•r;=KSS!JK 


,    -3 


^  "S, 


v» 


Of 


iDii1^pnlugA^''^^y^^^■vig■ 


wo 


President  White    Library 
CoRNELE  University 


/ 


DATE  DUE 


MAY  -J  f 

in«j  i'_ 

~Tt-bSt- 

^^-fi 

1  ' 

1 

GAYLORD 

PSlNTEDINU.li.A. 

Cornell   University    Library 

DC   213.B61 

A  ^selection  from  the  'e"^fs  a"?,,!?^,^??,!!;. 


3    1924   024    332   243 


Cornell  University 
Library 


The  original  of  tliis  book  is  in 
tlie  Cornell  University  Library. 

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in 
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text. 


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924024332243 


A   SELECTION    FROM 
THE   LETTERS   AND   DESPATCHES 

OF   THE 

FIRST     NAPOLEON. 


VOL.    II. 


A    SELECTION   FROM 

THE    LETTERS   AND    DESPATCHES 

OF   THE 

FIRST    NAPOLEON. 

SSBtti)  iSi})lanator2  Notes. 


-l^^  1  ^c?^xAJ:.--'■-^^^^^'t^i=~'^y•^'^^c:^'  >    'Hg^'^"^^ "^^-^ 


BY 

CAPTAIN    THE    HON.    D.    A.    BINGHAM, 

AUTHOR    OF    "marriages    OF   THE    BONAPARTES." 


IN   THREE    VOLUMES. 
VOL.    II. 


LONDON:  CHAPMAN  AND  HALL, 

Limited. 

1884. 

i 

In  - 


,/1.371/M 


LONDON  ; 

R.  Clay,  Sons,  and  Taylor,' 

BREAD   STREET    HILL. 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  I. 

rAGE 

The  Year  1803 i 


CHAPTER   II. 
The  Year  1804 47 

CHAPTER  III. 
The  Year  1805 io4 

CHAPTER  IV. 
THE  Year  1806 '94 

CHAPTER  V. 
The  Year  1807 278 

CHAPTER  VI. 
The  Year  1808 • 35° 

CHAPTER  VII. 
The  Year  1809 428 


A    SELECTION    FROM 
THE    LETTERS    AND    DESPATCHES 

OF  THE 

FIRST    NAPOLEON. 


THE   CORRESPONDENCE  OF 
NAPOLEON. 


CHAPTER  I. 

THE     YEAR     1803. 

The  principal  event  of  this  year  was  undoubtedly  the 
rupture  of  the  treaty  of  Amiens — a  treaty  which  had  been 
hailed  with  such  delight  on  both  sides  of  the  Channel,  but 
which,  thanks  to  the  restless  ambition  of  Bonaparte,  was 
never  more  than  a  truce.  Immediately  after  the  rupture  the 
"army  of  England  "  was  reorganised,  six  large  camps  were 
formed  along  the  coasts  of  France  and  Holland^  and  active 
preparations  were  made  for  the  invasion  of  England.  It 
is  still  a  moot  point  whether  Bonaparte  ever  really  intended 
to  cross  the  Channel,  although  he  had  medals  struck  in 
commemoration  of  the  conquest  of  Great  Britain,  and  had 
caused  a  report  to  be  made  of  the  treasures  he  would  be 
likely  to  find  in  Oxford,  which  ancient  seat  of  learning 
was  to  be  pillaged  as  the  chief  towns  of  Italy  had  been 
pillaged.  In  making  this  grand  display,  he  flattered  the 
feeling  of  antipathy  of  the  French  nation  against  England, 
who  was  accused  of  having  broken  the  treaty ;  he  was 
furnished  with  an  excuse  for  asking  for  more  conscripts 
and  for  maintaining  an  enormous  army  which,  kept  Eng- 
land in  a  fever  of  apprehension,  and  drained  her  resources. 

VOL.   11.  B 


K> 


2  THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

But  would  Bonaparte  have  ventured  across  the  Channel  in 
spite  of  the  remonstrances  of  his  admirals,  of  Ganteaume, 
of  Bruix,  of  Decr^s,  and  of  Villeneuve  ?  Would  he  have 
risked  so  dangerous  an  operation,  leaving  behind  him 
Austria,  Russia,  and  Italy,  which  would  soon  have  taken 
advantage  of  his  absence,  and  Spain,  Portugal  and 
Switzerland,  which  would  have  seized  the  opportunity  to 
break  their  fetters  ?  Perhaps  if  the  British  fleet  had  been 
annihilated,  Bonaparte  might  have  carried  out  his  threats  ; 
he  knew  that  his  lust  for  universal  dominion  would  never 
be  satisfied  until  Carthage  had  been  destroyed.  With 
England  in  his  grasp,  the  Continent  was  his,  and,  as  he  ex- 
pressed it  himself,  he  would  be  able  to  garrison  Strasburg 
with  old  women.  It  was  his  invariable  custom,  however, 
to  keep  several  irons  in  the  fire  at  the  same  time,  and  then, 
when  a  propitious  moment  arrived,  to  adopt  one  out  of 
several  schemes  all  worked  out  beforehand.  It  was  there- 
fore impossible  to  know  where  he  really  intended  to  strike, 
and  difficult  to  say  now  what  portion  of  his  policy  was 
feigned,  and  what  portion  was  real.  All  we  know  for 
certain  is  that  the  blow  which  was  apparently  aimed  at 
England  eventually  fell  upon  Austria. 

On  the  rupture  of  the  treaty  of  Amiens,  Bonaparte, 
contrary  to  the  law  of  nations,  had  all  the  English  travelling 
upon  the  Continent  arrested.  The  Annual  Register  sets 
down  their  number  at  ii.ooo,  and  says  that  "the  greats 
consul,  like  a  politic  shepherd,  continued  removing  the 
pen  of  his  bleating  English  flock  from  spot  to  spot,  well 
knowing  that  the  soil  will  be  everywhere  enriched  by  their 
temporary  residence." 

In  the  month  of  May,  Nelson  sailed  in  the  Victory  to 
take  command  of  the  Mediterranean  squadron. 

In  the  month  of  June  we  see  that  the  poor  King  of 
Etruria,  who  had  been  so  terribly  ill  treated  by  Bonaparte, 
died.  He  was  buried  with  great  splendour  at  Florence ; 
his  funeral  is  said  to  have  cost  300,000  livres ;  two  gold 
medals    of  great   value   were   placed   in   his   coffin ;    the 


BONAPARTE   AND    INDIA.  3 

buckles  of  his  shoes  were  richly  set  in  brilliants,  and  he  had 
on  his  finger  a  costly  diamond  ring. 

Before  the  end  of  the  year,  St.  Lucia,  Tobago,  Demerara, 
and  Esequibo  fell  into  our  hands,  and  the  position  of 
the  French  in  St.  Domingo  became  untenable,  what  with 
yellow  fever  and  the  determination  of  the  blacks  to  revenge 
the  fate  of  Toussaint  Louverture. 

To  REAR-ADMIRAL  DECRES. 

"St.  Cloud,  15/A  January,  1803. 
" .  .  .  .  The  Captain-General  (of  East  Indian  posses- 
sions) will  arrive  in  a  country  where  our  rivals  dominate. 
....  He  must  not  give  them  any  subject  for  alarm.  He 
must  confine  himself  to  indispensable  negotiations,  and  in 
his  relations  with  the  people  and  princes,  who  support 
with  impatience  the  English  yoke,  he  must  carefully  avoid 
causing  uneasiness.  They  are  the  tyrants  of  India  ;  they 
are  suspicious  and  jealous  ;  the  Captain-General  must  act 
with  gentleness,  dissimulation,  and  simplicity.  Six  months 
after  his  arrival  in  India  he  must  furnish  me  with  full 
details  of  the  situation,  the  feelings  of  the  various  peoples 
of  India,  and  the  strength  of  the  different  English  estab- 
lishments. He  must  make  known  his  views,  and  what  hope 
there  would  be  of  obtaining  support  in  the  event  of  war. 
....  He  must  pay  the  greatest  attention  to  every 
phrase,  as  they  will  all  be  weighed,  and  as  they  may 
determine  the  decision  of  the  government." 

After  examining  rather  superficially  the  prospect  of 
being  able  to  undertake  a  campaign  in  India,  Bonaparte 
terminated  his  letter  thus — 

"  But  the  First  Consul^  well  informed  by  the  Captain- 
General,  and  aided  by  the  punctual  execution  of  his  in- 
structions, may  some  day  place  him  in  the  position  of 
acquiring  that  great  glory  which  causes  the  memory  of 
man  to  last  beyond  the  duration  of  ages. 

"Bonaparte." 
B  2 


4       THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

No  doubt,  had  a  favourable  opportunity  occurred, 
Bonaparte  would  not  have  treated  his  Captain-General  as 
the  Bourbons  treated  Dupleix,  Labourdonnais,  and  Lally. 

On  the  1 6th  January,  the  weather  being  very  severe, 
Bonaparte  ordered  5,000  francs  to  be  sent  to  the  Bishop 
of  Arras  for  the  poor  of  his  diocese.  The  same  day  the 
Minister  of  Finance  was  directed  to  pay  to  Madame 
d'Orleans  the  sum  of  100,000  francs  in  addition  to  the 
ordinary  100,000.    This  money  was  to  be  remitted  secretly. 

Madame  d'Orleans  was  an  amiable  woman  better 
known  as  Madame  de  Montesson.  After  the  death  of 
her  first  husband  she  had  been  secretly  married  to  the 
Duke  of  Orleans.  During  the  Revolution  she  had  been 
thrown  into  prison  where  she  had  made  the  acquaintance; 
and  acquired  the  friendship  of  Josephine  de  Beauharnais, 
which  was  the  real  cause  of  her  favour  with  Bonaparte. 

On  the  20th  February,  1803,  Bonaparte  addressed  along 
message  to  the  Chambers.  Referring  to  the  Concordat,  he 
said, 

"  The  principles  of  our  enlightened  religion,  the  voice 
of  the  sovereign  Pontiff,  and  the  firmness  of  the  govern- 
ment, have  triumphed  over  all  obstacles.  Mutual  sacrifices 
have  reunited  the  ministers  of  the  gospel ;  the  Gallican 
Church  is  restored,  thanks  to  intelligence  and  concord ; 
there  is  already  a  happy  change  in  public  morality ; 
children  listen  with  more  docility  to  the  voice  of  their 
parents ;  youth  is  more  submissive  to  the  authority  of  the 
magistrate,  and  the  conscription  is  now  effected  in  places 
where  its  very  name  used  to  arouse  resistance." 

After  drawing  a  brilliant  picture  of  domestic  prosperity, 
Bonaparte  added — 

"  The  Isle  of  Elba  has  been  ceded  to  France  ;  it  brings; 
her  a  mild  and  industrious  population,  two  superb  harbours 
and  a  rich  mine  ;  but,  separated  from  France,  it  could  not 
be  intimately  connected  with  any  of  her  departments,  nor 
subjected  to  the  ordinary  administrative  regulations 


MESSAGE   TO    THE    CHAMBERS.  5 

"  The  abdication  of  the  sovereign,  the  wishes  of  the 
people,  the  necessity  of  things  have  placed  Piedmont  in 
the  power  of  France.  In  the  midst  of  the  nations  which 
surrounded  her  she  could  not  support  the  weight  of  her 
own  independence  nor  the  expenses  of  a  monarchy.  United 
to  France  she  will  enjoy,  &c.,  &c. 

"  Old  means  of  communication  have  been  repaired,  and 
new  ones  constructed.  The  Simplon,  the  Mount  Cenis, 
and  the  Mount  Geneva,  will  soon  open  up  a  triple  and 
easy  access  to  Italy ;  a  high  road  will  run  from  Genoa  to 
Marseilles,  &c. 

"The  islands  of  Martinique,  Tobago,  and  St.  Lucia, 
have  been  restored  to  us  with  all  their  old  elements  of 
prosperity.  Guadeloupe  has  been  reconquered  and 
pacified.  Guiana  is  increasing  in  importance.  St.  Domingo 
has  been  subdued,  and  the  author  of  its  troubles  is  in 
the  power  of  France " 

But  yellow  fever  came  and  decimated  the  French  hosts, 
and  the  "gallant  blacks,"  infuriated  by  the  perfidious 
treatment  of  Toussaint  Louverture,  once  more  resumed 
the  offensive.^ 

^  The  treatment  of  Toussaint  Louverture  and  the  blacks  of  St. 
Domingo  is  one  of  the  darkest  pages  of  French  history.  That  the 
"rebel"  leader  was  himself  basely  betrayed  is  proved  by  the  following 
letter  from  General  Rochambeau : 

"  Head-Quarters,  Zth  May,  1802. 
" ....  I  informed  Toussaint  that  if  he  would  repair  to  the  Cape 
pardon  might  yet  be  extended  to  him.     He  did  not  hesitate — came  to 
me,  implored  pardon,  and  promised  fidelity  to  France.    I  accepted  his 
submission.  .  .  ." 

The  greatest  horrors  ensued.  The  whites  erected  a  gallows  on  one 
hill,  the  blacks  upon  another,  and  hourly  executions  took  place  in 
sight  of  each  other.  The  French  bayoneted  and  poisoned  the  blacks 
by  thousands,  and,  renewing  one  of  the  terrible  episodes  of  the  Revo- 
lution, sent  four  hundred  prisoners  to  sea  in  an  old  vessel,  in  the  hold 
of  which  they  were  stifled  with  brimstone.  The  ship  was  then 
scuttled.  The  blacks  retaliated  by  drawing  the  eyes  out  of  French- 
men with  corkscrews,  and  similar  cruelties. 


6  THE    CORRESPONDENCE   OF   NAPOLEON. 

"  A  French  ambassador  is  at  Constantinople  with  orders 
to  strengthen  the  bonds  that  attach  us  to  a  seemingly 
tottering  power  which  it  is  our  interest  to  support  and  place 
on  a  solid  basis. 

"  British  troops  still  occupy  Alexandria  and  Malta  ;  the 
government  would  be  justified  in  complaining  of  this,  but 
it  has  learned  that  the  vessels  which  are  to  take  them  home 
are  in  the  Mediterranean." 

Bonaparte  then  expressed  his  want  of  confidence  in 
England,  and  said  that  the  Republic,  as  a  measure  of 
prudence,  had  500,000  men  ready  to  defend  and  to  avenge 
it.  "  Strange  necessity  which  miserable  passions  impose 
upon  two  nations  attached  to  peace  by  an  equal  interest." 

This  message  touched  upon  several  of  the  questions 
which  led  to  the  rupture  of  the  treaty  of  Amiens,  the 
signature  of  which  had  been  hailed  with  such  unfeigned 
dehglit  by  the  people  on  both  sides  of  the  Channel  just  a 
year  before.  It  referred  to  the  acquisition  of  the  Isle  of 
Elba  which  had  been  evacuated  by  Englaiid  ;  to  the  an- 
nexation of  Piedmont ;  to  the  establishment  of  France  in 
Switzerland ;  to  the  mission  of  Sebastiani  to  Constanti- 
nople, Egypt,  Palestine,  &c.,  on  commercial  affairs !  and, 
finally,  to  those  armaments  along  the  French,  Belgian,  and 
Dutch  coasts  which  had  commenced  to  inspire  alarm  and 
distrust  even  in  the  breast  of  Mr.  Addington.  The  fact  of 
Bonaparte  publicly  declaring  that  he  had  500,000  men 
ready  to  avenge  himself  on  a  nation  with  which  he  was  at 
peace,  was  a  statement  too  bold  and  too  menacing  to  be 
lightly  explained  away. 

To  BRIGADIER  COLBERT. 

"  Paris,  istk  March,  1803. 
"  You  will  go  to  Russia  and  hand  the  inclosed  letter  to 
the  Emperor.  You  will  talk  to  him  of  the  esteem  enjoyed 
by  Russians  in  Paris.  .  .  .  You  will  discuss  liberal  and 
philosophical  ideas  in  preference  to  other  subjects,  in 
speaking  with  his  majesty.     If  you  see  the  Grand  Duke 


RUSSIA   AND   SPAIN.  '  7 

Constantine,  tell  him  that  I  regret  he  did  not  come  to 
Paris.  You  will  speak  to  the  Empress  of  the  pleasure  I 
experienced  on  seeing  her  uncle  here,  and  how  he  amused 
himself  in  Paris.  .  .  .  If  war  with  England  be  spoken 
about,  you  will  say  that  the  French  nation  desires  nothing 
better  than  to  measure  swords  with  her,  seeing  the  amount  of 
antipathy  which  exists.  You  will  treat  the  diplomatic  body 
with  civility,  the  English  ambassador  like  the  others.  You 
will  speak  well  of  the  one  now  in  Paris,  who  is  very  well 
known.^  You  will  represent  the  First  Consul  as  very  busy 
tracing  canals,  establishing  manufactures,  and  settling  the 
details  of  public  instruction.  "BONAPARTE." 

The  letter  to  the  Emperor  of  Russia  was  directed 
against  England,  and  her  refusal  to  evacuate  Malta. 
Bonaparte  declared  that  he  would  never  consent  to  such 
dishonour,  that  he  was  resolved  to  resist  the  English 
occupation  of  that  island  at  no  matter  what  price.  Owing 
to  the  interest  which  Alexander  was  supposed  to  take  in 
the  Order,  he  was  asked  to  concern  himself  in  this  affair. 
A  similar  letter  was  addressed  to  the  King  of  Prussia. 

On  the  I  ith  of  March,  the  First  Consul  addressed  a  long 
letter  to  his  faithful  ally,  the  King  of  Spain,  filled  with 
reproaches.  As  usual  his  chief  grievance  bore  reference  to 
England.  In  accordance  with  treaty  the  British  troops 
had  been  withdrawn  from  Minorca,  but  he  complained  that 
since  the  evacuation  the  Spanish  Government  had  not  only 
neglected  to  fortify  a  port  coveted  by  England,  but  had 
reinstated  the  officials,  owing  to  whose  treason  the  island 
had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  Bonaparte  then 
complained  of  the  condition  into  which  the  Spanish  navy 
had  been  permitted  to  fall,  adding — 

"  I  beg  your  Majesty  to  pardon  me  for  taking  so  much 
interest  in   a   matter  which   specially  concerns  you  ;  but 

^  This  was  Lord  Whitworth,  who  was  British  ambassador  at  St. 
Petersburg  when  Paul  was  assassinated,  and  who  had  been  accused 
by  Bonaparte  of  complicity  in  that  crime. 


8  THE   CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

England  is  not  asleep  ;  she  is  always  on  the  watch,  and 
will  not  rest  until  she  has  seized  upon  all  the  colonies  and 
all  the  commerce  of  the  world  [having  just  restored  Mar- 
tinique, Tobago,  St.  Lucia,  and  Minorca].  France  can 
alone  prevent  this.  ...  "  BONAPARTE." 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

"  Paris,  \zth  March,  1803. 
"  General  Duroc  will  repair  to  Berlin  with  all  diligence, 
and  will  hand  the  inclosed  letter  to  the  King  of  Prussia." 
[Letter  already  referred  to.] 

After  portraying  the  conduct  of  England  in  the  darkest 
colours,  the  Instructions  added — 

"  Should  war  take  place,  the  First  Consul  will  be  able 
to  appeal  to  God  and  man,  and  nothing  shall  hinder  him 
from  pursuing  the  British  Cabinet  wherever  its  standard 
may  be  hoisted.  To  speak  plainly,  his  intention  is,  should 
the  British  Cabinet  persevere,  immediately  to  invade 
Hanover." 

Bonaparte  appeared  to  suppose  that  by  threatening 
Hanover  the  King  of  Prussia  would  be  induced  to  per- 
suade England  to  evacuate  Malta. 

The  Due  de  Richelieu  having  been  struck  off  the  list  of 
imigris,  asked  permission  to  remain  in  the  service  of 
Russia. 

DECISION. 

"Paris,  2^th  March,  1803. 

"Referred  to  the  Grand  Judge  in  order  that  he  may 
forward  letters  of  permission  to  remain  in  the  service  of 
Russia,  and  remove  the    sequestration    attached    to    the 

P''°P^'*y-'  "BONAPARTE." 

>  In  the  Nelson  despatches  may  be  found  the  following  letter  :— 
To  THE  Right  Hon.  HENRY  ADDINGTON. 

"Off  Toulon,  lUh  July,  1803. 
"  I  send  you  some  papers  relative  to  letters  from  Odessa,  a  Russian 
port  in  the  Black  Sea,  of  which  the  Duke  of  Richelieu  is  governor. 


THE   GOVERNOR   OF    ODESSA.  9 

The  Due  de  Richelieu  had  been  in  the  Russian  service 
before  the  breaking  out  of  the  French  Revolution,  and 
had  served  under  Suwarrow  at  the  siege  of  Ismail.  He 
afterwards  rendered  eminent  services  to  both  Russia  and 
France — to  Russia  as  Governor  of  Odessa,  where  his  statue 
still  stands,  and  where  his  name  is  still  remembered  with 
gratitude  ;  to  France  as  a  minister,  by  procuring  the  liber- 
ation of  the  territory  in  18 18,  at  an  earlier  date  than  that 
originally  fixed  by  the  allies.  The  chambers  voted  him 
2,000/.  a  year,  but  the  Duke — although  his  pecuniary  cir- 
cumstances were  anything  but  brilliant — refused  to  accept 
the  pension.  He  conceived  that  he  had  merely  done  his 
duty  in  exerting  his  influence  with  the  Emperor  Alexande 
for  the  benefit  of  his  native  land. 

To  GENERAL  BERTHIER. 

"Paris,  i\st March,  1803. 
"I  beg  you  will  order  Brigadier-General  Monnet  to  go 
to  Flushing,  and  to  assume  the  command  of  that  town  and 
of  the  Isle  of  Walcheren.  .  .  .  Order  General  Belliard  to 
arm  the  battery  opposite  Flushing,  which  protects  the 
entry  of  the  Escant.  .  .  .  He  must  be  instructed  to  assume 
full  authority,  and  not  to  allow  any  interference  on  the 
part  of  the  Dutch  commandant.  .  .  .  This  place  being 
common  to  France  and  Holland,  the  intention  of  the 
Government  is  that  everything  shall  be  done  in  the  name 
of  France.  .  .  .  General  Monnet  must  treat  the  Batavian 
inhabitants  and  troops  well,  show  civility  to  the  officers, 
and  frequently  talk  to  them  of  the  conduct  of  the  English 
at  the  Cape.  ...  «  BONAPARTE." 

You  will  know  much  better  than  I  can  tell  you  how  this  emigrant  duke 
has  been  courted  by  Buonaparte,  through  his  minister  in  Russia.  We 
must  recollect  that  he  is  a  Frenchman,  and  his  ultimate  views  pro- 
bably turn  to  getting  back  some  of  his  estates  in  France.  ...  I 
cannot  help  thinking  that  France  and  Russia  understand  each  other 
about  the  Turkish  dominions.     If  so,  Egypt  will  be  the  price.  .  .  . 

"Nelson  and  Bronte." 


lO  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF   NAFOLEON. 

To  CITIZEN  TALLEYRAND. 

"Paris,  ^th  April,  1803. 
"  You  will  find  inclosed  the  nomination  of  the  Cardinal 
of  Lyons  to  the  embassy  at  Rome.  .  .  .  You  will  inform 
Citizen  Cacault  that  I  have  always  been  satisfied  with 
liim,  and  that  if  he  leaves  Rome  it  is  because  circum- 
stances oblige  me  to  send  a  cardinal  there.  ... 

"  Bonaparte." 

At  one  moment  Bonaparte  threatened  to  send  a  Pro- 
testant ambassador  to  the  Holy  See,  but  at  present  his 
uncle,  Fesch,  was  to  represent  the  French  Republic. 
Citizen  Cacault,  though  he  had  been  several  times  called 
upon  to  perform  disagreeable  duties,  had  always  acted 
with  great  personal  deference  towards  the  Pope. 

On  the  23rd  April  was  drawn  up  the  secret  conven- 
tion by  which  France  ceded  Louisiana  to  the  United 
States  for  the  sum  of  80,000,000  francs,  and  certain 
commercial  advantages  to  be  enjoyed  by  French  and 
Spanish  vessels  in  the  ports  and  cities  of  the  ceded 
territory. 

The  money  was  required  for  the  approaching  war  with 
England. 

NOTE. 

"Paris,  loth  April,  1803. 

"  The  minister  will  draw  up  a  plan  for  placing  the  statue 
of  Charlemagne  on  the  Place  de  la  Concorde,  or  on  the 
so-called  Place  Venddme. 

"  Bonaparte." 

Bonaparte  had  an  unbounded  admiration  for  Charle- 
magne, but.no  doubt  wished  that  instead  of  contenting 
himself  with  writing  the  Caroline  Books  against  the 
worship  of  images,  he  had  proclaimed  himself  Pope  as 
well  as  Emperor.  The  precedent  would  have  been  handy. 
As  for  the  "so-called  Place  Vend6me,^'  where  the  statue 


LORD   WHITWORTH.  I  I 

of  Louis  XIV.  had  stood  for  one  hundred  years  and  one 
day,  it  was  not  the  graven  image  of  Charlemagne  but 
that  of  Bonaparte  which  was  destined  to  stand  there,  and 
to  see  many  strange  vicissitudes.  In  1815  it  was  pulled 
down  by  the  Royalists,  and  in  1871  the  whole  column 
was  thrown  to  the  ground  by  the  Communists,  to  be 
re-erected  by  the  Third  Republic. 

To  CITIZEN  TALLEYRAND. 

"St.  Cloud,  1  si  May,  1803. 

"Your  letter  reached  me  at  the  Malmaison.  I  desire 
that  the  conference  should  not  degenerate  into  a  con- 
versation. Show  yourself  cold,  haughty,  and  even  some- 
what proud. 

If  the  note  contains  the  word  ultimatum,  make  him 
(Lord  Whitworth)  understand  that  that  word  means  war, 
and  that  this  is  the  way  in  which  a  superior  negotiates 
with  an  inferior ;  if  the  note  does  not  contain  this  word, 
make  him  insert  it,  remarking  that  we  must  really  know 
whereabout  we  are,  and  that  we  are  weary  of  this  state  of 
uncertainty.  .  .  .  Frighten  him  as  to  the  consequences 
of  this  note  ;  if  he  remains  firm,  accompany  him  into  the 
drawing-room,  and  when  leaving  him,  say,  '  But  the  Cape 
and  the  island  of  Gorea,  have  they  been  evacuated  ? ' 
Soften  down  a  little  at  the  end  of  the  conference,  and 
invite  him  to  return  before  writing  to  his  court,  so  that 
you  may  be  able  to  inform  him  of  the  impression  made 
upon  me,  which  may  be  diminished  by  the  assurance  that 
the  Cape  and  the  island  of  Gorea  shall  be  evacuated. 

"  Bonaparte." 
note  for  the  british  ambassador. 

"  Paris,  4iA  May,  1803. 
"After   the    last    communication    addressed    to    your 
Excellency,  it  is  difficult  to  conceive  how  a  great,  power- 
ful, and  sensitive  nation  can  undertake  to  declare  a  war 


12      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

which  will  necessitate  such  terrible  misfortunes,  the  cause 
of  which  will  be  so  small  since  it  merely  concerns  a 
miserable  rock.  .  .  . 

"  Bonaparte." 

Only  a  short  time  before  this,  Bonaparte  had  declared 
that  he  would  sooner  see  the  British  fleet  moored  at 
Chaillot,  or  the  English  in  possession  of  the  Faubourg 
St.  Antoine  than  of  Malta. 

Lord  Whitworth,  Mr.  Addington,  Lord  Hawkesbury,  and 
perhaps  Fox  were  beginning  to  think  they  had  been  suffi- 
ciently trifled  with,  and  that  the  national  honour  was 
opposed  to  any  further  compromise  or  delay. 

After  a  few  more  inefl'ectual  attempts  to  come  to  terms, 
the  British  ambassador,  after  having  been  treated  with 
singular  rudeness  by  the  First  Consul,  left  Paris. 

We  have  already  referred,  in  connection  with  Bona- 
parte's message  of  the  20th  February,  to  some  of  the 
causes  which  led  to  the  rupture  of  the  treaty  of  Amiens 
— to  the  500,000  men  prepared  to  avenge  the  Republic ;  to 
Sebastiani's  report  filled  with  insults  and  taunts  directed 
against  the  British  army  and  clearly  showing  that  another 
attack  upon  Egypt  was  meditated ,  to  the  annexation  of 
Elba  and  Piedmont  and  the  French  invasion  of 
Switzerland. 

In  addition  to  the  above  causes  were  the  creation  of  the 
Italian  Republic  with  Bonaparte  for  president,  the  acqui- 
sition of  Louisiana,  the  annexation  of  Parma,  encroach- 
ments in  Germany,  Portugal,  and  Italy,  the  secret  treaties 
concluded  with  Turkey  and  Portugal,  the  appointment  of 
French  agents  in  English  ports,  the  protection  accorded 
to  Irish  Jacobins,  the  insulting  tone  of  the  French  official 
press,  the  discovery  of  the  private  instructions  addressed 
to  Fauvelet,  and  the  treatment  of  British  ships.  The 
treaty  of  Amiens,  too,  had  hardly  been  signed  when  a 
French  fleet  appeared  off  Tunis  and  terrified  the  Bey  into 
signing  a  treaty  by  which  French  goods  were  to  pay  lower 


JOSEPH    AND    THE    TREATY   OF   AMIENS.  1 3 

duties    than    those    of    other     nations    throughout    the 
Regency. 

Seeing  that  France  had  ever  since  the  treaty  of  Amiens 
been  engaged  in  violating  it  in  letter  and  in  spirit,  it  is  not 
astonishing  that  at  the  last  moment  England  should  have 
refused  to  evacuate  Malta,  and  to  restore  the  Cape  of  Good 
Hope  to  the  Dutch,  who  were  no  longer  free  but  bond. 
Bonaparte  naturally  did  what  he  could  to  throw  the  whole 
blame  of  this  rupture  on  England.  Count  Miot  de  Melito 
relates  that  when  I^ord  Whitworth  left  Paris,  the  First 
Consul  summoned  a  cabinet  council,  at  which  the  Count 
was  present.  Bonaparte,  he  said,  spoke  with  great  vehe- 
mence, and  roundly  abused  his  brother  Joseph  and  Talley- 
rand, who  were  in  favour  of  peace.  The  majority  of  the 
council,  however,  voted  whatever  the  First  Consul  desired. 
This  fact  disposes  of  the  assertions  made  by  Bonaparte 
that  he  wished  for  peace.  The  Count  also  remarked  that 
the  First  Consul  passed  very  lightly  over  the  French 
.  aggrandisements  since  the  signature  of  the  treaty,  and 
that  he  said  not  a  single  word  about  Sebastiani's  mission  ; 
Joseph,  a  few  days  afterwards,  denounced  this  "  extrava- 
gant mission,"  and  talked  of  uniting  himself  with  Moreau 
and  Sieyes,  and  all  the  friends  of  liberty,  in  order  to  pre- 
vent a  war  which  might  be  avoided.  Joseph  had  a  right 
to  complain  ;  he  had  negotiated  the  treaty  with  England, 
and  was  aware  of  the  sacrifices  to  which  she  had  consented, 
whereas  France  had  sacrificed  nothing  but  her  allies,  and 
occupied  a  splendid  position  on  the  continent.  As  Sheridan 
said,  "  Prussia  is  at  his  beck  ;  Italy  is  his  vassal ;  Spain  is 
at  his  nod ;  Portugal  at  his  feet ;  Holland  in  his  grasp ; 
Turkey  in  his  toils ; "  adding  that  the  ambition  of  the  ruler 
of  France  was  principally  directed  against  England. 

Bonaparte  made  great  capital  out  of  the  fact  that  while 
he  had  evacuated  Tarentum  and  Otranto,  England  had 
refused  to  evacuate  Malta.  This  was  no  doubt  a  strong 
point  when  addressed  to  persons  not  aware  that  the 
evacuation  of  Tarentum  and  Otranto  had  nothing  to  do 


14      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

with  Malta,  but  was  due  to  a  treaty  concluded  between 
the  First  Consul  and  the  King  of  Naples,  thanks  to  the 
intervention  of  the  Emperor  of  Russia. 

As  for  the  English  press,  he  forfeited  all  right  of  com- 
plaining of  its  attacks,  by  himself  dictating  the  most 
scurrilous  articles  against  George  III.  and  the  British 
Government.  In  one  article  he  asserted  that  Georges 
Cadoudal  had  received  the  Order  of  the  Bath  for  at- 
tempting to  assassinate  him,  and  that  he  would  have 
been  honoured  with  the  garter  had  he  succeeded.  It 
was  in  vain  that  Galois  reminded  him  of  the  volumes  of 
libels  which  had  been  directed  against  Louis  XIV.,  and 
how  nothing  had  survived  but  the  recollection  of  the  fretful 
sensibility  of  that  monarch,  and  the  false  political  steps  to 
which  they  provoked  him.  It  is  curious  that  Bonaparte 
should  have  thought  it  worth  his  while  to  keep  Mounier 
and  twelve  clerks  at  work,  extracting,  translating,  abridg- 
ing, and  arranging  the  contents  of  English  newspapers, 
which  so  greatly  irritated  him.  He  might  as  well  have 
worn  a  hair  shirt  next  his  skin. 

The  manner  in  which  our  ships  were  treated  during  the 
peace  was  most  intolerable.  Under  the  cover  of  a  law 
passed  during  the  Reign  of  Terror,  an  English  vessel  which 
had  been  driven  into  Cherbourg  by  stress  of  weather  was 
seized  and  confiscated,  nor  could  any  redress  be  obtained. 
Another  vessel  in  the  Charente  engaged  in  taking  in  a 
cargo  of  brandy  suffered  the  same  fate,  because  some  pro- 
hibited English  merchandise,  in  the  shape  of  the  knives, 
forks,  and  plates  used  by  the  crew,  was  found  on  board, 
the  value  of  the  said  merchandise  being  4/. 

That  we  acted  in  a  different  spirit  is  proved  by  this 
fact : — 

Captain  Fyffe,  of  the  Cyclops,  having  captured  a  vessel  in 
the  Bay  of  Naples,  Nelson  at  once  wrote  to  Sir  John  Acton, 
saying — "  I  have  ordered  her  to  be  released  ;  for  as  I  would 
not  permit  the  French  to  break  the  neutrality  of  any  power 
with  impunity,  so  I  will  never  suffer  such  an  improper 


SYMPTOMS    OF   WAR.  1$ 

thing  to  be  done  by  any  of  his  Majesty's  ships  under  my 
command." 

And  yet  we  find  Nelson  writing — 

To  LADY  HAMILTON. 
"  '  Amphion,'  July  S(A,  1803.     [Off  Corsica.] 
"  ....  I  have  made  up  my  mind  that  it  is  part  of  the 
plan  of  that  Corsican  scoundrel  to  conquer  the  kingdom  of 
Naples." 

On  the  13th  May  Bonaparte  directed  Talleyrand  to 
forward  the  following  instructions  to  General  Andr^ossy, 
who  was  empowered  to  offer  these  conditions — ist,  The 
British  troops  to  occupy  Malta  for  ten  years.  2nd,  The 
French  troops  during  the  same  period  to  occupy  the  posi- 
tions at  Tarentum  and  Otranto  which  they  evacuated  in 
virtue  of  the  treaty  of  Amiens,  Art.  xi. 

The  General  was  told  that  if  these  conditions  were  not 
deemed  acceptable,  he  was  to  take  care  that  no  trace 
should  remain  of  their  having  been  made,  so  that  the 
French  Government  might  be  able  to  deny  having  con- 
sented to  them.  ...  "In  speaking  to  Lord  Hawkesbury, 
he  was  to  say  that  he  had  no  precise  authorisation,  but 
that  he  was  prepared  to  sign  on  his  own  responsibility, 
without  any  fear  of  being  disavowed." 

On  the  same  day  the  following  despatch  was  forwarded 
to  General  Clarke,  the  French  ambassador  at  Florence : — 

"  The  English  ambassador  has  just  left  Paris.  War  has 
not  yet  been  declared,  but  the  conduct  of  the  ambassador, 
acting  on  the  orders  of  his  government,  necessitates 
precautions.  .  .  . 

"  In  consequence,  the  First  Consul  desires  me  to  inform 
you  that  it  is  his  intention  that  an  embargo  be  laid  on  all 
the  ports  subject  to  the  King  of  Etruria.  .  .  ." 

Similar  instructions  were  forwarded  to  the  French  repre- 
sentatives in  the  Batavian  and  Ligurian  Republics — in- 
structions important  to  remember,  because  Bonaparte,  the 


l6      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

moment  war  was  declared,  and  contrary  to  the  usages  of 
civilised  countries,  ordered  the  arrest  of  all  Englishmen 
travelling  in  France,  and  in  the  countries  dependent  on 
France,  on  the  false  charge  that  an  English  frigate  had 
captured  two  French  merchantmen  before  hostilities  broke 
out.  It  is  true  that  he  afterwards  confessed  that  he  re- 
sorted to  this  cruel  and  arbitrary  measure  in  order  to 
disgust  the  English,  not  with  the  French,  but  with  their 
own  government. 

To  THE  PRINCE  REGENT  OF  PORTUGAL. 

"St.  Cloud,  \-]th  May,  1803. 
"  I  have  received  the  different  letters  which  it  has  pleased 
your  majesty  to  write  to  me.  .  .  .  Circumstances  become 
more  and  more  serious,  and  war  is  about  to  be  rekindled 
between  France  and  England.  I  have  done  all  in  my 
power  to  spare  the  world  this  calamity,  but  England  has 
refused  to  execute  the  treaty  of  Amiens.  .  .  .  All  the 
Powers  interested  in  the  independence  of  the  Order  of 
Malta  ought  to  unite  their  efforts,  and  I  am  authorised  to 
count  upon  the  sentiments  which  your  Royal  Highness  has 
been  good  enough  to  express,  &c.  &c. 

"  Bonaparte." 

On  the  22nd  May  instructions  were  forwarded  to  Citizen 
Marescalchi,  Foreign  Minister  of  the  Italian  Republic,  to 
confiscate  all  the  English  merchandise  upon  which  he 
could  lay  hands,  and  to  arrest  all  the  Englishmen  in 
the  Republic.  On  the  same  day  instructions  were  sent  to 
Ganteaume  that  he  was  to  keep  all  his  ships  in  Toulon 
ready  to  sail  at  a  moment's  notice.  All  the  ofiScers  were 
to  dine  and  sleep  on  board  their  vessels. 

The  First  Consul  then  called  upon  the  Minister  of 
Marine  to  furnish  the  model  of  a  flat-bottomed  boat, 
capable  of  carrying  one  gun  and  100  men  across  the 
channel.  In  the  meantime,  the  Grand  Judge  was  directed 
to    silence    certain    journals    guilty  of  expressing   their 


THE   BISHOP    OF    ORLEANS.  1 7 

opinion  on  the  march  of  events.  The  D^bats  and  the 
Publiciste  were  to  be  warned  not  to  give  any  more  accounts 
of  armaments  in  Russian  ports  calculated  to  alarm  the 
friends  of  the  Republic,  and  to  cool  the  noble  ardour  mani  - 
fested  in  the  French  departments  and  cities.  "  Journalists," 
wrote  the  First  Consul,  "  will  be  free  to  copy  the  news 
published  in  the  official  journal." 

On  the  4th  June,  Bonaparte,  ill  at  ease  in  spite  of  the 
Concordat,  wrote  to  Citizen  Regnier — "  Georges  has  two 
brothers  at  Auray,  one  or  more  brothers-in-law  and  several 
uncles.  They  are  all  scamps,  and  you  must  have  them  all 
arrested  and  sent  to  the  fort  of  Saumur." 

The  Debats  and  the  Publiciste  were  correctly  informed 
with  regard  to  Russian  preparations  ;  but  there  was  to  be 
no  more  freedom  of  speech  or  thought  in  France.  With  a 
free  press,  Bonaparte  admitted  that  his  rule  would  not 
endure  for  six  weeks. 

To  CITIZEN  REGNIER. 

"St.  Cloud,  wth  June,  1803. 
"I  beg  you  will  hand  100,000  francs  to  Colonel  Sebas- 
tiani  for  secret  expenses  ;  25,000  francs  to  M.  Chatillon ; 
30,000  to  the  Bishop  of  Orleans,  and  25,000  to  the  Prefect 
of  the  Loire-Inferieure. 

"Bonaparte." 

The  Bishop  of  Orleans  was  the  ex-Abbe  Bernier,  ex- 
chouan,  now  attached  to  the  sacred  gendarmerie.^ 

On  the  1 8th  June  Bonaparte  expressed  to  Decr^s  his 
discontent  at  the  capture  of  the  frigate  L'Uranie,  and 
declared  it  to  be  exceedingly  shameful  that  English 
frigates  should  be  allowed  to  cruise  off  Toulon  and  to 
make  prizes  along  the  coast. 

^  One  of  the  oaths  which  the  bishop  took  after  the  signing  of  the 
Concordat  was—"  If  I  learn  anything  prejudicial  to  the  welfare  of 
the  state  I  will  reveal  it !  "  "  The  Bishop  of  Orleans,"  says  Lanfrey, 
"  rivalled  Fouchd  in  his  zeal." 

VOL.  II.  ^ 


1 8  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  CITIZEN  TALLEYRAND. 

"  St.  Cloud,  19M  June,  1803. 
"  Orders  have  been  sent  to  General  Mortier  to  inform 
the  Hanoverian  army  that  the  King  of  England  has  refused 
to  ratify  the  convention  of  the  14th  Prairial,  and  that 
consequently  it  must  capitulate.  I  have  directed  this 
general  to  make  the  army  defile  with  the  honours  of  war, 
to  disarm  it,  to  dismount  the  cavalry,  and  to  send  it 
prisoner  to  France. 

"  As  General  Mortier  will  be  obliged,  before  this  signifi- 
cation, to  make  a  movement  of  troops,  and  as  this  move- 
ment can  be  executed  only  five  or  six  days  after  the 
reception  of  the  order,  it  appears  to  me  necessary  to  warn 
Citizen  Laforest  (French  minister  at  Berlin),  who  ought, 
in  course  of  conversation,  to  inform  the  Prussian  court 
that  I  have  not  ratified  the  convention,  and  that  I  have 
sent  it  to  London,  stating  my  readiness  to  ratify  it  as  soon 
as  his  Britannic  Majesty  announces  his  intention  to  do 
the  same.  Four  days  after  this  communication  Citizen 
Laforest  can  state  that  the  King  of  England  has  refused 
to  approve  of  the  convention.  He  will  dwell  on  the  bad 
faith  of  this  refusal  on  the  part  of  England.  .  .  . 

"Bonaparte." 

War  was  no  sooner  declared  than,  as  he  had  threatened, ; 
Bonaparte  invaded  Hanover.     He  had  hoped  to  be  able 
to  barter  that  country,  or  Portugal,  or  Ireland,  for  Malta, 
but  none  of  these  schemes  had  succeeded.     In  179S,  on  the 
occasion   of  the  treaty  of  Bale,  the  French  Republic  had 
recognised  the  neutrality  of  Hanover  while  at  war  with 
England,  and,  in  fact,  Hanover  was  independent  of  the'i 
British  cabinet,  formed  part  of  the  German  confederation, ' 
and  governed  itself     Bonaparte  refused  to  recognise  this:-! 
neutrahty,   and  risked,  a  conflict  with  Prussia  by  flooding , 
Hanover  with  troops,  seizing  on   Cuxhaven,  and  threat- 
ening  the    existence   of  Denmark.      The   inhabitants  of 


BONAPARTE    AT    BOULOGNE. 


t9 


Hanover  were  not  at  all  disposed  to  oppose  the  French  ; 
but  Mortier  had  no  sooner  made  himself  master  of  the 
country  than  he  laid  it  under  contribution ;  his  soldiers, 
too,  behaved  with  the  most  wanton  barbarity,  plundering 
villages  and  violating  women.  Altogether  the  whole 
German  confederation  paid  heavily  for  not  at  once 
resisting  the  aggression  of  Bonaparte.  By  this  invasion 
of  Hanover,  France  forfeited  the  goodwill  of  Prussia, 
which  had  been  her  warm  ally,  and  also  provoked  the 
remonstrances  of  Russia,  and  it  was  all  in  vain  that 
Bonaparte  protested  that  his  only  intention  was  to  levy 
war  on  the  Elector  of  Hanover,  the  King  of  England. 
The  convention  referred  to  above  was  a  convention  by 
which  General  Walmoden  consented  to  capitulate  with 
his  army  on  the  condition  of  its  receiving  the  signature 
of  George  IH.  One  thing  which  greatly  aggravated  the 
British  monarch  was  to  see  Mortier  taking  up  his  head- 
quarters at  the  palace  which  he  had  just  repaired  for  the 
Duke  of  Cambridge  at  a  cost  of  50,000/. ! 

To  CONSUL  CAMBAC]£rES. 

"  Abbeville,  29M  June,  1 803. 

"  I  left  Amiens  yesterday  morning,  after  going  to  the 

cathedral  in  pomp  to  say  parting  prayers.     I  afterwards 

went   to    St.   Valery,    where    I    remained    six    hours   on 

horseback  examining  the  most   important  points  of  the 

coast.  .  .  . 

"  Bonaparte." 

To  CONSUL  CAMBACiRtS. 

"Calais,  istjufy,  1803. 
"  Extreme  fatigue  prevented  me  sending  you  a  courier 
yesterday.  From  Abbeville  I  went  to  breakfast  at 
Etaples,  and,  after  inspecting  the  bay,  I  rode  to  Boulogne, 
where  I  arrived  at  10  P.M.  I  employed  the  day,  from 
3  A.M.,  in  visiting  the  port ;  I  sent  out  some  gun-boats, 
which  had  a  warm  affair  with  two  English  frigates,  which 

c  2 


20      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

finished  by   sheering  off;   one   of  them   left   her  anchor 
behind. 

"  To-day  I  breakfasted  at  Ambletelise,  and  from  thence 
I  rode  along  the  coast.  I  have  found  an  important  spot 
for  my  projects  situated  at  a  point  of  the  cape  (Grisnez) 

nearest  England.  .  .  . 

"  Bonaparte." 


This  progress  through  the  provinces  and  along  the 
coast  was  undertaken  because  Paris  had  shown  no  enthu- 
siasm for  the  war.  Bonaparte  deemed  that  it  would  be 
more  easy  to  excite  the  Chauvinism  of  the  country ;  nor 
was  he  mistaken.  At  Amiens  he  was  received  with  trans- 
ports of  delight  ;  flowers  were  strewn  in  his  path,  and  on 
a  triumphal  arch  he  read  this  inscription — "  The  road  to 
England."  That  road,  as  Lanfrey  remarks,  was  a  long 
one,  and  at  the  end  of  it,  Bonaparte,  had  he  been  gifted 
with  second  sight,  might  have  perceived  the  Bellerophon 
patiently  awaiting  its  guest. 

Never  had  adulation  been  carried  further.  The  bishops 
rendered  themselves  conspicuous  by  their  servility  and 
their  abuse  of  "that  great  nation  tormented  by  spleen 
rushing  blindly  to  destruction,"  as  Bonaparte  called 
England.  "  Most  of  these  venerable  personages,"  says  a 
French  historian,  "  had  been  welcomed  in  England  during 
the  emigration,  where  they  had  received  not  only  an 
asylum  and  protection,  but  the  most  generous  aid  and 
attention  ;  for  ten  years  they  had  eaten  the  bread  of 
British  hospitality.  To-day  they  showed  their  gratitude 
by  calling  down  the  scourges  of  God  on  the  people  who 
had  nourished  them.  They  preached  hatred  and  fury! 
they  invoked  Heaven  ;  they  excited  the  people  in  favour 
of  a  war  with  the  iniquity  of  which  they  were  better 
acquainted  than  any  one  else  ;  they  knowingly  deceived 
those  simple  minds  who  confided  in  their  words.  But  it 
was  necessary  to  pay  the  price  of  the  Concordat  to  the 
new  Constantine.     Such   were  the  edifying  fruits  of  the 


THE  ELBE  AND  WESER  BLOCKADED.       2  1 

celebrated  reconciliation  between  Church  and  State."  No 
wonder  that  Bonaparte,  on  his  return  to  Paris,  was  con- 
vinced that  he  might  venture  on  anything  he  pleased, 
in  spite  of  the  opinion  of  the  capital. 

To  GENERAL  MORTIER. 

"■Bruges,  nth  July,  1803. 
"  I  approve  of  the  convention  '  you  have  made  with 
Hanover.  ...  I  recommend  you  to  be  inflexible  as  re- 
gards its  execution,  and  not  to  permit  the  introduction  of 
any  English  goods  or  couriers.  .  .  .  This  will  prove  a 
dreadful  blow  to  England  ;  a  number  of  houses  have 
become  bankrupt.  .  .  .  Send  us  horses,  especially  for 
the  heavy  cavalry.  .  .  .  Take  care  to  disarm  the 
country.  ... 

"  Bonaparte." 

It  was  not  only  in  England  but  in  Germany  that  a 
number  of  mercantile  houses  were  ruined  by  this  attack 
upon  Hanover,  and  this  order  respecting  English  goods.  By 
way  of  retaliation,  the  British  Government,  to  the  great 
indignation  of  Bonaparte,  and  to  the  material  damage  of 
the  German  confederation,  which  had  offered  no  resistance 
to  his  policy,  blockaded  the  mouths  of  the  Elbe  and  the 
Weser.  To  Bonaparte  it  appeared  beyond  comprehension 
that  a  civilised  power  should  blockade  the  mouths  of 
rivers !  The  action  of  England  in  this  matter  greatly 
influenced  the  creation  of  that  party  in  Prussia  which  was 
soon  destined  to  condemn  that  alliance  with  France  which 
brought  with  it  too  little  profit  and  too  much  humiliation. 

On  the  26th  July  Bonaparte  wrote  to  Talleyrand  from 
Brussels  ordering  him  to  send  a  special  courier  to  Madrid 
with  instructions  for  General  Beurnonville.  The  General 
was  to  demand  explanations  on  the  subject  of  the  raising 
of  twelve  militia  regiments,  and  to  say  that  this  levy,  made 
at  a  moment  when  Spain  was  disarming  her  marine,  was 
equivalent  to  a  commencement  of  hostilities. 


2  2      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

A  French  vessel  having  been  cut  out  under  the  fort  of 
Carnero,  Spain  was  to  be  called  on  to  make  good  the  loss, 
as  she  had  allowed  her  territory  to  be  violated. 

To  THE  QUEEN  OF  NAPLES. 

"  Brussels,  lUh  July,  1803. 

"  I  have  read  your  Majesty's  letter  with  great  attention, 
and  I  beg  you  will  be  persuaded  that  after  having  done 
you  a  great  deal  of  harm,  I  desire  to  make  myself 
agreeable. 

"At  the  present  juncture  it  is  the  policy  of  France  to 
consolidate  tranquillity  among  her  neighbours,  and  to  aid 
a  feeble  state  whose  welfare  is  useful  to  the  prosperity 
of  French  commerce. 

"  I  desire  to  reply  to  your  Majesty  in  the  most  un- 
reserved manner.  In  what  light  must  I  consider  the 
kingdom  of  Naples,  geographically  and  politically  speak- 
ing, when  I  see  at  the  head  of  the  administration  a 
foreigner  who  has  centred  all  his  affections  and  invested  all 
his  wealth  in  England  1  And  yet  the  kingdom  of  Naples 
is  governed  less  by  the  will  and  the  principles  of  its 
sovereign  than  by  those  of  its  first  minister. 

"  I  have  therefore  decided  by  way  of  precaution  to  look 
upon  Naples  as  a  country  governed  by  an  English  minister. 
It  is  repugnant  to  7ny  feelings  to  meddle  with  the  internal 
affairs  of  other  states ;  it  is  only  in  order  to  be  sincere 
towards  your  Majesty  that  I  have  acquainted  you  with  the 
real  reason  which  justifies  all  the  measures  adopted  towards 
Naples,  &c. 

"  Bonaparte." 

A  similar  letter  was  addressed  to  the  King  of  Naples  on 
the  same  day,  the  First  Consul  thus  displaying  a  total 
disregard  for  the  predilections  of  the  court  of  St.  Peters- 
burg and  the  promises  made  to  Alexander. 

Two  letters,  the  first  addressed  to  the  King  of  Prussia, 
and  the  second  to  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  show  a  certain 


COUNT    MARKOFF. 


23 


amount  of  uneasiness  on  the  part  of  Bonaparte  at  this 
moment.  In  his  letter  to  the  King  of  Prussia  explaining 
his  conduct  in  Hanover,  and  declaring  that  no  matter  what 
right  the  English  might  have  to  close  the  Elbe  and  the 
Weser  to  French  vessels,  they  had  no  right  to  close  them, 
to  Prussian  and  Danish  vessels,  he  called  on  his  majesty 
to  uphold  the  sacred  rights  of  his  subjects,  &c.,  &c.  He 
then  said — 

"  I  know  not  how  long  a  war,  which  promises  to  be 
waged  with  peculiar  animosity,  will  last,  I  believe  that 
England  will  not  be  able  to  carry  it  on  long  without  the 
support  of  the  Continent  ;  and  this  support  she  can  only 
find  in  Prussia,  in  Austria,  or  in  Russia. 

"  I  cannot  but  be  satisfied  with  the  sentiments  expressed 
by  the  court  of  Vienna,  and  with  the  conduct  of  the  cabinet 
at  this  moment ;  but  times  may  change,  and  your  majesty 
cannot  disapprove  of  ray  resolution  to  have  some  guarantee 
insuring  the  tranquillity  of  the  continent  during  the  war 
with  England.  The  personal  character  of  your  majesty, 
and  that  of  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  are  sufficient  guar- 
antees ;  but  then  the  court  of  Vienna  may  be  easily 
induced  to  recall  to  mind  a  recently  extinguished  war ; 
and  Russia  herself  may  be  led  astray  having  so  many  men 
easily  corrupted. 

"  Your  majesty  will  perceive  that  I  disguise  none  of  my 

thoughts,  &c.,  &c. 

"  Bonaparte." 

Bonaparte's  letter  to  the  Emperor  of  Russia  contained 
expressions  of  confidence,  but  its  chief  purport  was  to  get 
the  Czar  to  recall  Count  Markoff,  who  had  become  per- 
sonally disagreeable  to  the  First  Consul.  Only  a  short 
time  before  Bonaparte  had  procured  the  recall  of  M.  de 
Kalitscheff,  whose  haughty  manner  of  demanding  the  fulfil- 
ment of  French  promises  had  been  considered  most 
unpardonable.     Count  Markoff  had  been  guilty  of  prying 


24      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

into  French  affairs,  and  of  refusing  to  be  led  astray  by  the 
plausible  but  insincere  declarations  of  the  First  Consul, 
who,  deeming  that  he  had  nothing  to  apprehend  from 
Austria  or  Prussia,  now  treated  the  Russian  ambassador 
with  marked  incivility. 

To  REAR-ADMIRAL  DECR£:S. 

"  Brussels,  29/^  July,  1803. 
"You  will  find  inclosed  a  letter  from  Admiral  Truguet.' 
Inform  him  that  it  is  not  my  intention  to  make  a  Lord 
High  Admiral  .  .  .  nor  is  it  my  intention  to  see  O'Connor 
or  any  other  Irish  chief.  .  .  .  Citizen  Olivier  has  informed 
General  Mortier  that  in  order  to  build  sixty  flat-bottomed 
boats  he  must  purchase  at  Hamburg  60,000/.  worth  of 
seasoned  timber.  Send  him  an  order  to  cut  down  the 
necessary  timber  in  the  forests  of  Hanover  and  not  to 
spend  a  farthing.  ...  «  Bonaparte." 

To  CONSUL  CAMBACiRilS. 

"  Namur,  /i,th  August,  1803. 
"  I  shall  arrive  at  St.  Cloud  when  least  expected,  perhaps 
during   the    night.     The   next    day    I    shall    receive   the 
authorities.     I  am  not  the  less  sensible  of  the  empressement 
of  the  Tribunate.  .  .  .  "BONAPARTE." 

"  Mortier  has  sent  me  a  Latin  manuscript  addressed  by 
Leibniz  to  Louis  XIV.  proposing  the  conquest  of  Egypt. 
This  work  is  very  curious.  .<  BONAPARTE." 

1  Two  years  later  Bonaparte  made  his  brother-in-law,  Murat,  Lord 
High  Admiral,  a  post  held  only  once  since,  by  the  Due  d'Angoul^me, 
the  son  of  Charles  X.  The  office  of  Lord  High  Admiral  appears  to 
have  been  created  by  St.  Louis ;  it  was  abolished  by  Richelieu,  re- 
established by  Louis  XIV.,  abolished  again  by  the  Revolution,  and 
once  more  re-established  by  Napoleon.  It  was  held  at  one  time  by 
Anne  of  Austria,  who  was  surintendante  des  mers,  and  afterwards  by 
the  Comte  de  Vermandois,  a  natural  son  of  Louis  XIV.,  when  two 
years  of  age. 


THE    UNITED    IRISHMEN.  25 

As  Bonaparte  objected  to  the  presence  of  M.  de 
Kalitscheff,  M.  de  Markoff,  and  Admiral  Mazeredo  in 
Paris,  to  the  presence  of  the  Prince  of  the  Peace  at  Madrid 
and  of  Mr.  Acton  at  Naples,  so  he  objected  to  M. 
d' Almeida  at  Lisbon.  On  the  4th  August  he  informed 
the  Prince  Regent  that  as  long  as  that  minister,  who  was 
"  devoted  to  England "  remained  in  office,  the  First 
Consul  could  not  consider  Portugal  as  a  neutral  or  friendly 
Power. 

TO  REAR-ADMIRAL  DECRES. 

"  Sedan,  i,th  August,  1803. 

"The  affairs  of  Ireland  make  me' feel  the  necessity  of 
your  having  some  private  conferences  with  the  chiefs  of 
the  United  Irishmen  now  in  Paris.  You  can  offer  them 
25,000  men,  40,000  muskets,  with  artillery  and  ammunition, 
and  assure  them  that  the  Government  will  undertake  not 
to  make  peace  with  England  until  the  independence  of 
Ii-eland  has  been  proclaimed  ;  provided  that  20,000  United 
Irishmen  join  the  French  army  on  its  landing.  .  .  .' 

"Bonaparte." 

Bonaparte  cared  little  for  the  independence  of  Ireland, 
but  he  would  have  much  liked  to  have  been  able  to  wrest 
that  country  from  England  in  order  to  have  offered  it 
in  exchange  for  Malta.     "  During  one  of  his  voyages  to 

^  Nearly  at  the  same  date  Nelson  wrote  : — 

To  HIS  EXCELLENCY  MR.  DRUMMOND,  Constantinople. 

" '  Victory,'  off  Toulon, 

"2jth  August,  1803. 
"According  to  the  reports  of  vessels  from  Marseilles  and  Genoa 
the  war  is  very  unpopular,  and  I  hope  it  will  end  in  the  destruction  of 
that  man  of  tyranny,  Buonaparte  ;  but  I  detest  Europe  for  being  so 
mean-spirited  as  to  submit  to  the  mandates  of  the  Corsican.  I  blush 
for  their  meanness.  In  Ireland  the  Militia  have  vied  with  the  Regulars 
who  should  act  best.  If  we  are  but  true  to  ourselves  a  fig  for  the 
great  Buonaparte,  &c. ,  &c. 

"Nelson  and  Bronte.' 


26      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Boulogne,"  wrote  Miot  de  Melito,  "  Bonaparte  said  in 
conversation  with  Joseph — 'Well!  I  shall  not  go  to  England. 
I  shall  send  Ney  there.  Besides,  I  have  another  plan  ;  I 
shall  undertake  only  the  expedition  to  Ireland,  thus 
reducing  the  war  to  ordinary  dimensions.  I  shall  restore 
Ireland  in  exchange  for  Malta  and  conclude  peace.' " 

To  CITIZEN  TALLEYRAND. 

"  St.  Cloud,  142'/^  August,  1803. 
"  The  most  important  matter  with  regard  to  our  relations 
with  Spain  is  not  the  question  of  subsidies  ;  it  is  not  the 
execution  of  the  treaty  by  which  we  are  bound,  but  it  is — 
1st,  The  strange  conduct  of  having  allowed  two  vessels 
anchored  at  Algesiras  to  be  cut  out,  and  not  offering  an 
indemnity.  2nd,  It  is  to  see  four  French  vessels  of  war 
arriving  at  Corunna,  left  exposed  to  the  attacks  of  the 
enemy,  and  treated  as  if  they  belonged  to  Barbary  Rovers. 
3rd,  It  is  the  impertinence  with  which  the  Spanish  Govern- 
ment dares  to  declare  that  100,000  militia  men,  evidently 
not  intended  to  attack  the  British  fleets,  have  been  armed... 

"  Bonaparte." 

In  this  very  long  and  violent  letter  Talleyrand  was 
instructed  to  ask  Charles  IV.,  "  if  he  means  to  observe  the 
treaty  of  Amiens  which  he  signed,  and  which  England 
violated.  If  he  will  declare  war  against  England,  or,  in 
case  of  neutrality,  grant  France  the  subsidy  demanded. 
Or  if  his  majesty,  blinded  by  the  vertigo  which  has  seized 
upon  his  ministers,  wishes  for  war  with  France." 

The  French  ambassador  was  to  demand  immediate  satis- 
faction, and  to  inform  the  court  at  Madrid  that  80,000  men 
would  invade  the  country  unless  the  following  conditions 
were  accepted — "The  Governor  of  Cadiz  dismissed;  the 
officer  commanding  the  artillery  at  Algesiras  punished  ; 
the  arrears  of  subsidies  amounting  to  over  6,000,000/.  paid 
up."  In  default  of  the  above,  and  a  few  other  conditions, 
Spain  was  to  dismiss  the  British  ambassador;  to  lay  an 


•I  ^  1 


EXPLANATIONS    TO    PRUSSIA.  2/ 

embargo  on  all  British  vessels  in  her  ports  ;  to  furnish 
France  with  from  fifteen  to  twenty  armed  vessels,  and  to 
attack  Portugal  and  Gibraltar  in  concert  with  a  French 
army.  "  Between  this  double  alternative  and  war  with 
France,"  added  Bonaparte,  "  I  know  of  no  fourth." 

In  fact  Spain,  Portugal,  and  all  their  rich  possessions  in 
South  America  had  become  the  property  of  the  First 
Consul.     Such  was  the  result,  not  of  war,  but  of  peace. 

To  CITIZEN  TALLEYRAND. 

"St.  Cloud,  ^yd August,  1803. 

"  I  think  it  will  be  useful  to  send  the  last  note  from 
Russia  to  Laforest.  He  can  communicate  it  to  M.  de 
Haugwitz,  pointing  out  all  its  absurdity.  He  can  declare 
at  the  same  time  that  England  will  never  obtain  from  me 
anything  but  the  treaty  of  Amiens.  I  will  never  allow 
her  to  possess  anything  in  the  Mediterranean.  ...  I  have 
made  up  my  mind  to  evacuate  Holland  and  Switzerland. 
....  All  that  I  will  consent  to  is  the  evacuation  of 
Otranto,  of  Tarentum,  and  of  Hanover,  but  at  the  same 
time  that  England  evacuates  Malta. 

"Bonaparte." 

After  throwing  cold  water  on  the  idea  of  Russian 
mediation,  and  abusing  M.  de  Markoff  and  M.  de  Woron- 
sow,  the  First  Consul  said  that  Russia  talked  a  great  deal 
about  the  integrity  of  the  Ottoman  Empire,  while  she 
continually  violated  that  integrity.  He  returned  to  the 
subject  of  the  Russian  note  in  a  second  letter  to  Talleyrand, 
of  the  same  date,  and  to  this  letter,  in  which  he  referred 
to  M.  de  Markoff  as  that  scamp  {polisson),  he  added 
pages  of  observations  which  however  do  not  appear  to 
have  had  much  effect  at  St.  Petersburg.  Russia  in  fact 
was  becoming  painfully  aware  of  the  duplicity  of  Bona- 
parte, and  rather  ashamed  of  having  permitted  herself  to 
be  deceived  for  such  a  length  of  time,  and  this  in  spite  of 
the  representations  of  her  own  ambassadors. 


2  8  THE    CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  GENERAL  BERTHIER. 

"St.  Cloud,  ■2yd August,  1803. 
"  I  beg  you  will  have  an  analysis  made  of  all  the  descents 
which  the   English  have  made  on  our  coasts  since  1700, 
mentioning  the  object  proposed  and  the  result  obtained. 

"  Bonaparte." 

A  few  days  afterwards  Bonaparte,  writing  to  Admiral 
Bruix  for  information  concerning  the  capacities  of  Etaples, 
said — "  In  the  month  of  August,  1708,  Admiral  Byng  with 
fourteen  vessels  of  the  line  and  sixty  transports  anchored 
in  the  bay  and  landed  500  men.  Let  me  know  if  there 
are  any  traditions  with  regard  to  the  spot  where  he 
anchored,  and  if  there  would  be  any  danger  there  for  a 
portion  of  the  flotilla." 

To  CITIZEN  TALLEYRAND. 

"  La  Malmaison,  \ith  September,  1803. 
"I  return  you  the  despatch  from  Madrid  of  the  13th 
Fructidor.  I  am  surprised  that  we  have  no  other  news. 
Make  out  a  list  of  all  the  complaints  we  have  against 
Spain,  so  that  we  may  have  materials  ready  in  the  event  of 
requiring  them. 

"  Bonaparte." 

And  on  the  i8th  the  First  Consul  wrote  a  long  tirade  to 
the  King  of  Spain  begging  him  to  open  his  eyes  to  the 
gulf  which  British  intrigue  was  hollowing  out  under  his 
throne.  All  Europe,  he  said,  was  afflicted  and  indignant 
at  his  sort  of  dethronement  by  the  Prince  of  the  Peace, 
who  was  the  I'eal  King  of  Spain  ;  he  foresaw  with  pain 
that  he  should  have  to  wage  war  with  this  new  monarch. 

.  .  "  But,"  added  Bonaparte,  "  if  continuing  to  show  con- 
fidence in  me,  you  ask  for  a  remedy  against  approaching 
calamities,  I  have  only  one  answer  to  make,  in  which  you 
will  recognise  my  sincerity  and  friendship  ;  re-ascend  your 
throne  and  dismiss  the  man  who  by  degrees  has  usurped 


II44« 


MLLE.    ROBESPIERRE.  29 

the  royal  power ;  who,  in  spite  of  his  rank,  preserves  the 
base  passions  of  his  character  ;  who  exists  only  for  his 
vices,  and  who  will  be  always  governed  entirely  by  his 
thirst  of  gold." 

The  First  Consul  was  greatly  grieved,  so  he  said,  to 
write  to  his  Majesty  in  this  strain. 

The  French  alliance  had  already  produced  the  most 
disastrous  consequences,  but  many  more  indignities  were 
in  store  for  Charles,  his  family,  and  his  advisers.  The  above 
letter  was  sent  to  Madrid  by  a  courier,  a  copy  of  it  was 
to  be  shown  to  the  Prince  of  the  Peace,  and  that  minister 
was  to  be  informed  that  if  he  did  not  consent  to  the  con- 
ditions of  the  First  Consul  the  original  would  be  placed 
in  the  hands  of  the  King.  A  few  da5's  later  General 
BeurnonviUe  gave  the  letter  to  his  Majesty,  but  the  King, 
warned  that  it  contained  the  most  insulting  language, 
refused  to  open  it,  saying  it  would  be  useless  to  read  it,  as 
the  Spanish  ambassador  in  Paris  had  received  orders  to 
sign  the  treaty. 

Bonaparte  thought  that  by  exacting  240,000/.  a  month 
from  Spain  instead  of  the  land  and  sea  forces  to  which  he 
was  entitled  by  the  offensive  and  defensive  treaty  of  St. 
Ildefonso,  Spain  might  avoid  being  drawn  into  the  war 
with  England  and  thus  retain  colonies  which  furnished 
precious  metals,  and  which  were  to  all  intents  and  purposes 
French  property.  England  refused  to  be  the  dupe  of  this 
arrangement ;  she  at  once  seized  upon  some  Spanish 
galleons,  and  war  ensued. 

DECISION. 

"Paris,  24/^  September,  1803. 
"  The   Grand  Judge  will  send  her  (Mile.  Robespierre) 
the  sum  of  600  francs,  and  pay  her  150  francs  a  month. 

"  Bonaparte." 

Bonaparte  owed  a  good  deal  to  the  Robespierres.  In- 
gratitude was  not  one  of  his  failings  where  private 
individuals  were  concerned. 


30  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  CITIZEN  TALLEYRAND. 

"  Paris,  iZth  September,  1803. 

"  You  will  write  to  our  agent  at  Aleppo  and  say  that 
Consul  Bonaparte  wishes  to  know  if  the  French  navigating 
the  Red  Sea  or  passing  through  the  countries  occupied  by 
the  Wahabites  will  be  protected  by  their  chief  ?  and  if  so, 
whether  in  the  event  of  their  coming  to  Syria  or  Egypt 
they  will  be  secured  from  pillage  and  looked  upon  as 
friends.  Our  agent  must  endeavour  to  procure  informa- 
tion with  regard  to  the  force  and  situation  of  this  new 
sect. 

"  You  will  direct  Citizen  Rousseau  to  open  up  corre- 
spondence with  Persia,  and  express  my  dissatisfaction  that 
he  does  not  write  more  often.  Ask  General  Brune  to  find 
out  at  Constantinople  who  commands  in  Persia,  and,  if  it 
be  safe,  let  him  send  some  one  to  compliment  him. 
General  Brune  will  prepare  the  way  for  a  minister  which 
I  wish  to  have  at  Ispahan. 

"  Bonaparte." 

The  following  letter  is  of  peculiar  interest,  seeing  what 
befell  our  fatal  expedition  to  the  Low  Countries. 

To  GENERAL  DAVOUST. 

"  Paris,  2Zth  September,  1803. 

"  Citizen  General, — I  am  informed  that  you  have 
placed  a  demi-brigade  on  the  Isle  of  Cadzand.  If  this  be 
the  case  I  beg  you  will  withdraw  it,  for  the  troops  will  fall 
ill.  Should  the  English  attempt  an  attack  on  the  Isle  of 
Walcheren  you  will  have  time  to  succour  it.  I  recommend 
to  you,  above  all,  the  health  of  the  troops.  If  they  be 
quartered  in  unhealthy  spots  the  army  will  melt  away  and 
be  reduced  to  nothing.  This  is  the  first  of  all  military 
considerations.  You  perceive  what  the  unfortunate  situa- 
tion of  Walcheren  costs  us,  but  it  is  an  island,  and  this 


THE   VENd6mE    column.  3  I 

has  obliged  me  to  send  a  strong  force  there.  It  is  doubt- 
ful, however,  whether,  in  giving  this  order,  I  have  not 
committed  a  fault,  for  you  see  all  the  men  are  ill. 

"  Bonaparte." 

On  the  29th  September  Napoleon  sent  some  instructions 
to  Melzi,  Vice-President  of  the  Italian  Republic,  who  was 
told  to  encourage  military  pride  among  Italian  youths, 
"which  will  enable  them  to  beat  an  equal  number  of 
Austrians." 

To  CITIZEN  REGNIER. 

"  Paris,  30//^  September,  1803. 

"  It  is  not  suitable,  Citizen  Minister,  that  d'Avary  should 
remain  in  Paris.  Have  him  arrested,  so  as  to  be  able  to 
seize  his  papers  ;  and  if  nothing  be  found  in  them  (for  he  no 
doubt  keeps  a  sharp  look-out),  you  will  send  him  sixty 
leagues  away  from  Paris  to  a  small  town  where  he  will  be 
under  supervision. 

"  Send   a   clever  man  to  Besangon  to  make  friends  with 

Courvoisier  in  order  to  find  out  his  connections  and  how 

it  will  be  possible    to  seize  his  correspondence  with  the 

enemies  of  the  State. 

"  Bonaparte." 

DECREE. 

1st.  There  shall  be  raised  in  Paris,  in  the  centre  of  the 
Place  Venddme,  a  column  similar  to  that  erected  at  Rome 
in  honour  of  Trajan. 

2nd.  This  column  shall  be  two  metres  seventy-three 
centimetres  in  diameter,  and  twenty  metres  seventy-eight 
centimetres  high. 

The  shaft  was  to  be  ornamented  with  so  many  alle- 
gorical figures  in  bronze  representing  the  departments  of 
the  Republic,  and  on  the  top  was  to  be  placed  the  statue 
of  Charlemagne. 

As  before  mentioned,  the  bronze  figure  of  Bonaparte^ 


32      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

in  the  garb  of  a  Roman  emperor,  now  occupies  the  top  of 
this  column,  the  shaft  of  which,  regardless  of  the  ana- 
chronism, is  ornamented  with  muskets,  field-pieces,  and 
other  instruments  of  slaughter  which  did  not  exist  in  the 
days  of  the  Roman  Caesars. 

To  CITIZEN  REGNIER. 

"  Paris,  ^rd  October,  1803. 
"  I  am  informed.  Citizen  Minister,  that  Madame  de 
Stael  has  arrived  at  Maffiers.  Let  her  be  informed 
through  one  of  her  friends,  without  making  a  scandal,  that 
if  on  the  8th  she  has  not  taken  her  departure  she  shall  be 
escorted  to  the  frontier  by  the  gendarmery.  The  arrival  of 
this  woman,  like  that  of  a  bird  of  ill  omen,  has  always 
been  the  signal  for  some  trouble.  It  is  not  my  intention 
to  allow  her  to  remain  in  France. 

"  Bonaparte." 

to  rear-admiral  decres. 

"  St.  Cloud,  /^th  October,  1803. 
"  It  results  from  the  returns  that  we  have  a  flotilla  com- 
posed of  29  sloops,  300  armed  launches,  475   gun-boats, 
S36  pinnaces,  27  yawls,  8z;c. 

"  Bonaparte." 

And  Admiral  Bruix  was  instructed  to  select  three  or 
four  hardy  and  daring  corsair  captains  to  slip  over  to  the 
English  coast  during  the  long  nights  in  order  to  capture 
fishermen  and  peasants,  and  to  obtain  from  them  infor- 
mation concerning  the  coast  from  the  Thames  to  Ports- 
mouth, league  by  league.  The  formation  of  a  company 
of  guide-interpreters  was  ordered.  Irishmen  might  apply. 
Bonaparte  minutely  described  the  uniform,  &c.,  of  this 
corps — dragon-green  coats  with  red  lining,  scarlet  facings, 
white  buttons,  a  waistcoat  of  white  cloth  with  white 
buttons,  white  leather  breeches,  American  boots,  black 
bronzed  spurs.     The  armament  was  to  consist  of  carabine, 


TRAINING   FOR   THE   INVASION.  33 

with  the  bayonet  and  dragoon  sabre.  There  were  to  be 
two  drummers  in  this  corps  of  117  men. 

A  small  French  sloop  having  been  captured  by  an 
English  launch,  Bonaparte  was  exceeding  wrath.  The 
sloop  had  got  aground,  and  was  therefore  taken  close  to 
the  shore.  This  fact,  as  Bonaparte  said,  though  not  very 
important  in  itself,  was  a  misfortune,  as  exhibiting  a  want 
of  vigilance.  He  wrote  to  Soult  on  this  subject  three 
times — on  the  6th  and  i  ith  October  and  again  on  the 
13th  December;  also  three  letters  to  Davoust  and  a 
long  despatch  to  Admiral  Bruix. 

In  numei'ous  letters  and  orders  of  the  day  Bonaparte 
gave  directions  that  the  troops  should  be  practised  in 
rowing.  Each  soldier  was  to  labour  at  the  oar  for  two 
hours  a  day.  The  first  three  lessons  were  to  bfe  given  in 
the  port,  and  then  the  men  were  to  be  taken  into  the 
roads.  One  sees  that  dragoons  quartered  at  Compiegne 
were  taught  to  row  on  the  sluggish  waters  of  the  Oise. 

The  most  minute  instructions  on  technical  details  were 
poured  forth  by  Bonaparte.  His  "  Instructions  for  the 
Crews  of  Pinnaces"  extend  over  seven  printed  pages. 
They  begin  by  explaining  the  fore  and  aft,  the  starboard 
and  larboard  ;  that  the  oar  is  divided  into  three  parts  — 
the  handle,  the  shaft,  and  the  blade ;  that  the  handle  is 
that  extremity  of  the  oar  which  is  the  thinnest,  and  which 
is  rounded  so  that  it  may  be  clutched  by  the  hands  of 
the  rower,  &c.,  &c. 

To  CITIZEN  TALLEYRAND. 

"St.  Cloud,  October  'i.'ith,  1803. 
"  I  was  very  much  surprised  to  learn,  Citizen  Minister, 
that  the  Spanish  ambassador  had  the  indecence  to  dispute 
precedence  with  the  minister  of  France  at  Florence,  Let 
me  know  if  General  Clarke  has  written  anything  on  this 
subject.  It  is  not  my  intention^  no  matter  what  the  pre- 
text, to  allow  this  ridiculous  pretension  to  exist.  .  .  . 

"  Bonaparte." 

VOL.  II.  ^ 


34      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

A  song  having  made  its  appearance  intitled  Invitation 
to  start  for  England,  Bonaparte  decided — 

"  It  is  suitable  to  know  the  name  of  the  author  of  this 
song.  Although  it  appears  to  have  been  inspired  by 
praiseworthy  motives,  the  authority  of  the  police  should 
not  remain  foreign  to  any  movement." 

DECREE. 

"St.  Cloud,  n^th  October,  1803. 
"Art.  1st.   A  marble  bust  of  Jean  Bart  shall  be  placed 
in  the  principal  hall  of  the  town  of  Dunkirk,  the  birthplace 
of  that  gallant  sailor.  ... 

"  Bonaparte." 

Considering  all  the  naval  preparations  along  the  coast 
of  Holland  for  the  invasion  of  England,  the  moment  was 
ill-chosen  for  doing  public  honour  to  a  sailor  who  served 
first  in  the  Dutch  navy  under  De  Ruyter,  and  whose  most 
brilliant  achievement,  after  entering  the  French  service, 
was  the  defeat  of  the  Dutch  admiral  Vries. 

To  GENERAL  BERTHIER,  Wat  Minister. 

"  St.  Cloud,  2oik  October,  1803. 

"  It  cannot  be  disguised  that  a  great  number  of  English 

prisoners  desert  before  reaching  their  depots.     This  service 

is  very  badly  organised. 

"  Bonaparte." 

After  complaining^that  the  English  had  time  to  plunder 
a  vessel  which  went  ashore  between  Gravelines  and  Calais, 
Bonaparte  ordered  that  cavalry  pickets  should  constantly 
cross  each  other  all  along  the  coast. 

To  REAR-ADMIRAL  DECR^S. 

"  St.  Cloud,  loth  October,  1803. 
"  Citizen  Minister, — I  wish  you  to  assemble  at  Brest 
and  Rochefort  the  means  of  transport  for  the  expedition 
to  Ireland.     Transport  for   1,500  horses  and   3,000  men. 


TRAP    LAID    FOR   DRAKE.  35 

independently  of  what  may  be  embarked  on  board  the 
State  vessels,  appears  to  me  sufficient.  I  wish  to  have  at 
Rochefort  transports  for  500  horses  and  2,000  men. 

"  Bonaparte." 

to  citizen  talleyrand. 

"St.  Cloud,  \st  November,  1803. 

"  It  will  be  important  to  have  a  secret  agent  at  Munich, 
who  will  keep  an  eye  on  Drake  and  note  all  the  French- 
men who  repair  to  that  city.  ...  I  wish  ...  to  write  to 
Drake,  and  to  tell  him,  in  order  to  inspire  confidence,  that 
while  waiting  for  the  great  blow  to  be  struck,  he  thinks 
he  can  promise  to  have  taken,  from  the  table  of  the  First 
Consul,  in  his  secret  cabinet,  and  written  with  his  own 
hand,  notes  relative  to  the  great  expedition  and  other 
important  papers  ;  that  this  hope  reposes  on  an  usher  of 
the  cabinet,  who,  having  been  a  member  of  the  Jacobin 
Club,  but  to-day  having  the  care  of  the  cabinet  of  the 
First  Consul  and  being  honoured  with  his  confidence, 
nevertheless  belongs  to  the  Secret  Committee.  But  two 
things  are  necessary — 1st,  the  promise  of  100,000/.  if  the 
papers  have  the  importance  attributed  to  them  ;  2nd,  a 
French  agent  belonging  to  the  Royalist  party  must  be 
sent  here  with  means  to  hide  the  usher,  who  would 
naturally  be  arrested  on  the  disappearance  of  such 
documents. 

"It  may  be  added  that  the  same  usher  promises  to 
communicate  other  notes  of  lesser  interest  subtracted 
from  Meneval — minutes,  &c.  In  addition  to  these  de- 
tails care  must  be  taken  to  say  that  the  First  Consul  is 
surrounded  by  persons  in  whom  he  has  the  greatest 
confidence,   and  that  this  circumstance  alone  renders   it 

easy  to  get  access  to  his  secrets.  .  .  . 

"  Bonaparte." 

Drake  was  the  British  charg6  d'affaires  at  Munich,  and 
the  object  of  Bonaparte  was  to  try  and  mix  him  up  in  the 

D  2 


36      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Georges  conspiracy,  so  that  he  might  accuse  the  EngHsh 
Government  of  wishing  to  assassinate  him,  and  of  the 
fearful  crime  of  stirring  up  civil  war  in  France.^ 

With  regard  to  the  charge  of  taking  advantage  of 
internal  disaffection  in  France,  Lord  Hawkesbury  pointed 
to  the  agitation  kept  up  in  Ireland,  and  to  the  corps  of 
Irish  rebels  assembled  on  the  French  coast  with  a  view  of 
invading  England,  and  he  justified  the  conduct  of  British 
ministers  abroad  who  corresponded  with  French  malcon- 
tents, adding  :  "  But  of  all  governments  which  pretend  to 
be  civilised  governments  that  of  France  is  the  one  which 
has  the  least  right^to  appeal  to  the  law  of  nations." 

To  CITIZEN  TALLEYRAND. 

"  Boulogne,  %th  November,  1803. 

"  I  return  you  your  despatches,  Citizen  Minister.  Tell 
Citizen  Laforest  that  I  have  read  his  despatch  with 
great  interest.  It  will  be  well  to  warn  the  Turkish 
ambassador  that  the  English,  who  evidently  encourage 
the  Beys,  intend  to  seize  upon  Egypt.  .  .  . 

"  Bonaparte." 

To  CONSUL  CAMBAC^R^S. 

"  Boulogne,  \oth  November,  1803. 

"  I  have  received  your  letter,  Citizen  Consul.  You 
must  turn  your  attention  to  inserting  in  the  little  journals 

1  Duruy,  who  was  Minister  of  Public  Instruction  under  the  Second 
Empire,  says,  in 'a  note  in  his  History  of  France  (p.  441):  "The 
letters  of  the  English  ministers  at  Munich  and  Stuttgard  were  seized  ; 
they  proved  that  those  agents  paid  men  to  assassinate  the  First 
Consul,  to  kindle  civil  war,  to  blow  up  powder  magazines,  &c.,  &c. 
The  English  minister  publicly  avowed  his  agents.  Constant  (Bona- 
parte's valet  de  chambre)  declares  in  his  Memoirs,  that  one  day  at 
the  Malmaison  the  First  Consul  found  on  his  table  a  snuff-box  in 
every  way  similar  to  the  one  which  he  used,  and  which  was  filled 
with  poisoned  tobacco." 


INVASION   OF   IRELAND.  2i7 

articles  turning  the  bearers  of  false  news  into  ridicule. 
What  could  be  more  stupid  than  the  report  of  a  regiment 
of  hussars  having  been  captured  by  a  vessel  of  war .? 

"  Bonaparte." 

French  hussars,  a  few  years  before,  had  performed  the 
curious  feat  of  capturing  the  Dutch  fleet. 

To  GENERAL  AUGEREAU. 

"Boulogne,  12th  November,  1803. 
"Citizen  General, — I  have  received  your  letter,  and 
have  given  orders  for  hoods  to  be  served  out  to  all  the  men 
forming  part  of  the  expedition  to  Ireland,  of  which  you 
shall  have  the  command.  Affairs  are  settled  with  Spain 
and  Portugal.  .  .  .  Measures  have  been  taken  against 
desertion,  which  reduces  the  army.  ...  I  have  been  here 
for  the  last  ten  days,  and  I  have  reason  to  hope  that  I 
shall  soon  attain  the  end  which  Europe  awaits.  We  have 
six  centuries  of  insults  to  avenge.  «  Bonaparte  " 

To  CONSUL  CAMBACiR^S. 

"  Boulogne,  i6tk  November,  1803. 
"The  Minister  of  Marine  arrived  here  yesterday.  I 
spent  three  hours  in  the  midst  of  the  camps  and  the  port. 
Everything  commences  to  take  a  favourable  turn.  I  saw 
from  the  heights  of  Ambleteuse  the  coasts  of  England  as 
one  sees  Calvary  from  the  Tuileries.  One  could  distinguish 
the  houses  and  the  movement.  It  is  a  ditch  (the  Channel) 
which  will  be  crossed  when  one  has  the  audacity  to 
attempt  it.  .  .  .  "BONAPARTE." 

The  Calvary  above  alluded  to  is  better  known  now  as 
Mont  Valerien. 

In  a  letter  to  Citizen  Talleyrand  of  the  i6th  November^ 
we  find  the  following  paragraph  : — 

"  The  despatches  of  Citizen  Beurnonville  do  not  deserve 
any  reply  " 


38      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

The  Marquis  de  Beurnonville,  who  served  under  the 
Revolution,  will  ever  retain  a  page  in  French  history  as 
the  author  of  the  famous  bulletin,  "After  three  hours 
tremendous  fighting  the  enemy  lost  10,000  men;  the  loss 
of  the  French  was  confined  to  the  little  finger  of  a 
drummer."  No  wonder  Bonaparte  paid  little  attention  to 
his  despatches,  and  the  only  wonder  is  that  he  should  have 
made  him  an  ambassador.  He  was  made  a  senator  in 
1805,  a  count  in  1809,  a  peer  by  the  Bourbons  in  1814, 
a  commander  of  the  Order  of  St.  Louis  in  18 16,  a  marshal 
the  same  year,  and  a  marquis  in  18 17. 

To  CITIZEN  TALLEYRAND. 

"Boulogne,  17/A  November,  1803. 
"  The  affair  of  General  Ney  does  not  merit  much  atten- 
tion. For  a  great  length  of  time  people  have  occupied 
themselves  with  the  means  of  propelling  boats  without 
men.  The  solution  of  this  problem  offers  such  immense 
advantages  that  it  is  improbable  anything  reasonable  can 
have  been  imagined  by  a  Swiss  mountaineer. 

"The  despatch  from  Prussia  is  quite  another  matter. 
.  .  .  Do  they  wish  us  to  evacuate  Hanover .'  Do  they 
wish  to  obtain  a  great  preponderance  in  Germany  .' 

"  BONAPARTE." 

It  was  at  the  camp  of  Boulogne  that  Bonaparte  studied 
the  proposal  of  Fulton  and  recommended  it  to  the 
Academy  of  Sciences,  and  he  must  have  had  some  better 
reason  than  that  given  above  for  rejecting  plans  of  the 
Swiss  mountaineer. 

To  CITIZEN  TALLEYRAND. 

"  St.  Clotjd,  19M  November,  1803. 
"  I  beg  you  will  cause  to  be  inserted  in  the  Moniteur 
some  details  respecting  the  war  now  being  waged  in  India 
by  the  English  against  the  Mahrattas. 

"  I  send  you  a  letter  which  will  acquaint  you  with 
Russian  affairs.  "  BONAPARTE." 


THE    FLOTILLA.  39 

To  GENERAL  BERTHIER. 

"Paris,  iist November,  1803. 
"  It  is  time  for  you  to  propose  the  formation    of  the 
Irish  battalions.     I  wish  you  to  hand  me  a  return  of  the 
Irish   who   are   here,   and   who   count   upon  joining    the 
expedition,  to  settle  their  rank,  &c. 

"  Bonaparte." 

to  general  (admiral)  ganteaume. 

"Paris,  2yd November,  1803. 
"  I  send  you  General  Rapp,  one  of  my  aides-de-camp. 
...  I  wrote  to  you  two  months  ago  that  I  wished  to  have 
in  the  course  of  Frimaire  (latter  half  of  November  and 
first  half  of  December)  ten  ships  of  the  line,  four  frigates, 
and  four  corvettes  ready  to  sail  from  Toulon.  .  .  .  Let  me 
know  the  precise  day  upon  which  this  squadron  can  put 
to  sea.  ...  I  have  just  arrived  from  Boulogne,  where  the 
greatest  activity  reigns.  By  January  I  hope  to  have  300 
launches,  500  gun-boats,  and  500  pinnaces  assembled.  .  .  . 
What  are  your  ideas  concerning  this  flotilla  .■"  Do  you 
think  it  will  convey  us  to  England  }  It  can  carry  100,000 
men.  Eight  hours  of  night  in  our  favour  would  decide 
the  fate  of  the  universe.  The  Minister  of  Marine  is  at 
Flushing  ;  he  will  visit  the  Batavian  flotilla,  which  consists 
of  1 00  launches  and  300  gun-boats,  capable  of  carrying 
30,000  men.     The  Texel  fleet  could  also  transport  30,000 

men.   .  .   .  ^ 

"  Bonaparte." 

1  A  few  days  previously  Nelson,  who  never  believed  in  the  possi- 
bility of  an  invasion,  wrote  : — 

To  SIR  ALEXANDER  BALL,  BART.,  Malta. 

"'Victory,'  Madalena  Islands, 
November  "jth,  1803.^ 
" .  .  .  .  We  are  more  likely  to  go  to  war  with  Spain  for  her  com- 
plaisance to  the  French ;  but  the  French  can  gain  nothing,  but  be 
great  losers  by  forcing  Spain  to  go  to  war  with  us  ;  therefore,  I  never 


40  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOI,EON. 

To  CITIZEN  PERREGAUX. 

"  Paris,  ii,th  November,  1803. 
"  I  perfectly  understand  your  note.  1st,  That  there 
were  transactions  pending  between  the  Bank  and  the 
Treasury  ;  I  have  ordered  them  to  be  settled,  my  intention 
being,  under  no  circumstances,  to  borrow  money  from  the 
bank.  2nd,  That  the  bank  does  not  enjoy  the  capital  to 
which  it  is  entitled.  I  have  directed  Consul  Lebrun  to 
propose  various  means  for  enabling  the  bank  to  act  with 
more  confidence,  my  intention  being  to  aid  the  bank 
under  all  circumstances,  &c. 

"  Bonaparte." 

note  for  the  foreign  minister. 

"  Paris,  i\th  November,  1803. 
"  It  appears  from  the  last  despatches  from  Spain  that 
Azara  is  only  trying  to  gain  time.  However,  I  am  pressed 
for  money  :  sixteen  millions  were  due  on  the  21st  Sep- 
tember. The  Minister  of  Finance  will  draw  upon  the 
Spanish  Treasury  for  that  sum.  If  the  letters  of  change 
are  not  honoured,  this  will  furnish  a  motive  for  quarreUing 
with  Spain.  .  .  . 

"  Bonaparte." 
to  citizen  talleyrand. 

"  Paris,  24^/%  November,  1803. 
"  I  beg  you  will  write  to  Citizen  S^monville  at  the  Hague 
that  I  have  great  confidence  in  the  Dutch  Admiral  Ver 
Huell,  whom  I  have  appointed  to  the  command  of  the 
Batavian  flotilla. 

"  Bonaparte." 

expect  that  the  Spaniards  will  begin,  unless  Buonaparte  is  absolutely 
mad,  as  many  say  he  is.  What !  he  begins  to  find  excuses  !  I 
thought  he  would  invade  England  in  the  face  of  the  sun.  Now  he 
wants  a  three-days'  fog,  that  never  yet  happened  !  and  if  it  did,  how 
is  his  craft  to  be  kept  together?  He  will  soon  find  more  excuses,  or 
there  will  be  an  end  of  Buonaparte,  and  may  the  devil  take  him  ! " 


ADMIRAL    VER    HUELL.  4 1 

When  Louis  Bonaparte  was  King  of  Holland  Admiral 
Ver  Huell  was  so  well  received  by  the  Queen  Hortense 
that  doubts  have  never  ceased  to  exist  on  the  subject  of 
the  paternity  of  the  child  who  afterwards  became 
Napoleon  III. 

To  CITIZEN  CHAPTAL. 

"Paris,  ixth  November,  1803. 
"  I  beg  you  will  have  a  song  written  for  the  invasion  of 
England  to  the  tune  of  the  Chant  du  de'part.     Have  several 
songs  written  upon  this  subject,  to  different  airs. 

"  I  know  that  several  comedies  appropriate  to  the  cir- 
cumstance have  been  presented.  A  choice  should  be  made 
so  that  they  may  be  played  in  the  various  theatres  of  Paris, 
and  especially  at  the  camps  of  Boulogne,  Bruges,  and  other 
places  where  the  army  is  quartered. 

"  Bonaparte." 

note  for  the  minister  of  justice. 

"Paris,  ind December,  1803. 
"  It  is  not  my  intention  to  show  indulgence  towards  the 
sixty    conscripts   who    appeared    in    arms    at    Beaupreau. 
Forestier  and   Morin  and  any  other  instigators  must  be 
tried  by  court  martial  and  condemned  to  death.  .  .  . 

"  Bonaparte." 

It  was  a  frequent  habit  on  the  part  of  Bonaparte  to  order 
not  only  the  arrest  and  trial  of  individuals,  but  to  indicate 
at  the  same  time  the  sentence  to  be  pronounced  by  the 
court,  a  system  which  strongly  resembled  Jedburg  justice. 

To  CITIZEN  REGNIER. 

"  Paris,  (^th  December,  1803. 
"  Give  orders  at  Besan9on  for  Bourmont  to  be  placed  in 
solitary  confinement.  Let  Madame  Bourmont  be  examined 
as  to  the  foreigner  who  paid  her  a  visit  a  month  ago.     Let 


42      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

her  understand  that  the  result  of  her  examination  may 
have  important  consequences,  and  that  she  ought  to  tell 
the  truth  clearly.  "  BONAPARTE." 

To  CITIZEN  TALLEYRAND. 

"Paris,  -12th  December,  1803. 
"  M.  de  Coucy,  the  ex-Bishop  of  La  Rochelle,  is  in 
Spain,  where  he  is  behaving  very  badly.  His  incendiary 
pastorals  encourage  the  civil  war  in  La  Vendue.  Send  an 
extraordinary  courier  to  Madrid  with  instructions  for  him 
to  be  arrested  and  handed  over  to  the  gendarmery  at 
Bayonne.  Write  to  General  Beurnonville  that  this  is  no 
vain  formality ;  that  the  pastorals  of  this  wretch  have  a 
baneful  influence  on  the  public  tranquillity  ;  that  he  is 
evidently  paid  by  the  English  ;  that  I  cannot  beheve  His 
Most  Catholic  Majesty,  in  so  important  a  matter,  will 
refuse  to  deliver  the  bishop  into  my  hands.  Recommend 
General  Beurnonville  to  take  care  that  this  affair  succeeds. 

"  Bonaparte." 

organisation  of  the  grand  expedition. 

"  Paris,  12th  December,  1803. 
"  The  army  is  divided  into  four  grand  corps  : 
"  The  camp  of  St.  Omer  ; 
"  The  camp  of  Bruges  ; 
"  The  camp  of  Montreuil ; 
"  The  reserve." 

Then  follows  an  infinity  of  details.  A  general  of  brigade 
was  to  take  four  servants  with  him  ;  a  colonel,  two  ;  a 
captain,  one,  &c.,  &c.  The  war  minister  (Berthier)  was  to 
act  as  chief  of  the  staff. 

The  bishop  OF  ORLEANS. 

"  Paris,  16th  December,  1803. 
"I  have  received  your  letter   of  the   12th,  which  was 
handed  to  me  by  the  Councillor  of  State  Portalis.    I  thank 


EFFECT    OF   THE    CONCORDAT.  43 

you  for  the  details  you  have  furnished  me  concerning  La 
Vendue.  I  recognise  in  this  matter  the  zeal  of  which  you 
have  already  given  several  proofs.  .  .  .  Signals  have  been 
exchanged  between  the  English  fleet  and  St.  Hilaire.  Let 
me  know  your  opinion  with  regard  to  the  villages,  curh 
and  notables  you  consider  capable  of  corresponding  with 
the  enemy.  There  must  be  some  understanding  among 
these  brigands  (!).  .  .  . 

"  Bonaparte." 

The  above  letter  and  others  show  to  what  a  state  of 
servility  and  degradation  Bonaparte  had  reduced  the 
ministers  of  that  religion  which  he  had  just  re-established 
in  France.  He  well  knew  what  he  was  about  when  he 
signed  the  Concordat^ — that  he  was  becoming  the  virtual 
head  of  the  Church  in  France. 

To  ADMIRAL  BRUIX. 

"Paris,  i<)th  December,  1803. 
"  I  have  received  the  letter  in  which  you  announce  the 
arrival  of  forty  sail  in  the  Somme.  I  have  also  received  the 
report  of  the  visit  made  to  the  Prince  de  Galles.  You  can 
have  her  fitted  up  as  you  propose.  As  soon  as  she  is  ready 
hand  her  over  to  the  sailors  of  the  Guard.  Have  three 
other  vessels  fitted  up  in  a  suitable  manner  destined  for 
the  non-military  persons  who  will  follow  me.  If  you  can 
place  a  howitzer  on  board  without  inconvenience,  do  so.  .  .  . 

"  Bonaparte." 

And  General  Berthier  was  directed  to  form  in  each 
battalion  a  light  company  to  be  called— Horse  Company, 
or  Expedition  Company,  or  Company  of  Partisans ;  these 
companies  to  be  composed  of  strongly  built,  active  men  of 
small  stature.  They  were  to  be  lightly  armed,  and  to 
receive  musketry  instruction.     Bonaparte  addded  : 

"  The  men  of  these  companies  will  be  exercised  to  follow 
the  cavalry  at  the  trot,  sometimes  holding  the  boot  of  the 


44  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

trooper,  and  at  other  times  the  tail  of  the  horse  ;  also  to 
jump  up  behind  the  trooper  in  order  to  be  rapidly  trans- 
ported. .  .  .  These    companies    will    be    always    kept    up 

on  a  war  establishment.  .  .  . 

"  Bonaparte." 

These  companies  were  not  persevered  with,  it  being 
found  that  the  infantry  were  soon  knocked  up,  and  the 
movements  of  the  cavalry  greatly  impeded. 

To  CITIZEN  PORTALIS. 

"  Paris,  ■iind  December,  1803. 
"Write  to  the  Bishop   of  Orleans  for  information   con- 
cerning a  man  called  Lecocq,  and  to  know  what  kind  of 
person  he  is.     Tell  him  I  believe  Prejean  is  in  the  west; 
let  him  see  if  he  cannot  have  him  arrested. 

"  Bonaparte." 

To  citizen   TALLEYRAND. 

"Paris,  2-yd December,  1803. 
"  I  beg  you  will  have  made  me  out  a  summary  of  the 
campaigns  which  took  place  when  the  war  of  1790  broke 
out  between  Gustavus  III.  and  the  Russians. 

"  Bonaparte." 

This  was  the  Gustavus  who,  in  1792,  was  preparing  to 
march  upon  France  at  the  head  of  a  large  army  when  he 
was  assassinated  at  Anharstroem.  The  probability  is 
that  Bonaparte  wished  to  know  more  about  the  Russians 
now  his  friend  Paul  was  dead. 

To  CITIZEN  REGNIER. 

"Paris,  -zGth  December,  1803. 

"The   Debuts  has   published    two    articles   dated  from 

Germany.      I  wish  to  know  whence  these   articles  were 

derived,  and  who  paid  for  alarming  the  nation  with  the 

echo  of  rumours  spread  by  England.     Order  the  D^bats  to 


THE    PARIS    PRESS.  45 

contradict  these  false  reports  in  a  suitable  manner.  I  am 
not  more  satisfied  with  the  politics  of  the  Mercure.  I  wish 
to  know  if  the  brothers  Bertin,  who  have  been  constantly 
in  English  pay,  own  the  D^bats  and  the  Mercure.  Do  not 
conceal  the  fact  that  this  is  the  last  time  I  shall  make 
known  my  displeasure,  and  that  they  will  next  learn  the 
disapprobation  of  the  Government  by  the  suppression  of 
their  journals ;  that  I  know  everything;  that  the  brothers 
Bertin  are  paid  by  England,  as  is  proved  by  the  tone  of 
their  articles  ;  that  it  is  my  intention  to  allow  only  those 
journals  which  excite  the  nation  against  England  and 
encourage  it  to  support  the  vicissitudes  of  war,  to  exist. 

"  Bonaparte." 


The  Bertin  family  still  own  the  Debats  (1883).  Lanfrey 
writes  upon  this  subject  that  the  press  and  the  tribune 
were  alike  silent,  and  that  only  one  voice  was  heard.  "The 
situation  of  the  press,"  he  adds,  "  was  even  more  humiliating 

and  deplorable  than  that  of  the  public  assemblies 

Of  the  twelve  journals  to  which  the  Paris  press  had  been 
reduced  in  the  year  VIII.,  there  only  remained  eight,  with 
18,630  subscribers  between  them!"  The  unfortunate 
papers  which  were  allowed  to  exist  were  prohibited  from 
borrowing  from  foreign  gazettes,  and  the  only  foreign 
news  that  they  were  permitted  to  print  was  what  they 
chose  to  take  from  the  columns  of  the  Moniteur.  "  Nelson," 
continues  Lanfrey,  "  might  annihilate  our  navy  at  Trafalgar  ; 
this  insolent  fact  was  ignored,  and  woe  to  any  one  who 
dared  to  allude  to  it !  " 

No  book  could  be  published  without  permission.  A 
consular  decree  ran — "  In  order  to  ensttre  the  liberty  of  the 
press,  no  bookseller  can  place  a  book  on  sale  before  it  has 

been  submitted  to   a  committee  of  revision "     No 

wonder  that  a  staunch  Republican  should  have  exclaimed, 
on  reading  this  decree — "We  have  fought  for  ten  years  to 
be  citizens,  and  we  are  nothing  but  subjects." 


46  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  CITIZEN  TALLEYRAND. 

"  Y PCB.\Z,  listh  December,  \%oi. 
"The  proposals  of  Citizen  Reinhard  are  inadmissible. 
The  Government  is  master  to  send  whom  it  chooses  with- 
out giving  information  to  any  one.  It  appears  that 
Colleville  was  formerly  employed  by  Citizen  Reinhard 
[when  Foreign  Minister]  as  a  spy;  to-day  he  is  employed 
by  the  Grand  Judge,  and  his  mission  has  nothing  in  com- 
mon with  the  patent  diplomatic  and  important  functions 
of  Citizen  Reinhard.  The  conduct  of  Citizen  Reinhard 
is  foolish.     If  he  supposes  Colleville  to  be  a  spy  sent  to 

Hamburg  he  should  not  see  him In  a  city  like 

Hamburg  the  police  ought  to  have  not  one,  but  ten  spies. 
These  spies  are  not  agents  of  the  Government,  are  not 
public  functionaries,  and  are  not  strictly  speaking  charged 
with  missions  ;  they  are  men  who  are  there  as  Frenchmen, 
who  receive  pay,  and  who  write  what  is  required.  Citizen 
Reinhard  did  wrong  to  compromise  himself  by  sending 

for  Colleville 

"  Bonaparte." 

It  was  a  trick  of  Bonaparte  to  have  private  as  well  as 
public  agents  at  various  important  places — men  capable 
of  performing  any  dirty  work,  and  who  cared  little  for 
being  disavowed  as  long  as  they  were  paid. 


CHAPTER  II. 

THE    YEAR     1804. 

One  of  the  chief  events  of  this  year  was  the  assassina- 
tion of  the  Due  d'Enghien.  A  serious  rising  was  anticipated, 
under  the  direction  of  a  Bourbon  prince,  and  Savary  had 
been  despatched  to  the  cliffs  at  Biville  to  he  in  wait  for  the 
Comte  d'Artois  and  the  Due  de  Berri,  whose  landing  was 
hourly  expected.  This  scheme  having  broken  down, 
Bonaparte,  determined  at  any  price  to  shed  Bourbon  blood, 
sent  a  detachment  of  cavalry  across  the  Baden  frontier  and 
seized  on  the  son  of  the  Prince  de  Cond6,  who  for  two 
years  past  had  been  living  a  retired  life  at  Ettenheim, 
absorbed  in  a  romantic  passion  for  the  Princess  Charlotte 
de  Rohan,  to  whom  he  had  been  secretly  married,  and 
hunting  in  the  Black  Forest. 

To  justify  this  arbitrary  act,  and  this  violation  of 
territory,  Bonaparte  pretended  that  the  Due  d'Enghien 
was  the  prince  who  was  to  head  the  projected  rising,  and 
that  he  was  the  mysterious  person  called  Charles,  whose 
presence  in  Paris  had  been  reported  to  the  police.  In 
reality  Bonaparte  knew  that  the  Due  d'Enghien  had 
nothing  to  say  to  the  threatened  movement ;  that  it  was  to 
be  headed  by  the  Comte  d'Artois,  and  that  Charles  was  no 
other  than  Charles  Pichegru,  his  old  tutor  of  Brienne, 
and  the  conqueror  of  Holland,  who  had  turned 
conspirator. 


48      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Murat,  Savaiy,  Real,  Caulaincourt,  and  HuUin  were  the 
chief  instruments  employed  in  this  infamous  affair.  Once 
kidnapped,  the  unfortunate  duke  was  hurried  to  Vincennes, 
and  tried  by  court-martial.  There  was  not  the  slightest 
evidence  of  his  having  been  engaged  in  any  plot  against 
the  life  of  the  First  Consul,  or  of  any  crime  beyond  having 
borne  arms  against  the  Revolution,  for  which  crime  an 
amnesty  had  been  granted.  Half  an  hour  after  his 
sentence  was  pronounced  the  duke  was  shot  by  torcUight 
in  the  ditch  of  Vincennes. 

There  were  several  motives  for  this  crime.  Bonaparte 
wished  to  reassure  both  the  Jacobins,  who  suspected  him 
of  plotting  a  restoration,  and  also  those  Royalists  who, 
like  Talleyrand,  had  deserted  the  Bourbons,  and  dreaded 
their  return.  He  also  desired  to  strike  terror  into  the 
hearts  of  all  his  enemies.  Bonaparte  is  accused,  too,  of 
having  been  instigated  to  commit  this  crime  through 
jealousy  of  the  high  military  reputation  of  the  last  of  the 
Condes,  whose  name  was  extremely  popular  with  the  troops. 

The  effect  of  this  sanguinary  drama  was  immense.  The 
court  of  Russia  went  into  mourning.  The  Pope,  who  a 
few  months  afterwards  consented  to  crown  the  murderer, 
wept  over  the  fate  of  "  that  great  and  innocent  victim,"  as 
he  called  the  duke.  Great  was  the  irritation  and  horror 
inspired  throughout  Germany.  A  feeling  of  consternation 
reigned  in  Paris,  which  was  in  no  humour  to  see  the 
establishment  of  another  reign  of  terror.  This  crime,  in 
fact,  was  greeted  with  universal  reprobation,  and  every 
one  concerned  endeavoured  to  get  rid  of  his  share  of 
responsibility.  Bonaparte  threw  the  blame  upon  Talley- 
rand, and  even  upon  Picot.^  Savary  said  to  Madame  de 
R^musat,  "The  Emperor  and  I  were  deceived  on  this 
occasion."  And  he  went  on  to  relate  how  Picot,  after 
leading  them  to  believe  that  the  Due  d'Enghien  had  been 
in  Paris,  afterwards,  on  seeing  Pichegru,  recognised  in 
that  General  the  mysterious  personage  treated  with  so 
'  Georges  Cadoudal'  s  valet  ! 


BONAPARTE  AND  THE  BOURBONS.        49 

much  respect  by  his  brother  conspirators.  "  On  learning 
this,"  said  Savary,  "  Bonaparte  stamped  with  his  foot, 
and  exclaimed,  '  Ah,  the  wretch !  what  has  he  caused  me 
to  do  .? '  " 

There  can  be  Httle  doubt,  however,  about  Bonaparte 
having  been  entirely  to  blame.  When  Josephine  appealed 
to  him  to  spare  the  duke,  he  said  that  his  policy  demanded 
this  coup  dytat,  that  impunity  would  encourage  parties, 
that  the  prince  troubled  France  and  served  the  vengeance 
of  the  English,  that  his  military  reputation  might  influence 
the  army,  but  that  once  dead  the  only  tie  between  the 
army  and  the  Bourbons  would  be  broken. 

To  his  brother  Joseph  he  spoke  in  a  manner  equally 
candid  and  cold-blooded.     He  said : — 

"  I  cannot  repent  of  my  decision  with  regard  to  the 
Due  d'Enghien.  This  was  the  only  means  I  had  of 
leaving  no  doubt  as  to  my  real  intentions,  and  of 
annihilating  the  hopes  of  the  partisans  of  the  Bourbons. 
Then  I  cannot  conceal  the  fact  that  I  shall  never  be 
tranquil  on  the  throne  as  long  as  a  single  Bourbon  exists, 
and  this  Bourbon  is  one  the  less.  It  is  what  remains  of 
the  blood  of  the  great  Conde,  the  last  heir  of  the  finest 
name  of  that  house.  He  was  young,  brilliant,  brave,  and 
consequently  my  most  redoubtable  enemy.  It  was  the 
sacrifice  the  most  necessary  to  my  safety  and  grandeur. 
.  Not  only  if  what  I  have  done  were  still  to  be  done,  I 
would  do  it  again,  but  if  I  had  a  favourable  opportunity 
to-morrow  of  getting  rid  of  the  two  last  scions  of  that 
family  (the  two  sons  of  the  Comte  d'Artois,  the  Due 
d'Angouleme  and  the  Due  de  Berri),  I  would  not  allow  it 
to  escape." 

Bonaparte,  too,  in  his  will  attempted  to  justify  his 
conduct,  saying  that  under  similar  circumstances  he 
would  act  again  as  he  acted  in  1804. 

There  can  be  little  doubt,  therefore,  as  to  the  real 
author  of  this  crime. 

VOL.  11.  ^ 


50      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Madame  de  Remusat  has  summed  up  her  opinion  in 
these  words — "  It  was  with  the  coolness  of  calculation,  or 
rather  of  sophism,  that  Bonaparte  covered  himself  with 
illustrious  and  innocent  blood."  Talleyrand  she  excuses 
to  a  certain  extent,  on  the  ground  that  he  saw  it  was 
useless  to  interfere.  Both  M.  de  Caulaincourt,  who  had 
played  the  chief  part  in  the  arrest  of  the  duke,  and 
HuUin,  who  was  president  of  the  court-martial  which  tried 
and  condemned  him,  were  persuaded  that  Bonaparte  did 
not  intend  to  shed  blood.  It  was  some  time  before  De 
Caulaincourt,  after  the  execution,  would  speak  to  the  First 
Consul,  whom  he  upbraided  with  having  branded  him  with 
infamy.  General  Hullin  told  Lucien  Bonaparte  that  the 
First  Consul  had  assured  the  members  of  the  court- 
martial  that  he  merely  wished  to  make  a  display  of 
power,  and  that  his  intention  was  to  pardon  the  Due 
d'Enghien.  Looking  at  what  afterwards  took  place  in 
the  case  of  Moreau,  there  is  every  probability  that  this 
story  is  true. 

Madame  de  Remusat  relates  that  on  the  evening  be- 
fore the  execution,  while  she  was  playing  at  chess  with 
Bonaparte,  he  said  in  a  low  voice,  "  Soyons  amis  Cinna," 
and  then  repeated  the  following  lines  irom  A  Izire : — 

"  Des  dieux  que  nous  servons  connais  la  difference  : 
Les  tiens  f  ont  command^  le  meurtre  et  la  vengeance  ; 
Et  le  mien,  quand  ton  bras  vient  de  m'assassiner, 
M'ordonne  de  te  plaindre  et  de  te  pardonner." 

She  could  not  believe  after  this  that  the  duke  would  be 
executed. 

According  to  General  Hullin  these  hnes  were  recited  to 
some  of  the  members  of  the  court-martial  before  the  trial. 

One  of  the  most  bitter  accusations  brought  against 
England  was  that  the  papers  had  reprinted  a  pamphlet 
written  in  the  time  of  Cromwell,  called.  Killing  no 
Murder.  But  what  did  Bonaparte  say  to  Josephine  when 
she   pleaded   on    behalf    of    the    Due   d'Enghien.?      "In 


ACTS    OF    VIOLENCE.  5 1 

politics,  a  death  destined  to  give  repose  is  not  a  crime, 
The  orders  have  been  given;  there  is  no  possibility  of 
drawing  back." 

In  Paris  and  elsewhere  this  political  assassination  created 
the  most  painful  sensation,  and  it  was  some  days  before 
the  First  Consul  ventured  to  show  himself  in  public,  and 
then  he  was  received  with  remarkable  coldness.  In 
London  a  high  mass  was  celebrated  for  the  late  duke  in 
the  French  chapel  in  King  Street,  at  which  were  pre- 
sent, in  addition  to  the  Dukes  of  Berry,  Orleans,  and 
Montpensier,  a  large  number  of  the  French  and  English 
nobility,  together  with  the  Archbishop  of  Narbonne,  and 
the  Bishops  of  Montpellier,  Arras,  Avranches,  Nantes, 
Angouleme,   Noyon,   Rhodes,  and   Usez. 

In  the  Memorial  of  St.  Helena  one  finds  Napoleon 
saying :  "  The  duke  wrote  me  a  letter  offering  me  his 
services,  and  asking  for  the  command  of  an  army,  and 
that  wretch,  Talleyrand,  did  not  hand  me  the  letter  until 
two  days  after  the  death  of  the  prince."  It  is  almost 
needless  to  say  that  this  letter  never  existed  except  in  the 
imagination  of  Bonaparte.  The  duke  wrote  one  letter,  and 
that  was  to  the  Princess  Charlotte  de  Rohan. 

In  addition  to  the  political  assassination  of  the  Due 
d'Enghien,  other  acts  of  .violence  were  committed  during 
1804.  There  was  the  trial  of  Moreau  and  his  transporta- 
tion, that  of  Pichegru  and  his  dubious  suicide,  that  of 
Georges  Cadoudal,  who  was  executed  with  eleven  of  his 
companions.  There  was  the  capture  of  Captain  Wright 
and  his  mysterious  death  in  the  temple  ;  there  was  the 
seizure  of  Sir  G.  Rumbold  at  Hamburg ;  the  robbery  of 
Mr.  Wagstaffe  as  he  was  conveying  despatches  to  St. 
Petersburg ;  while  the  Pope  was  forced  to  give  up  the 
imigre  Vern^gues,  who  had  become  a  naturalised  Russian, 
and  who  was  acting  in  a  diplomatic  capacity  in  Rome. 

The  trial  of  the  hero  of  Hohenlinden  on  a  charge  of 
conspiracy  created  both  surprise  and  indignation,  and  there 
can  be  no  doubt  that  the  accusation  was  due  to  the  hatred 

E  2 


52      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

and  jealousy  of  Bonaparte.  Moreau  was  the  only  soldier 
left  whose  services  could  be  compared  to  those  of  the 
First  Consul.  According  to  Lanfrey,  Bonaparte  hated 
Moreau  as  a  probable  successor.  We  have  already  seen 
how  he  got  rid  of  the  army  of  the  Rhine  by  sending  it  to 
perish  at  St.  Domingo.  Bonaparte  still  disliked  and  dis- 
trusted all  the  officers  of  that  army,  not  one  of  whom 
received  the  baton  of  Marshal  when  the  Empire  was  pro- 
claimed. There  was  no  ground  for  implicating  Moreau  in 
the  conspiracy  against  Bonaparte,  beyond  the  fact  that  he 
had  met  Pichegru ;  but  at  the  same  time  it  was  clearly 
proved  that  he  had  refused  all  the  offers  made  to  him. 
The  only  real  charge  which  could  be  proved  against  Moreau 
was  that  he  had  not  denounced  Pichegru.  His  defence 
was  that  he  was  not  an  informer,  and  that  he  had  tried  to 
turn  Pichegru  from  his  purpose.  Accused  of  having 
wished  to  secure  the  supreme  power  for  himself,  Moreau 
had  only  to  reply  that  when  he  had  been  offered  the  dic- 
tatorship on  the  1 8th  Brumaire,  by  Sieyes,  he  had  rejected 
it.  One  of  the  chief  witnesses  against  Moreau  was  Picot, 
the  valet  de  chambre  of  Georges  Cadoudal.  His  evidence 
was  relied  upon  to  confound  Moreau.  But  on  the  trial 
Picot  recanted  ;  he  declared  in  court  that  the  accusations 
which  he  had  made  against  the. General  had  been  wrung 
from  him  by  torture,  and  he  held  up  his  hands  all  covered 
with  bruises  to  prove  the  truth  of  his  statement. 
Although  the  jury  had  been  suspended  in  the  department 
of  the  Seine,  and  although  the  judges  had  been  packed, 
trembled  before  Bonaparte,  were  aware  of  his  wishes,  and 
had  been  assured  that  if  they  returned  a  verdict  of  death 
the  sentence  would  not  be  carried  out,  still  the  majority  re- 
fused to  find  Moreau  guilty  of  the  crimes  imputed  to  him. 
Clavier,  one  of  the  judges,  when  told  that  if  Moreau  were 
condemned  to  death  the  Emperor  would  pardon  him, 
exclaimed,  "And  who  will  pardon  us?"  Out  of  the 
twelve  judges  before  whom  Moreau  appeared  seven  were 
in  favour  of  an  acquittal,  five  of  a  condemnation.     In  the 


MOREAU    BANISHED.  ^  53 

end  a  compromise  was  agreed  to,  and  Moreau  was 
sentenced  to  two  years'  imprisonment.  Moreau  naturally 
complained  of  this  sentence,  which  he  said  was  at  variance 
with  evidence  and  with  common  sense.  "  If,"  he  said,  "  I 
played  the  part  of  a  conspirator,  I  should  be  condemned 
to  death  as  a  chief  No  one  will  believe  that  I  acted  as 
a  corporal." 

When  the  sentence  of  the  court  was  communicated  to 
Bonaparte  he  flew  into  a  violent  passion — a  passion  which 
makes  one  doubt  the  assertion  that  he  would  have  par- 
doned his  rival  had  he  been  condemned  to  death.  A  few 
days  later  when  Lacourbe,  one  of  the  judges  who  had  all 
along  maintained  the  innocence  of  Moreau,  presented  him- 
self at  the  Tuileries  with  his  colleagues,  Bonaparte  ad- 
vanced towards  him,  and  violently  exclaimed — "  How  dare 
you  sully  my  palace  with  your  presence  .-'  "  The  sentence 
against  Moreau  was  changed  into  one  of  banishment,  and 
he  left  France. 

In  the  whole  of  this  affair,  as  in  that  of  the  Due 
d'Enghien,  Murat  played  a  prominent  part,  encouraging 
Bonaparte  in  his  evil  instincts.  It  is  said,  too,  that  the 
new  Emperor  had  been  violently  irritated  by  the  mother- 
in-law  of  Moreau,  who  had  made  some  bitter  remarks  on  a 
rumour  then  current  of  a  scandalous  connection  between 
Bonaparte  and  his  sister  Caroline,  who  afterwards  married 
Murat.     Madame  de  Remusat  mentions  this. 

The  case  against  Pichegru,  the  conqueror  of  Holland, 
was  clear  enough.  He  was  a  disappointed  man  ;  he  had 
been  transported  to  Cayenne  at  the  time  of  the  Fructidor 
business,  and  had  made  his  escape.  From  being  the  friend 
of  St.  Just,  he  went  over  to  Cond^  and  he  is  said  to  have 
asked  as  the  price  of  his  treason  for  the  governorship  of 
Alsace,  the  castle  of  Chambord,  8,000/.  a  year,  &c.  &c. 
He  was  found  dead  in  prison,  and  the  supposition  is  that 
he  was  strangled  by  the  orders  of  Bonaparte.  There  were 
several  suspicious  points  in  connection  with  his  suicide,  as 
it  was  called.     He  was  found  strangled  with  a  silk  hand- 


54  THE   CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

kerchief,  which  he  had  tightened  round  his  throat  by- 
twisting  it  with  a  stick,  and  he  was  discovered  lying  with 
the  stick  placed  behind  his  ear  to  prevent  it  from  moving. 
It  has  been  remarked  that  in  the  convulsions  of  death 
Pichegru  could  not  have  remained  in  the  position  in  which 
he  was  found  ;  he  would  have  raised  his  head,  and  the 
handkerchief  would  have  been  loosened.  Then  a  noise  was 
heard  in  Pichegu's  cell,  on  the  night  of  the  "  suicide,"  by 
some  of  the  General's  fellow-prisoners,  and  on  his  table, 
said  the  Moniteur,  was  found  a  volume  of  Seneca,  opened 
at  the  page  where  the  moralist  says  that  "  he  who  con- 
spires should  not  fear  death."  It  is  not  considered  likely 
that  Pichegru,  who  was  yearning  for  revenge,  would  have 
taken  the  trouble  to  remove  all  appearances  of  an  assassi- 
nation. The  strangling  seemed  to  indicate  the  employment 
of  some  of  the  Mamelukes,  whom  Bonaparte  had  brought 
back  from  the  East,  while  the  Seneca  lying  on  the  table  was  a 
theatrical  arrangement  which  was  no  doubt  due  to  the  fertile 
imagination  of  the  First  Consul.  We  shall  find  a  very 
similar  inise  en  scene  when  we  come  to  the  "  suicides " 
of  Admiral  Villeneuve  and  of  Captain  Wright.  There 
is  nothing  to  show  that  Pichegru  intended  suicide.  On 
the  contrary,  he  had  declared  that  he  meant  to  speak 
out  at  his  trial,  and  it  was  suspected  that  this  was 
the  reason  of  his  sudden  removal.  What  if  he  were  to 
prove  the  innocence  of  Moreau,  and  to  declare  in  court 
that  Bonaparte  and  himself  had  both  conspired  to  re- 
store the  Bourbons  on  a  former  occasion  .'  Colonel  Jung, 
in  his  Bonaparte  et  son  Temps,  quotes  a  curious  letter 
(vol.  iii.  p.  197),  in  which  the  Comte  d'Avaray,^  writing  to 
the  Comte  d'Antraigues,  concerning  some  despatches  which 
had  been  taken  from  him,  and  partially  printed,  said — 
"You  should  promptly  enlighten  public  opinion  on  this 
bit  of  perfidy,  which  has  mutilated  facts  in  order  to  select 

^  The  chief  of  the  political   cabinet   of  the   Comte   de   Provence 
(Louis  XVIIL). 


GEORGES    CADOUDAL  55 

a  victim  between  two  generals  equally  sold  to  royalism." 
If  Bonaparte  was  not  serious  in  1797,  if  he  never  intended 
to  accept  the  hereditary  vice-royalty  of  Corsica,  with  the 
title  of  duke,  a  seat  in  the  House  of  Peers,  a  marshal's 
b^ton  and  the  blue  ribbon,  still  he  knew  that  Pichegru 
was  in  the  plot,  and  he  allowed  two  months  to  pass  without 
giving  information  to  the  Government.  He  was  guilty  of 
the  same  crime  in  1797  as  Moreau  wasjn  1804.  Talley- 
rand, asked  what  he  thought  of  the  death  of  Pichegru, 
said — "  It  was  very  sudden  and  very  opportune."  There 
was  a  report  that  Pichegru,  like  Picot  and  others,  had 
been  tortured. 

As  for  Georges  Cadoudal,  he  behaved  after  his  arrest, 
and  especially  at  his  trial,  with  an  amount  of  courage  and 
energy  which  elicited  the  admiration  of  Bonaparte.  He 
indignantly  denied  that  it  was  his  intention  to  assassinate 
the  First  Consul.  His  idea  was  to  attack  him  openly 
when  surrounded  by  his  escort,  and  to  fight  it  out  fairly. 
Twelve  persons  were  executed  in  connection  with  this 
Royalist  plot,  and  one  can  understand  the  discontent  of 
Murat,  who  complained  that  the  only  culprits  reprieved 
were  the  Marquis  de  Riviere,  the  Polignacs,  and  other 
sprigs  of  the  nobility. 

In  this  year  France  saw  many  other  wonderful  sights, 
such  as  the  establishment  of  the  Empire,  and  the  corona- 
tion of  Napoleon  Bonaparte  by  the  Pope,  who,  to  the  great 
scandal  of  the  Catholic  world,  allowed  himself  to  be  coaxed 
to  Paris,  in  the  hope  of  obtaining  from  "  the  restorer  of  the 
altar"  certain  spiritual  and  temporal  advantages.  The 
"  Code  Napoleon  "  was  promulgated,  the  Legion  of  Honour 
created,  and  eagles  were  distributed  to  the  army. 

As  regards  the  general  state  of  Europe  at  this  period, 
Lanfrey  says  :  "  We  have  seen  how  Bonaparte,  after  the 
rupture  of  the  Treaty  of  Amiens,  had  managed  by  his  un- 
bearable exactions  to  exasperate  the  states  best  disposed 
towards  us.  We  have  seen  how  he  estranged  the  hearts 
of  allies  by   his    depredations,   oppressing   without    pity 


56      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

independent  nations,  humiliating  conquered  Austria  be- 
yond measure,  irritating  Russia,  and  rejecting  with  blind 
infatuation  the  hand  offered  by  Prussia." 

In  the  month  of  February  the  session  was  opened,  and 
in  his  message  the  Emperor  said,  a  propos  to  the  blockade 
of  the  French  ports — "  The  fleets  of  our  enemies  are  wear- 
ing themselves  out  against  the  winds  and  the  tempests, 
whilst  ours,  without  destroying  themselves,  are  learning 
how  to  fight  them." 

This  was  the  euphemistic  manner  in  which  the  forced 
inaction  of  the  French  fleets  was  explained  away. 

To  GENERAL  BERTHIER. 

"Paris,  IXth  January,  1804. 
"  I    forward    you   a   letter   from   the    Minister  of  the 
Republic  at  Genoa.     Give  orders  for  Papaccini,  Bruni,  and 
Cinni,  English  spies,  to  be  arrested,  tried  by  a  court-martial 
composed  of  five  ofificers,  and  sentenced  to  be  shot.  .  .  . 

"  Bonaparte." 

To  CITIZEN  TASCHER.i 

"  Paris,  13M  January,  1804. 
"  Citizen  Tascher,  officer  of  the  Guard,  you  will  start 
to-morrow  for  Rome.  You  will  alight  at  the  residence  of 
Cardinal  Fesch,  Ambassador  of  the  Republic,  who  will 
present  you  to  the  Pope,  into  whose  hands  you  will  deliver 
the  inclosed  letter.  You  will  remain  at  Rome  until  His 
Holiness  has  handed  you  an  answer.  At  all  events,  you 
will  remain  eight  or  ten  days  in  that  city. 

"  Bonaparte." 
to  his  holiness  the  pope. 

"  Paris,  13/A  January,  1804. 
"Most  Holy  Father,— I  have  communicated  to  the 
Diet  of  Ratisbon  the  last  brief  which  your  Holiness  sent 

^  One  of  Josephine's  nephews. 


CARDINALS    CAPRARA   AND   CASELLI.  57 

me,  and  I  have  informed  it  of  my  desire  that  nothing  should 
be  done  in  matters  of  rehgion  without  your  participation, 
so  that  your  Holiness  may  have  no  cause  for  affliction  or 
pain.  Your  Holiness  can  rely  upon  my  support,  and  it 
will  be  sufficient  for  you  to  acquaint  me,  through  Cardinal 
Caprara.i  of  the  state  of  affairs,  and  the  steps  to  be  taken. 

"The  conclusion  of  the  Concordat  with  the  Italian 
Republic  has  afforded  me  great  consolation,  and  your 
Holiness  may  rest  assured  of  my  desire  to  render  your 
pontificate  happy  and  prosperous. 

"  In  general,  I  have  nothing  to  complain  of  in  the 
conduct  of  the  clergy  in  France.  The  bishops,  the  canons, 
the  cur^s,  and  the  churches  are  in  a  satisfactory  condition, 
and  my  intention  is  to  set  aside  certain  sums  for  the 
benefit  of  the  clergy,  to  build  seminaries,  &c. 

"  I  recommend  Cardinal  Caselli  to  your  Holiness  ;  he 
has  been  honoured  with  your  confidence,  and  I  cannot 
forget  the  amiability  and  purity  of  the  principles  I  have 
recognised  in  him  during  our  theological  discussions. 

"  I  beg  your  Holiness  will  show  some  kindness  to 
Madame  Paulette  [Sister  Pauline  Borghese],  and  some- 
times give  her  advice. 

"  I  have  received  a  great  number  of  petitions  from  the 
Catholics  of  Ireland,  who  are  oppressed  in  an  intolerable 
manner  quite  incompatible  with  those  principles  of 
philosophy  which  the  English  affect.  /  should  like  to  knotu 
if  your  Holiness  has  any  information  on  this  matter,  or  any 
means  of  action,  and  how  you  exercise  influence  on  the  said 
Catholics.  1  cannot  suppose  that  they  are  altogether  deprived 
of  corresponding  with  the  Holy  See.  «  BONAPARTE." 

Bonaparte  did  not  despair  of  enlisting  the  Pope  in  his 
sacred  gendarmery,  and  of  turning  him  into  a  police  spy, 
and  this  while  complaining  that  English  agents  were 
stirring  up  Frenchmen  to  fight  against  his  own  iniquitous 
government. 

^  One  of  Bonaparte's  creatures,  as  was  Cardinal  Caselli  also. 


58  THE   CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 


To  CARDINAL  FESCH. 

"  Paris,  13^,%  January,  1804. 
"  I  am  glad  to  hear  of  the  arrest  of  Vern^gues.  Let  him 
be  sent  to  the  first  French  posts  at  Rimini,  and  conveyed 
under  escort  to  Paris.  No  attention  should  be  paid  to  the 
steps  taken  by  the  Russians,  because  they  have  not  been 
approved  of  by  the  Emperor.  But  some  intriguers  in  the 
cabinet,  bribed  by  England,  may  meddle  with  what  does 
not  concern  them.  The  best  way  to  avoid  all  discussion 
will  be  to  pack  him  off  at  once.  Russia  is  beyond  the  sphere 
of  Europe,  and  besides  that,  Vernegues  is  a  Frenchman. 

"  Bonaparte." 

Vernegues  was  a  Frenchman  who  had  taken  service  in 
Russia,  just  as  Napper  Tandy  had  taken  service  in  France. 
It  was  made  a  terrible  crime  on  the  part  of  Hamburg  to 
have  delivered  the  latter  into  the  hands  of  the  English 
under  threat  of  bombardment,  but  it  was  only  natural  for 
Rome  to  deliver  up  the  former. 

To  GENERAL  BERTHIER. 

"Paris,  13//4  January,  1804. 
"  Send  for  Emmet,  Thomson,  and  the  other  Irish  chiefs, 
and  let  them  know  that  I  have  read  the  inclosed  memorial 
with  the  greatest  attention ;  that  I  can  make  no  pro- 
clamation before  landing  in  Ireland  ;  but  that  the  General 
in  command  of  the  expedition  will  be  furnished  with 
sealed  orders,  by  which  I  shall  declare  that  I  shall  not  make 
peace  with  England  until  the  independence  of  Ireland  be 
recognised.  .  .  .  "BONAPARTE." 

In  a  message  to  the  Senate,  Bonaparte  said  that  in  all 
the  departments  he  had  traversed  he  had  heard  accents  of 
indignation,  truly  French  ;  that  he  had  perceived  in  their 
hatred  of  a  government  hostile  to  their  prosperity,  still 
more   than   in   their  burst   of    public   joy   and    personal 


THE  PRESS  AND  THE  CHURCH.         59 

affection,  their  attachment  to  their  country.  "  In  all  the 
departments  the  clergy  have  exerted  their  religious 
influence  to  consecrate  this  spontaneous  movement " ! 

The  fact  is  that  the  press  and  the  clergy  were  ordered  to 
preach  up  war  against  England,  which  was  far  from  being 
popular.  As  a  French  historian  has  written — "  The  bishops 
were  invited  by  a  short  note,  emanating  from  the  cabinet 
of  the  First  Consul,  to  order  prayers  for  the  success  of 
the  war  against  the  King  of  England,  '  who  had  violated  the 
faith  of  treaties  in  refusing  to  restore  Malta  to  the  Order  of 
St.  John  of  Jerusalem'  Malta  was,  in  fact.  Church  pro- 
perty, but  how  could  the  first  despoiler  of  the  Order  dare 
to  employ  this  argument  ?  The  bishops  obeyed  the  invi- 
tation with  unhoped-for  zeal,  using  their  ministry  of  peace 
to  transform  this  war  into  a  crusade."  Considering  the 
generous  treatment  they  had  received  in  England  during 
the  days  of  the  Revolution,  this  was  an  instance  of  the  most 
unchristian  ingratitude  which  was  perfectly  unwarrantable 
and  which  has  since  been  severely  and  honestly  rebuked. 
The  conduct  of  the  Press  was  odious  and  servile  enough, 
but  it  owed  England  nothing,  it  had  no  divine  mission  to 
fulfil,  and  it  was  far  more  dependent  even  than  the  Church 
on  the  favour  of  the  First  Consul,  who  vigilantly  scrutinised 
every  article  that  made  its  appearance. 

The  message  naturally  contained  the  most  terrible 
invectives  against  England.  But  it  alluded  also  to  other 
matters,  showing  a  close  attention  on  the  part  of  the 
Government  to  the  internal  welfare  of  the  country — to  the 
building  of  bridges,  the  reclaiming  of  marshes  and  sands, 
the  construction  of  canals  and  of  roads.  "  Carriages,"  it 
said,  "  can  now  cross  the  Simplon  and  the  Mount  Cenis." 
Harbours  were  improved,  and  the  works  at  Cherbourg 
recommenced.  "  The  ravages  of  time  and  neglect "  had 
been  repaired  at  La  Rochelle,  Cette,  Marseilles,  and  Nice. 
From  Boulogne  to  Havre  the  coast  was  iron  bound.  The 
civil,  judicial,  and  criminal  codes  were  nearly  terminated. 
Civil    and    military  schools   had    been   created.      Medical 


6o      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

reforms  had  been  operated,  and  the  finances  were  in  a 
flourishing  condition.  The  French  possessions  in  the  West 
Indies  had  been  placed  in  a  position  of  defence.  Hanover 
had  been  occupied,  and  25,000  of  the  enemy's  best  troops 
had  been  made  prisoners  of  war.  Louisiana  ■'^  was  hence- 
forward associated  with  the  independence  of  the  United 
States,  which  owed  that  independence  to  France,  &c. 
Bonaparte  certainly  infused  new  life  into  the  country,  and 
showed  himself  as  wonderful  an  administrator  as  he  was 
a  soldier. 

To  CITIZEN  REGNIER. 

"  Paris,  24M  January,  1804. 

"  Drake's  letters  appear  most  important.  I  wish  Mehde 
to  say  in  his  next  bulletin  that  the  Committee  was  delighted 
at  the  idea  of  Bonaparte  embarking  at  Boulogne  ;  but  to- 
day it  is  persuaded  that  the  preparations  at  Boulogne  are 
false  demonstrations  which,  however  costly,  are  less  so 
than  would  appear  at  first  sight ;  that  the  launches  are  so 
constructed  that  they  can  be  turned  into  merchant  vessels, 
&c.,  &c.  ;  that  the  First  Consul  is  too  crafty,  and  considers 
his  position  too  firmly  established  to-day,  to  attempt  a 
doubtful  operation  where  a  mass  of  troops  would  be  com- 
promised ;  that  his  real  intention  is  to  undertake  an  expedi- 
tion to  Ireland  which  will  be  accomplished  by  the  squadrons 
collected  at  Brest  and  the  Texel  ;  that  General  Angereau 
has  arrived  at  Brest ;  that  the  Irish  battalions  have  been 
formed  ;  that  it  is  on  political  grounds  that  a  large  number 
of  troops  have  been  assembled  in  camps,  Bonaparte  being 
glad  to  have  them  under  his  hand,  ready  to  take  the  field, 
and,  by  a  quarter  change  of  front,  to  fall  on  Germany, 
should  he  deem  it  necessary  to  undertake  a  continental 
war. 

"  The  affair  of  the  portfolio  must  not  be  dropped ;  it 
must  be  said  that  the  usher  has  presented  several  bits  of 

^  Louisiana  had  been  sold  to  the  United  States  for  80,000,000  francs 
to  the  great  disgust  of  Spain,  who  had  ceded  that  colony  to  France  in 
exchange  for  Tuscany,  which  was  never  handed  over  to  her. 


THE    BEY    OF    TUNIS.  6 1 

letters  in  the  handwriting  of  Bonaparte  ;  that  this  man  may- 
be of  the  greatest  use,  but  that  he  wants  a  large  sum  of 
money.  The  idea  is  to  hand  over  this  portfolio,  into  which 
the  First  Consul  will  put  all  the  information  he  wishes  to 
be  beheved.  But  in  order  that  a  great  importance  should 
be  attached  to  this  portfolio,  at  least  50,000/.  must  be  asked 

*^''  '^^-  ''  Bonaparte." 

The  above  letter  furnishes  a  good  specimen  of  the 
duplicity  of  Bonaparte.  "  His  whole  policy,"  says  Lanfrey 
(vol.  iii.  p.  99),  "  consists  in  the  art  of  imputing  conspiracies, 
invented   by    himself,    to    those    governments    which   he 

wishes   to  strike Drake  knew  nothing  about  the 

Georges  conspiracy,  and  his  ignorance  prevented  him  from 

faUing  into  the  trap  which  had  been  laid  for  him 

The  letters  of  Drake  published  with  such  a  flourish  in  the 
Moniteur  merely  show  the  perfect  innocence  of  that 
diplomatic  agent  in  the  Georges  conspiracy." 

"  Paris,  2i,th  January,  1804. 
"  Most  Holy  Father, — I  have  received  the  letter  of 
your  Holiness,  and  thank  you  for  your  kind  reception  of 
M.  de  Clermont-Tonnerre.  I  have  sent  a  letter  to  Tunis 
to  persuade  the  Bey  to  respect  the  states  of  your 
Holiness  ;  he  has  promised  to  give  instructions  on  this 
subject,  upon  which  however  it  would  not  be  prudent  to 
rely.  When  peace  is  re-established  on  the  seas,  it  will  be 
possible  to  insist  with  more  authority  on  his  respecting 
not  only  your  states  but  your  flag  ;  for  it  is  afflicting,  and 
indeed  a  dishonour  for  Christendom,  that  wretched  brigands 
who  inhabit  a  fine  country  cannot  live  peacefully.  Let  us 
hope  that  a  day  will  come  when  all  this  will  cease. 

"  Bonaparte." 

To  citizen  portalis. 

"  Paris,  29M  Jatmary,  1804. 
"  I  beg  you  will  inform  the  Bishop  of  Orleans  that  it 
being  my  intention  to  have  a  person  in  Paris  thoroughly 


62      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

acquainted  with  the  chouans,  I  have  thought  of  employ- 
ing Barbot,  who  was  formerly  a  chief  of  chouans.  He  will 
enjoy  a  salary  very  secretly  in  Paris,  and  will  be  able  to 
find  out  all  suspicious  people  coming  from  the  west. 

"Bonaparte." 

to  citizen  talleyrand. 

"Paris,  loth  February,  1804. 
"  I  wish  you  to  send  a  note  to  M.  d'Hervas  saying  that 
I  cannot  see  without  indignation  a  Spanish  envoyi  persist- 
ing in  protecting  M.  de  Coucy  the  ex-Bishop  of  La 
Rochelle,  and  M.  de  Themines  the  ex-Bishop  of  Blois, 
who  are  rebels  to  the  Pope  and  to  the  Government,  and 
who  continually  foment  discord  in  their  old  dioceses ;  that 
I  insist   on  him  sending  a   courier  to  Madrid  to  demand 

their  arrest  and   extradition  to   France Write  to 

General  Beurnonville  to  speak  in  the  same  way  to  the 
Prince  of  the  Peace,  saying  that  I  shall  see  by  this  if  the 
Spanish  ministry  desire  to  live  on  good  terms  with  me. 
He  must  tell  him  that  if  he  wishes  to  foment  troubles  in 
France,  he  will  find  he  has  to  do  with  a  man  who  will 
know  how  to  carry  trouble  into  Spain  ;  that  I  expect 
these  two  men  to  be  arrested,  their  papers  seized,  and  that 
they  be  handed  over  to  me.  However,  I  may  possibly 
consent  to  their  being  sent  to  the  penal  establishments  in 
Africa  instead  of  being  sent  to  France. 

"  Bonaparte." 

To  GENERAL  SOULT. 

"The  Malmaison,  i^th  February ,  1804. 
"  For  the  last  week  we  have  been  in  pursuit  of  forty 
brigands  composed  of  Georges  and  his  band,  who  dis- 
embarked at  three  different  places.  Another  band  is  to 
disembark  ;  we  have  arrested  all  the  men  who  were  to 
make  signals.  Savary  awaits  them  at  Biville.  Have  the 
crew  of  the  fishing-boat  which  communicated  with  the 
English  arrested More  than  thirteen   of  the  first 


ARRESTS.  63 

brigands  have  been  arrested.  That  wretch  Pichegru,  with 
Georges  and  his  brigands,  ventured  to  Paris,  where  they 
slept  on  Sunday  night.  The  depositions  of  men  who  have 
been  arrested  compromise  generals  of  more  note  to-day. 
Should  this  be  confirmed,  I  shall  mete  out  justice  to 
them 

"  Bonaparte." 

The  Generals  of  "more  note"  referred  to  above  were 
Moreau  and  Dumouriez.  Thus  three  of  the  most  renowned 
generals  which  the  revolution  had  produced  were  mixed 
up,  more  or  less,  in  this  attempt  to  overturn  the  existing 
order  of  things  in  France. 

To  CITIZEN  REGNIER. 

"Paris,  X'^tk  February,  iZos^ 
"  It   is   necessary  at   the  same  time  to  arrest  General 
Moreau,  and  to  place  seals  on  his  papers  both  at  Grosbois 
and  in  Paris. 

"  Bonaparte." 

The  next  day  the  arrest  of  General  Lieberts  and  of 
General  and  Madame  Souham,  was  ordered,  and  Madame 
Damas  was  directed  to  take  up  her  residence  at  from 
thirty  to  forty  leagues  from  Paris,  while  the  woman 
Pocheton,  who  kept  an  inn  at  Mans,  was  to  leave  that 
place,  and  her  auberge  was  to  be  handed  over  to  some 
more  trustworthy  person. 

DECISION. 

"  Paris,  19M  February,  1804. 
"  Citizen  Talleyrand  will  reply  that  the  Queen  of  Etruria 
must  pay  the  French  troops  in  Tuscany ;  that  the  town  of 
Leghorn  is  in  a  state  of  siege ;  that  these  measures  are 
due  to  the  fact  that  England  has  not  recognised  the 
kingdom  of  Etruria. 

"  Bonaparte." 


64      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

And  this  was  the  flimsy  excuse  given  for  breaking 
the  solemn  engagement  entered  into  with  his  late  Majesty 
and  the  King  of  Spain  ! 

To  GENERAL  S,0\]VT ,  commanding  the  Camp  of  Sf.  Omer. 

"  Paris,  ig//%  February,  1804. 
" .  .  .  .  You  must  not  attach  more  importance  to  the 
affairs  of  Paris  than  they  deserve.  Moreau,  misled  by  I 
know  not  what  passion,  called  Pichegru  to  Paris.  Pichegru 
has  arrived,  and  with  him  Georges  and  forty  other 
brigands.  Moreau  and  fifteen  brigands  have  been  arrested. 
The  police  seized  fifteen  horses  and  uniforms  which  were 
to  be  used  in  attacking  me  on  the  road  between  Paris  and 
the  Malmaison.  I  have  had  the  examination  read  to  the 
Senate  and  the  Council  of  State,  who  are  indignant. 
Moreau  shall  be  tried  before  the  tribunals;  during  his 
examination  he  showed  the  greatest  consternation.  This 
is  one  more  ungrateful  traitor  that  France  has  to  punish. 

"  Bonaparte." 

To  GENERAL  MURAT, 

"  Paris,  10th  February,  1804. 
"  Citizen  General, — The  Bishop  of  Orleans  will  send 
you  a  man  called  Piquantin,  from  La  Vendee  ;  you  will 
employ  him  as  a  secret  agent,  and  give  him  a  suitable 
salary.  You  will  promise  him  2,000  francs  for  each 
chouan  whom  he  delivers  over,  and  more  for  Georges. 

"  Bonaparte." 

To  GENERAL  SOULT. 

"  Paris,  ist  March,  1804. 
"  You  have  no  doubt  heard  that  Pichegru  was  arrested 
yesterday.  He  was  unable  to  make  use  of  his  pistols  or 
of  his  sabre.  He  fought  with  his  fists  for  half  an  hour 
with  three  or  four  gendarmes.  The  pleasure  experienced 
by  the  people  of  Paris  at  this  arrest  does  them  credit.  .  .  . 

"  Bonaparte." 


FRENCH    PRISONERS.  65 

The  arrest  of  Moreau  having  created  a  painful  impres- 
sion at  Brest,  Cafferelli,  the  prefect  of  that  port,  was 
ordered  to  send  the  General's  brother, 'who  was  a'  lieu- 
tenant in  the  navy,  to  Morlaix,  where  he  was  to  remain 
with  his  family. 

To  REAR-ADMIRAL  DECRES. 

"  Paris,  2nd  March,  1804. 
"I  am  informed.  Citizen  Minister,  that  Nelson  has 
written  to  Admiral  Latouche  to  propose  an  exchange 
of  prisoners.  I  wish  to  know  what  answer  you  made. 
At  all  events,  let  him  know  that  an  exchange  is  impos- 
sible ;  that  the  King  of  England  would  not  sanction  any 
exchange  without  appending  unusual  and  arbitrary  con- 
ditions. It  is  my  intention  that  no  flag  of  truce  should 
be  received  at  Toulon.^  .  .  . 

"  Bonaparte." 

In  several  letters  written  at  this  epoch  to  Melzi,  Soult, 
Davoust,  and  others,  Bonaparte  insisted  upon  the  guilt  of 
Moreau,  his  consternation  before  the  authorities  charged 
with  conducting  the  preliminary  inquiry,  and  the  ingrati- 
tude of  this  traitor. 

On  the  8th  March  Bonaparte  ordered  General  Dessolles 
commanding  in   Hanover,  to  keep  a  sharp  look  out  for 

1  The  following  letter  from  Nelson"  allows  one  to  doubt  the  above 
statement  : — 

To  THE  FRENCH  OFFICERS  PRISONERS  OF  WAR  AT 
MALTA. 
"  'Victory,'  off  Toulon,  August  i^th,  1803. 
".  Gentlemen, —  I  sent  to  offer  the  French  Admiral  in  Toulon  an 
exchange  of  prisoners.     After  keeping  the  boat  waiting  three  hours,  a 
message  come  down  that  the  French  Admiral  would  receive  no  letter 
or  message,  therefore  you  must  blame  the  cruelty  of  your  own  Admiral 
for  keeping  you  prisoners.     At  the  same  time,  I  shall  be  happy  to  do 
all  in  my  power  to  render  your  captivity  as  easy  as  possible,  always 
rera&rcih&^mg—Do  as  you  would  be  done  by.  .  .  . 

"Nelson  and  Bronte." 

VOL.  IL  F 


66      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

English  spies,  adding :  "  The  correspondence  of  Drake, 
the  English  minister  at  Munich,  which  I  have  intercepted, 
shows  me  that  the  English  are  doing  all  they  can  to  make 
dupes  in  your  direction.  If,  under  these  painful  circum- 
stances, you  should  ruin  men  who  are  attached  to  you, 
remain  persuaded  that  I  have  always  considered  myself 
entitled  to  enjoy  the  first  place  in  your  affection.  Nothing 
can  equal  the  intense  stupidity  of  this  plot,  if  it  be  not 
its  wickedness.  The  human  heart  is  an  abyss  which 
deceives  all  calculations,  and  cannot  be  fathomed  by  the 
■most  penetrating. "  ^ 

On  the  9th  March,  in  a  long  despatch  to  Davoust, 
Bonaparte  was  able  to  announce  the  capture  of  Georges 
■Cadoudal. 

To  GENERAL  BERTHIER. 

"  Paris,  \oth  March,  1804. 

"You  will  direct  General  Ordener  to  start  for  Strasburg 
to-night.  He  will  travel  under  a  false  name.  The  object 
of  his  mission  is  to  repair  to  Ettenheim,  to  surround  the 
town,  and  to  carry  off  the  Due  d'Enghien,  Dumouriez, 
an  English  colonel,  and  all  the  persons  attached  to  them. 

"...  You  will  also  order  General  Caulaincourt  to  go 
to  Offenburg  with  200  dragoons,  to  surround  'the  town, 
and  to  arrest  the  Baroness  de  Reich  and  other  English 
agents.  .  .  . 

"  Bonaparte." 

Five  days  afterwards  General  Ordener  crossed  the 
Rhine  and  carried  off  the  duke,  who  at  first  wished  to 
resist,  but  was  dissuaded  from  so  doing  by  a  German 
officer.  There  was  no  Dumouriez  found  at  Ettenheim, 
no  English  colonel,  nor  any  papers  showing  that  the  duke 
was  implicated  in  the  Georges  conspiracy  or  in  the 
military  designs  imputed  to  him. 

■^  General  DessoUes  was  an  old  friend  and  comrade  of  Moreau,  and 
was  one  of  the  only  officers  who  dared  to  protest  against  his  arrest. 
He  was  now  called  upon  to  betray  his  old  friend. 


LUCIEN    BONAPARTE.  67 

To  CITIZEN  R^AL. 

"  La  Malmaison,  nth  March,  1804. 
"  Citizen  Real,— I  beg  that  you  will  forward  the  last 
letter  written  by  Drake  to  Citizen  Maret,  so  that  he  may 
have  it  printed.  ...  It  will  be  necessary  to  add  two 
notes — one  making  known  that  the  aide-de-camp  of  the 
supposed  General  was  none  other  than  an  officer  sent  by 
the  prefect  of  Strasburg  ;  the  second,  stating  that  the  whole 
story  of  the  usher  is  a  fabrication  ;  that  there  are  no 
ushers  or  persons  employed  by  the  Government  whose 
sentiments  of  honour  do  not  place  them  above  receiving 
the  corrupting  gold  of  England. 

"  Bonaparte." 

To  GENERAL  MARMONT. 

"La  Malmaison,  12th March,  1804. 

"...  See  a  great  deal  of  the  soldiers,  and  in  detail. 

When  you  arrive  in  camp  inspect  the  men  one  by  one, 

eight  hours  at  a  time ;  receive  their  complaints,  inspect 

their  arms,  and  make  sure  that  they  want  for   nothing. 

There  is  a  great  advantage  in  holding  these  inspections  of 

seven  or  eight  hours  ;  they  accustom  the  soldier  to  remain 

under  arms,  and  prove  that  the  chief,  instead  of  indulging 

in   dissipation,  pays   attention   to   him.      This   gives   the 

soldier  great  confidence.  .  .  . 

"  Bonaparte." 

to  his  holiness  the  pope. 

"  La  Malmaison,  i-^th  March,  1804. 
"  Most  Holy  Father, — The  Senator   Lucien  Bona- 
parte, my  brother,  wishes  to  stay  in  Rome,  in  order  to 
study  history  and  antiquities.     I  beg  your  Holiness  will 
receive  him  with  that  kindness  which  is  peculiar  to  you. 

"  Bonaparte." 

And  thus  was  Lucien  driven  into  exile.     He  told  his 
brother  Joseph  that  he  left  France  with  his  heart  full  of 

F    2 


68      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

hatred  for  the  First  Consul,  whom  he  did  not  see  again, 
except  during  a  few  minutes  at  Mantua,  until  1815. 

On  the  14th  March,  in  a  letter  addressed  to  Genera) 
Brune,  ambassador  at  Constantinople,  Bonaparte  said — 

"  I  desire  to  support  the  Empire,  so  that  it  may  recover 
some  energy.  ...  In  the  present  position  of  Europe  all 
my  thoughts  are  directed  towards  England.  .  .  .  We  have 
news  from  India.  Our  squadron  has  arrived  there  safely, 
and  has  formed  its  junction  with  the  Dutch.  They  do 
England  immense  damage;  Ceylon  has  revolted,  the  King 
is  mad,  and  England  is  greatly  agitated. 

"Your  mission  is  most  important,  whether  I  march 
upon  London  or  whether  I  make  peace.  .  .  .  Send  me 
some  information  as  soon  as  possible  on  Persian  affairs." 

On  the  17th  March,  in  a  letter  addressed  to  Davoust, 
Bonaparte  expressed  great  indignation  at  the  idea  of  his 
old  adversary,  Sidney  Smith,  having  managed  to  capture 
a  patache  in  Holland.  He  considered  that  this  was  a 
disgrace  which  might  have  been  avoided. 

To  CITIZEN  r£aL. 

"  La  Malmaison,  \()th  March,  1804. 
"  I  send  you  the  papers  of  the  Due  d'Enghien.  I  have 
kept  his  correspondence  with  the  Comte  de  Lille  (after- 
wards Louis  XVIII.),  which  contains  nothing  of  impor- 
tance beyond  two  letters  on  the  occasion  of  the  new  year, 
and  one  relative  to  the  pretended  propositions  made  by 
Prussia  that  they  should  renounce  their  rights  to  the 
throne.  .  .  . 

"  Bonaparte." 

To  GENERAL  MURAT,  Governor  of  Paris. 

"  La  Malmaison,  \qth  March,  1804. 

"  If  the  Due  de  Berri  were  in  Paris  staying  with  M.  de 

Cobentzel,  and  the  Due  d'Orleans  at  the  residence  of  the 

Marquis  de  Gallo,  I  should  not  only  have  them  arrested 

this  very  night  and  shot,  but  I  should  also  have  the  two 


INFECTED    COTTON.  69 

ambassadors  arrested  and  treated  in  the  same  way.  But 
as  it  is  impossible  that  these  ministers,  at  the  risk  of 
losing  their  heads,  can  have  committed  such  an  insane 
act,  and  as,  far  from  authorising  this  conduct,  the  Cabinet 
of  Vienna  will  not  allow  any  French  prince  to  remain  at 
Vienna,  I  do  not  wish  their  houses  to  be  searched.  You 
will  do  well  to  arrest  the  person  who  gave  you  this  infor- 
mation, for  he  can  be  nothing  but  a  scamp.  Every  one 
knows,  but  the  badauds,  that  ambassadors'  houses  are  not 
sanctuaries  when  it  is  a  question  of  crimes  against  the  State. 
Do  not  allow  yourself  to  be  taken  in  by  such  absurdities. 
As  for  the  second  part,  concerning  Prince  Charles,  you 
must  feel  what  shocking  nonsense  it  is.  Prince  Charles 
is  a  brave  and  loyal  man,  to  whom  I  am  much  attached, 
and  Cobentzel  and  Gallo  are  incapable  of  conspiring 
against  me. 

"  Bonaparte." 


On  the  next  day  Bonaparte  himself  wrote  to  Ney : — 
"  I  am  informed  that  the  English  have  flung  bales  of 
cotton  on  our  coasts."  These  bales  were  supposed  to  have 
come  from  the  Levant,  and  the  idea  was  that  we  wished  to 
spread  the  plague  in  France.  It  made  Bonaparte  quite 
sad  to  think  that  we  should  so  far  have  forgotten  all 
principle  as  to  resort  to  such  diabolical  tricks  as  these.  As 
for  the  French  people,  they  were  perfectly  ready  to  believe 
us  capable  of  any  crimes,  from  political  assassination  to  the 
stowing  away  of  plague-stricken  goods  in  our  vessels. 

DECREE. 

"Paris,  ioth March,  1804. 
"Art.  I.  The  ci-devant  Due  d'Enghien,  accused  of  having 
borne  arms  against  the  Republic,  of  having  been,  and  of 
still  being,  in  the  pay  of  England,  &c.,  shall  be  tried  by 

court-martial.  ...  „ 

"  Bonaparte." 


70  THE   CORRESPONDENCE    OF   NAPOLEON. 

To  GENERAL  MURAT. 

"  La  Malmaison,  loth  March,  1804. 
"  The  Due  d'Enghien  is  to  be  taken  to  the  castle  of 
Vincennes,  where  arrangements  have  been  made  for  his 
reception.  .  .  .  The  First  Consul  desires  that  the  name  of 
this  prisoner,  and  everything  concerning  him,  may  be  kept 
secret.  ...  he  travels  under  the  name  of  Plessis.  .  .  . 

"  BONAPARTE." 

The  commandant  of  Vincennes  was  also  ordered  to 
keep  everything  a  profound  secret.  He  himself  was  to  be 
ignorant  of  the  name  of  his  prisoner.  Citizen  R6al  was 
furnished  with  a  list  of  eleven  questions  which  he  was  to 
put  to  the  Prince.  None  of  these  questions  referred  to 
the  presence  of  the  prisoner  in  Paris  ! 

To  PAULINE  BORGHESE. 

"  Paris,  (>th  April,  1804. 

"  Madame  and  dear  Sister,— I  have  learned  with 
pain  that  you  have  not  the  good  sense  to  conform  to  the 
manners  and  customs  of  the  city  of  Rome  ;  that  you  show 
contempt  for  the  inhabitants,  and  that  your  eyes  are 
unceasingly  turned  towards  Paris.  Although  occupied  with 
vast  affairs  I  nevertheless  desire  to  make  known  my  wishes, 
and  I  hope  that  you  will  conform  to  them. 

"  Love  your  husband  and  his  family,  be  amiable, 
accustom  yourself  to  the  usages  of  Rome,  and  put  this 
in  your  head,  that  if  you  follow  bad  advice  you  will  no 
longer  be  able  to  count  upon  me.  You  may  be  sure  that 
you  will  find  no  support  in  Paris,  and  that  I  shall  never 
receive  you  there  without  your  husband.  If  you  quarrel 
with  him  it  will  be  your  fault,  and  France  will  be  closed  to 
you.     You  will  sacrifice  your  happiness  and  my  esteem. 

"  Bonaparte." 

Bonaparte  wrote  a  somewhat  similar  letter  to  Cardinal 
Fesch,  his  ambassador  at  Rome,  on  the  subject  of  "  Madame 


THE    IMPERIAL    PURPLE,  J I 

Paulette."  "  Tell  her,"  he  added,  "  on  my  behalf,  that 
she  is  no  longer  pretty  [which  was  a  fib],  that  she  will 
be  much  less  so  in  a  few  years,  and  that  all  her  life  she 
ought  to  be  good  and  amiable.  .  .  .  She  should  not 
indulge  in  those  bad  manners  which  bon  ton  reproves, 
even  in  the  most  frivolous  society  of  the  capital." 

To  GENERAL  SOULT. 

"St.  Cloud,  i^tk  April,  1804. 

"  .  .  .  .  The  general  councils,  the  great  bodies  of  the 
State,  &c.,  &c.,  demand  that  an  end  should  be  put  to  the 
hopes  of  the  Bourbons.  .  .  .  Let  me  know  in  detail  the- 
opinion  of  the  army  on  a  measure  of  this  nature.^  You' 
must  feel  sure  that  I  would  only  undertake  it  in  the 
interest  of  the  nation,  for  the  French  people  have  made 
me  so  great  and  so  powerful  that  I  have  nothing  more  to- 
desire. 

"  You  will  inform  the  colonel  of  the  4th  regiment  that  I 
have  appointed  him  general  of  brigade.  To  replace  him 
as  colonel  I  send  my  brother  Joseph ;  during  the  first 
ca:mpaigns  of  the  Revolution  he  served  as  a  major;  he 
is  anxious  to  become  a  soldier,  for,  in  the  days  in 
which  we  live,  it  is  not  sufficient  to  serve  the  State  in 
negotiations,  more  or  less  difficult,  one  must  be  able,  in 
case  of  necessity,  to  use  the  sword.  He  must  pay  strict 
attention  to  his  duties.  When  he  arrives  you  may  receive 
him  with  the  honours  due  to  a  grand  officer  of  the  Legion 

1  At  a  Council  of  State,  which  was  held  at  St.  Cloud,  to  consider 
the  propriety  of  investing  the  First  Consul  with  the  purple,  Bonaparte 
said — "  It  is  necessary  to  make  haste  if  you  wish  this  to  be  accom- 
plished by  civilians,  for  I  know  that  the  army  is  on  the  point  of  pro- 
claiming me  Emperor.  I  have  already  received  petitions  signed  by 
30,000  soldiers,  and  it  is  for  this  reason  that  I  am  not  with  the  army 
at  present."  Count  Miot  de  Melito  throws  doubt  upon  this  story; 
he  says  that  he  shortly  afterwards  went  to  Boulogne,  and  was  able  to 
convince  himself  that  the  soldiers  had  no  idea  of  proclaiming 
Bonaparte  Emperor. 


72      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

of  Honour,  a  senator,  and   a  person  who  is  dear  to  me. 
But    once    these    honours    paid,  he    must    put    on    his 

uniform.  .  .  . 

"  Bonaparte." 

When  the  above  letter  was  written  the  fate  of  the  Due 
d'Enghien  was  already  sealed,  and  Bonaparte  contemplated 
assuming  the  purple.  With  regard  ^to  Joseph,  the  state- 
ment that  he  served  during  the  first  campaigns  of  the 
Revolution  as  a  chef  de  bataillon,  was  false.  The  com- 
mission given  to  Joseph  Bonaparte  upon  this  occasion  ran 
thus  :— 

BREVET    OF    COLONEL   TO    THE    CITIZEN    JOSEPH 
BONAPARTE. 

"Artillery  cadet  1768. 
"  Staff  officer  1793. 
"  Chef  de  bataillon  1793. 

"Present  at  campaigns  of  1793  and  1794;  slightly 
wounded  at  the  siege  of  Toulon." 

All  these  statements  were  equally  false.  Joseph  had  no 
connection  with  the  army  before  he  became  colonel  of  the 
4th  Regiment,  except  as  an  army  contractor  in  Italy. 

Miot  de  Melito,  the  friend  and  counsellor  of  Joseph, 
says  in  his  Memoirs  (vol.  ii.  p.  173),  that  "Joseph  braved 
the  ridicule  to  which  a  man  exposes  himself,  who,  at  the 
age  of  thirty-six  years,  commences  the  career  of  arms,  and 
started  in  the  first  days  of  Floreal  to  take  command  of  the 
regiment  of  which  he  had  been  named  colonel." 

On  the  1 8th  April  Bonaparte  did  something  more  than 
repeat  his  false  statements  respecting  his  brother  Joseph's 
military  career. 

MESSAGE  TO  THE  SENATE. 

"St.  Cloud,  lith  April,  1804. 
"  Citizen  Senators, — Citizen  Joseph  Bonaparte,  grand 
officer  of  the  Legion  of  Honour,  has  expressed  the  desire 


DUTCH    CAMPAIGNING.  73 

of  sharing  the  perils  of  the  army  encamped  at  Boulogne, 
in  order  to  take  part  in  its  glory. 

"  I  consider  it  for  the  welfare  of  the  State  that  Senator 
Joseph  Bonaparte,  who  displayed  such  skill  and  talent  in 
successively  negotiating  the  treaty  of  Mortefontaine,  which 
brought  our  difficulties  with  the  United  States  to  a  close, 
that  of  Luneville  which  pacified  the  Continent,  and  recently 
that  of  Amiens,  which  re-established  peace  between  France 
and  England,  should  be  allowed  to  contribute  to  the 
vengeance  which  the  French  people  propose  to  take  for  the 
violation  of  this  last  treaty,  and  that  he  should  be  afforded 
an  opportunity  of  acquiring  fresh  titles  to  the  esteem  of 
the  nation. 

"  Having  already  served  under  my  eyes  during  the  first 
campaigns  in  this  war,  and  having  given  proofs  of  courage 
and  a  taste  for  the  career  of  arms,  1  have  appointed  him 
colonel  of  the  4th  regiment.  ...  <<  Bonaparte." 

The  statement  with  regard  to  the  treaty  of  Amiens  was 
too  perfidious.  No  one,  as  we  are  aware,  more  severely 
blamed  Bonaparte  for  the  rupture  of  that  treaty  than  did 
Joseph,  who  in  his  wrath  said  to  Miot  de  Melito  {Memoirs, 
vol.  ii.  p.  107),  "Let  him  once  more  deluge  Europe  in 
blood  by  a  war  which  might  have  been  avoided  but  for 
the  extravagant  mission  of  his  Sebastiani !  And  I,  I  shall 
join  with  Sieyes,  even  with  Moreau  if  necessary,  and  with 
all  the  patriots  and  lovers  of  liberty  remaining  in  France, 
to  escape  so  much  tyranny."  Unfortunately  the  above,  like 
many  of  Joseph's  finest  sentiments,  was  not  durable. 

To  GENERAL  U.K^lliQl^^'X ,  Camp  of  Utrecht. 

"  St.  Cloud,  17/A  April,  1804. 
".  .  .  .   I   tremble  at   your    idea   of  forming   camps   in 
Holland  ;  sickness  did  us  a  great  deal  of  damage  last  year, 
and  I  prefer  allowing  the  English  to  land  and  driving  them 
out  afterwards  to  losing  all  our  troops  in  hospital.  .  .  . 

"  Bonaparte." 


74      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Several  letters  at  this  epoch  direct  proceedings  to  be 
taken  against  priests  who  refused  to  accept  the  new  bishops 
and  against  female  conspirators.  On  the  19th  April 
Bonaparte  wrote  to  the  Grand  Judge  :  — 

"  Send  the  Demoiselles  Monsigny  and  Lange  away 
from  Calais  for  corresponding  with  rebel  bishops  ;  place 
them  under  supervision  at  forty  leagues  from  the  coast.  I 
am  surprised  to  learn  that  Mdlle.  de  Circ6  has  left  Aix  ; 
she  was  allowed  out  of  prison  on  the  condition  of  not 
coming  to  Paris.  .  .  ." 

WORDS    ADDRESSED    TO    CITIZEJSI    PICHON    BY   THE 
FIRST  CONSUL, 

On  the  occasion  of  yerome  Bonapartds  Marriage. 

"  St.  Cloud,  10th  April,  1804. 
"...  .  Jerome  is  wrong  to  think  that  he  will  be  able  to 
count  upon  any  weakness  on  my  part,  for,  not  having  the 
rights  of  a  father,  I  cannot  entertain  for  him  the  feeling  of 
a  father  ;  a  father  allows  himself  to  be  blinded,  and  it 
pleases  him  to  be  blinded  because  he  identifies  his  son  with 
himself.  .  .  .  But  what  am  I  to  Jerome  .■■  Sole  instrument 
of  my  destiny,  I  owe  nothing  to  my  brothers  ;  they  have 
made  an  abundant  harvest  out  of  what  I  have  accomplished 
in  the  way  of  glory,  but  for  all  that  they  must  not  abandon 
the  field  and  deprive  me  of  the  aid  I  have  a  right  to  expect 
from  them.  They  will  cease  to  be  anything  for  me  directly 
they  take  a  road  opposed  to  mine.  If  I  exact  so  much 
from  my  brothers  who  have  already  rendered  many 
services,  if  I  have  abandoned  the  one  who,  in  mature  age 
[Lucien],  refused  to  follow  my  advice,  what  must  not 
Jerome,  who  is  still  young,  and  who  is  known  only  for  his 
neglect  of  duty,  expect }  If  he  does  nothing  for  me  I  shall 
see  in  this  the  decree  of  destiny,  which  has  decided  that  I 
shall  do  nothing  for  him  !...." 

There  are  strange  contradictions  and  mis-statements  in 
the  above  letter.     There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Joseph,  and 


THE    ITALIAN    CONCORDAT.  75 

more  especially  Lucien,  rendered  the  most  important 
services  to  their  brother,  and  it  is  shrewdly  supposed  that 
the  services  rendered  by  Lucien  were  the  cause  of  his  dis- 
grace, for  Bonaparte  disliked  being  constantly  reminded 
of  them.  He  wished  it  to  be  believed  that  he  owed  nothing 
to  any  one,  and  the  recollection  of  what  happened  on  the 
1 8th  Brumaire,  when  but  for  the  courage  and  presence  of 
mind  of  Lucien,  he  would  probably  have  shared  the  fate 
of  his  old  friends  the  Robespierres,  weighed  heavily  on 
his  mind. 

To  HIS  HOLINESS  THE  POPE. 

"St.  Cloud,  ■iind April,  1804. 
"  I  thank  your  Holiness  for  having  given  a  cardinal's 
hat  to  the  Archbishop  of  Bologna.  ...  I  have  come  to 
the  determination  to  take  into  my  own  hands  all  that 
relates  to  the  Concordat  with  the  Italian  Republic.  ...  I 
thank  your  Holiness  for  the  amiable  things  you  say  con- 
cerning the  arrival  of  my  mother  in  Rome.  The  climate 
of  Paris  is  much  too  damp  and  cold  for  her.  ...  I  am, 
with  filial  respect,  the  most  devoted  son  of  your  Holiness, 

"  Bonaparte." 

This  matter  of  the  Italian  Concordat  was  a  very  sore 
subject  with  the  Pope,  who  had  already  been  forced  to 
relinquish  a  good  deal  of  his  hold  over  the  French  bishops 
in  favour  of  the  terrible  "eldest  son  of  the  Church."  He 
was  strongly  opposed  to  extending  to  Italy  what  had  been 
accorded  to  France. 

On  the  25th  April  Bonaparte  replied  at  considerable 
length  to  an  address  of  the  Senate  expressing  the  desire 
that  the  office  of  chief  magistrate  should  be  hereditary. 
The  addresses  and  replies  on  the  part  of  the  First  Consul 
the  Senate,  the  Tribunate,  and  the  Council  of  State  were 
all  arranged  beforehand,  and  resulted  in  the  declaration 
of  the  Empire.  The  excuse  for  erecting  a  hereditary  form 
of  Government  was  to  mitigate  the  inconvenience  which 
would   ensue  from  the  assassination  of  the  chief  of  the 


76      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

State.  The  settlement  of  the  line  of  succession  gave  rise 
to  a  great  deal  of  intriguing.  Bonaparte  wished  to  make 
the  eldest  son  of  his  brother,  Louis,  his  heir,  having  no 
children  by  Josephine.  This  pretension  was  violently 
opposed  by  Joseph  and  by  Louis.  The  former,  who  had 
no  son,  objected  to  being  deprived  of  his  chance  of  the 
throne,  and  Louis  was  indignant  for  two  reasons — because 
one  day  his  son  would  take  precedence  of  him,  and  because 
the  contemplated  arrangement  would  revive  the  scandal 
which  attributed  the  paternity  of  the  child  in  question  to 
Napoleon.  In  the  end  it  was  settled  that  in  default  of 
heirs  male  of  his  body  the  Imperial  throne  on  the  death 
of  Napoleon  should  pass  to  Joseph,  and  in  default  of 
Joseph,  to  Louis.  Lucien  was  cut  off  for  having  insisted 
upon  marrying  Madame  Jouberthon,  and  Jerome  for  marry- 
ing Miss  Patterson. 

Before  accepting  the  Imperial  dignity,  Bonaparte  wrote 
two  important  letters  to  Talleyrand.  In  the  first  he 
said  : — 

"  I  am  not  fond  of  meddling  with  the  internal  affairs  of 
friendly  States  ;  but  the  wonderful  turn  which  public 
opinion  has  taken  in  Holland  attracts  my  solicitude,  and 
I  cannot  remain  indifferent  to  all  that  is  passing." 

Bonaparte  then  complained  that  although  a  third  of 
the  population  was  Catholic,  the  Catholics,  who  were 
attached  to  France,  were  represented  neither  in  the  Go- 
vernment nor  in  Parliament,  that  all  the  members  of  the 
Asiatic  council  were  the  friends  of  England,  &c.,  &c.  He 
therefore  declared  it  to  be  his  intention  to  interfere  in  the 
affairs  of  Holland,  which  in  plain  language  meant  to 
annex  it. 

The  second  letter  ran  thus  : — 

"  I  beg  you  will  send  a  courier  to  General  H^douville 
to  tell  him  to  leave  St.  Petersburg  on  the  pretext  of  sick 
leave,  and  to  repair  to  Berlin.  ...  If  before  leaving  he 
has  an  opportunity  of  speaking   to   the   minister,  or  to  the 


THE    EMPIRE.  ']'] 

Emperor,  he  should  use  firm  language,  and  say  that  we 
are  exceedingly  hurt  to  see  Russia  meddling  with  our 
domestic  affairs.  .  .  .  Repeat  that  I  do  not  desire  war, 
but  that  I  am  afraid  of  no  one.  ...  It  is  enough  to  have 
to  swallow  the  insults  of  England  by  sea  without  being 
forced  in  addition  to  swallow  the  impertinences  of  Russia." 
At  this  date  Napoleon  Bonaparte  accepted  the  Imperial 
dignity. 

REPLY  OF  THE  EMPEROR  TO  THE  SENATE. 

"St.  Cloud,  \ith  May,  1804. 

"  Everything  which  can  contribute  to  the  welfare  of  my 
country  is  essentially  connected  with  my  happiness. 

"  I  accept  the  title  which  you  believe  useful  to  the  glory 
of  the  nation. 

"  I  submit  to  the  French  people  the  law  concerning 
the  succession.  I  hope  that  France  will  never  repent  of 
the  honours  with  which  it  has  surrounded  my  family. 

"At  all  events  my  spirit  will  no  longer  be  with  my 
posterity  from  the  day  that  it  ceases  to  deserve  the  love 
and  the  confidence  of  this  great  nation." 

The  same  day  orders  were  issued  regarding  the  various 
titles  to  be  borne  by  the  grand  dignitaries  of  the  Empire 
— there  was  a  grand  elector,  a  constable,  an  arch-chan- 
cellor, and  arch-treasurer,  marshals,  &c.,  and  the  word 
citizen  was  replaced  by  "monsieur,"  and  nearly  every 
trace  of  the  Repubhc  disappeared.  On  the  21st  May  the 
Emperor  wrote  to  his  Grand  Judge  ordering  the  arrest  of 
thirteen  rebel  priests,  who  were  to  be  thrown  into  the 
prison  of  Poitiers,  and  his  Majesty  terminated  his  letter 
thus  :  "  Upon  which  I  pray  God  to  have  you  in  His  holy 
keeping."  On  the  same  date  Talleyrand  was  directed  to 
despatch  a  doctor  or  a  savant  to  Persia,  by  way  of  Con- 
stantinople, under  the  pretence  of  studying  the  flora  of 
that  country. 

In  addition  to  writing  several  letters  to  the  Minister  of 


78      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Marine,  despatches  were  sent  to  Vice-Admirals  Martin, 
Thevenard,  Latouche,  and  to  Admiral  Truguet,  with  the 
view  of  pushing  on  naval  preparations,  and  of  inspiring 
activity.  All  the  officers  above  mentioned  appeared  loth 
to  leave  port. 

To  M.  TALLEYRAND. 

"  St.  Cloud,  ^%th  May,  1804, 
"  Steube,  the  minister  of  Wirtemberg,  is  a  downright  fool, 
as  ill-meaning  as  ignorant.      If  you  can   insinuate  in   a 
delicate  manner  that  he  ought  to  be  recalled,  that  would 
please  me. 

"  Write  to  General  Lannes  at  Lisbon,  and  mention 
the  matter  to  M.  de  Souza  here,  so  that  the  Portuguese 
minister  at  Berlin,  who  is  our  bitter  enemy,  may  be 
recalled. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  M.  TALLEYRAND. 

"  St.  Cloud,  30/A  May,  1804. 

"  I  desire  that  the  official  note  of  Lord  Hawkesbury  may 
be  sent  to  all  our  agents  at  foreign  courts,  those  of  Russia, 
Sweden,  Denmark,  and  the  Porte  excepted,  with  remarks 
to  this  effect — that  the  French  Government  calls  attention 
to  the  note  in  question  ;  that  no  matter  how  gross  the 
insults  contained  in  it  against  the  Government  and  the 
French  nation,  the  French  Government  ought  to  have 
treated  it  with  sovereign  contempt ;  but  that  the  principles 
openly  proclaimed  by  England  are  so  subversive  of  the 
established  order  of  things  in  Europe,  that  the  French 
Government  has  deemed  it  worth  while  to  notice  it. 

"It  is  set  forth  in  fact  that  our  ambassador,  or  any 
other  individual  invested  with  a  public  character  in  a 
neutral  court,  has  a  right  to  conspire  against  France.  The 
most  shameful  ignorance,  and  that  want  of  reflection 
which  has  for  several  years  characterised  the  proceedings 
of  the  British  Government,  have  alone  induced  it  to  pro- 
claim such  a  blasphemy.     What !  the  French  Government 


LORD    HAWKESBURY.  79 

is  authorised  to  consider  all  the  representatives  of  the 
British  Cabinet  as  agents  of  plots  and  of  war !  And  the 
most  noble  profession  which  enjoys  a  kind  of  sanctity, 
and  which  is  surrounded  by  the  veneration  of  men,  is  for 
the  British  Cabinet  merely  a  veil  to  cover  plots,  crimes, 
and  subversions ! 

"  An  ambassador  is  a  minister  of  conciliation  ;  his  duty 
is  always  a  holy  duty  founded  upon  morality;  and  the 
British  Cabinet  says  he  is  an  instrument  of  war,  who  has 
a  right  to  do  anything,  provided  he  does  nothing  against 
the  country  to  which  he  is  accredited.  .  .  .  The  English 
Government  has  often  given  proofs  of  political  ferocity, 
but  it  now  behaves  with  folly  and  imbecility.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

Lord  Hawkesbury  indignantly  protested  against  the  idea 
of  encouraging  assassination,  but  insisted  on  the  right  of 
England  taking  advantage  of  the  internal  discords  of  a 
nation  with  which  she  was  at  war.  The  fact  of  Napoleon 
stirring  up  strife  in  Ireland  and  raising  Irish  regiments 
was  naturally  referred  to.  Then  especially  in  Austria  and 
Sweden  Napoleon  had  attempted  to  kindle  civil  war. 

In  a  letter  to  the  Minister  of  Marine  of  the  31st  May, 
occurs  the  following  paragraph : — 

"  Direct  the  admiral  to  give  prizes  to  the  soldiers  who 
go  out  on  the  yards,  and  impress  upon  the  rear-admirals 
and  post-captains  that  they  can  obtain  anything  from  the 
sentiments  of  honour  and  emulation  with  which  the  French 
soldier  is  animated." 

Then  why  these  prizes,  and  why  were  the  necessary 
funds  to  be  placed  at  the  disposal  of  the  admiral .' 

To  MARSHAL  SOULT. 

"  St.  Cloud,  ^rd  June,  1804. 
"...  But   for  this   miserable  trial   [of  Moreau,   &c.]  I 
should  be  in  the  midst  of  the  camps.     I  hope  everything 
will   be   finished    in   a  week.     I   suppose  that  in  camp  as 


8o      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

well  as  in  Paris  there  are  rumours  of  a  continental  war. 
This  would  be  unfortunate,  as  it  would  turn  our  attention 
from  England.  Woe  to  those  who  seek  war  !  .  .  .  The 
Germanic  Confederation,  Austria,  and  Prussia  are  with  us. 
Thanks  to  England,  a  false  step  has  been  take  by  Russia, 
which  wears  mourning  for  the  Due  d'Enghien,  thus  re- 
minding Europe  of  the  assassination  of  Paul  I.,  which  it 
was  beginning  to  forget.  ... 

"  Napoleon." 

But  Napoleon  at  the  time  had  accused  England  of  this 
assassination  ! 

DECREE. 

"  St.  Cloud,  bth  June,  1804. 
"  These  vases    must  be    placed  at  the  disposal  of  the 
Cardinal   Archbishop,  as  a  gift  made  by  the  Emperor  to 
the  metropolitan  church  of  Paris. 

"  Napoleon." 

These  silver  vases,  fourteen  in  number,  had  been  taken 
from  the  church  of  Tournay. 

In  announcing  to  the  Grand  Judge  that  he  had  par- 
doned Armand  de  Polignac,  with  whom  he  had  been  at 
school  at  Brienne,  Napoleon  wrote  : — 

"  The  plot  which,  by  the  aid  of  God,  your  vigilance  and 
that  of  good  citizens,  we  have  foiled,  has  greatly  affected 
me.  Spared  during  ten  years  from  all  kinds  of  dangers, 
we  have  acquired  the  right  of  supposing  that  it  will  not  be 
in  the  power  of  man  to  take  our  life  until  Providence  has 
fixed  its  term;  and  we  ourself  shall  be  interested  in 
defending  it  only  as  long  as  we  shall  consider  it  necessary 
to  the  grand  nation.    ..." 

To  THE  KING  OF  SPAIN. 

"  Most  High,  Most  Excellent,  and  Well-beloved 
GOOD  Brother,  Ally,  and  Confederate,— The  rela- 
tions which  exist  between  our  two  States,  and  the  interest 


THE    NEW    ARMADA.  8 1 

which  your  Majesty  has  always  shown  in  the  prosperity  of 
France,  induces  me  to  inform  you  that  it  has  pleased 
Providence  to  call  me  to  the  government  of  this  Empire- 
.  .  .  My  firm  intention  is  to  draw  closer  the  bonds  which 
unite  the  two  countries.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon. 
"  Given  at  St.  Cloud,  14M  June,  1804." 

DECISION. 

"  St.  Cloud,  idth  June,  1804. 
"  Write  to  General  Jourdan  that  he  must  not  permit  any 
Corsican  ^migr^  to  remain  at  Leghorn  ;  that  he  did  well  to 
have  them  arrested  as  well  as  the  English ;  that  the  Queen 
of  Etruria,  not  having  been  recognised  by  the  English, 
must  be  considered  as  at  war  with  them. 

"Napoleon." 

We  have  already  seen  how  this  much  persecuted  and 
widowed  queen,  daughter  of  the  "most  high,  excellent, 
well- beloved,"  Sec,  King  of  Spain,  had  to  pay  for  troops 
quartered  in  her  territory  contrary  to  treaty. 

Here  follow  many  despatches  on  the  subject  of  the  new 
Armada,  filled  with  incentives  to  display  greater  activity 
and  daring,  with  plans  for  deceiving  Nelson  and  Corn- 
wallis,  and  suddenly  concentrating  a  formidable  naval 
force  in  the  Channel.  We  see  that  the  flotilla  at  this 
moment  numbered  1,831  craft  of  various  descriptions. 

To  M.  OTTO. 

"St.  Cloud,  12M  July,  1804. 
"  I  desire  that  you  will  give  me  by  return  of  post  some 
information  on  the  subject  of  the  family  of  the  Elector  of 
Bavaria,  especially  concerning  his  daughter,  and  his  inten- 
tions with  regard  to  that  young  princess.  I  need  hardly 
remind  you   that   an  affair  of  this  nature  must  be  kept 

perfectly  secret.  ... 

"  Napoleon." 

VOL.   II.  G 


82  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

M.  Otto,  whose  diplomacy  was  highly  appreciated,  had 
been  removed  from  London  to  Munich. 

To  THE  EMPRESS  JOSEPHINE. 

"  Pont  de  Briques,  2isi  July,  1804. 

"  Madam  and  dear  Wife, — For  the  last  four  days 
since  I  have  been  absent  from  you  I  have  been  con- 
stantly on  horseback,  and  this  exercise  has  not  impaired 
my  health. 

"  M.  Maret  tells  me  that  you  intend  starting  on  Monday. 
Travelling  by  easy  stages  you  will  be  able  to  reach  the 
waters  without  fatigue. 

"  The  wind  freshened  during  the  night,  and  one  of  our 
gunboats  dragged  her  anchors  and  went  ashore  a  league 
from  Boulogne.  I  thought  boat  and  crew  lost,  but  we 
managed  to  save  everything.  The  spectacle  was  grand  ; 
the  alarm  guns,  the  coast  in  a  blaze  of  fire,  the  sea  tossed 
with  fury,  and  roaring.  The  soul  was  suspended  between 
eternity,  the  ocean,  and  the  night.  At  5  A.M.  it  cleared 
up,  everything  was  saved,  and  I  went  to  bed  with  all  the 
sensations  inspired  by  a  romantic  and  epic  dream. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  M.  DE  TALLEYRAND. 

"  Pont  de  Briques,  30M  July,  1804. 
" .  .  .  .  Inform  the  different  ambassadors  of  Germany 
that  the  conduct  of  the  Court  of  Vienna  at  Ratisbon  is 
all  the  more  inconceivable  because  its  ambassador  at  Paris 
himself  asked  the  Emperor  not  to  rep'y  to  the  Russian 
note,^  but  to  allow  matters  to  be  settled  by  way  of  Baden ; 
then,  a  fortnight  after  the  arrival  of  that  intemperate  and 
indiscreet  note,  the  Emperor  of  Germany  stated,  in  a  letter 
to  M.  de  Cobentzel,  that  he  took  into  account  that  circum- 
stances had  rendered  necessary,  and  he  complimented  the 
chief  of  the  state  on  the  happy  issue  of  the  events  which 
had  just  occurred,  expressing  the  pleasure  he  experienced 
on  seeing  him  triumph  over  the  plots  of  his  enemies. 
1  On  the  subject  of  the  Due  d'Enghien, 


THE    RUSSIAN    NOTE.  83 

"  I  suppose  that  you  have  given  instructions  to  ray- 
minister  in  America  with  respect  to  the  conduct  he  should 
pursue  towards  the  so-called  Madame  Jerome  Bonaparte. 
He  must  not  see  her,  nor  meet  her,  and  must  say  publicly 
that  I  do  not  recognise  the  marriage  of  a  young  man  of 
nineteen  contracted  against  the  laws  of  his  country. 

"  Send  the  Turkish  ambassador  the  snuff-box  and  the 
sum  of  money  agreed  upon. 

"  As  for  the  Russian  note,  you  may  reply  in  such  terms 
as  these.  '  I  received  your  note  of  the  ....  I  regret  that 
proposals  which  were  susceptible  of  being  admitted  were 
accompanied  by  insults  and  threats.  However,  I  am  going 
to  lay  the  note  before  the  Emperor,  and  J  shall  send  you 
the  orders  he  gives  me  without  delay.' 

"  M.  Durand,  in  handing  your  sealed  reply  to  M.  d'Oubril, 
must  take  care  to  tell  him  that  I  have  seen  neither  the  note 
nor  the  reply.  «  Napoleon." 

In  a  long  despatch  to  Marshal  Brune  at  Constantinople, 
Napoleon  announced  that  he  had  withdrawn  his  ambas- 
sador from  St.  Petersburg  in  consequence  of  the  Russian 
court  going  into  mourning.  He  added — "  Our  situation 
with  regard  to  England  is  most  favourable.  The  war  is 
not  felt  in  France,  in  consequence  of  the  way  in  which  it 
weighs  upon  England,  and  I  have  at  my  disposal  nearly 
120,000  men  and  3,000  launches,  &c.,  which  only  await  a 
favourable  wind  in  order  to  plant  the  imperial  eagle  on 
the  tower  of  London.  Time  and  destiny  alone  know  what 
will  happen." 

To  M.   DE  TALLEYRAND. 

"Pont  de  Briques,  \st  August,  1804. 
"  I   have  learnt  with   pleasure  that  your  health  is  re- 
established.     I  require  and  hope  that  you  will  live  for  a 
long  time.     I  am  satisfied  with  all  I  have  seen  since  my 
departure  from  Paris.     My  health  could  not  be  better. 
"  We  have  had  some  bad  weather,  and  a  gale  caused  us 

G  2 


84      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

to  lose  fifteen  men  and  three  or  four  craft.  As  this  event 
has  been  exaggerated  in  Paris,  it  will  be  well  in  writing  to 
our  diplomatic  agents  to  say  how  satisfied  I  am  with  the 
strength  and  mancEuvres  of  the  army,  and  that  I  pass 
whole  days  superintending  its  instruction.  Add  some 
details  respecting  the  voyage  of  the  Empress  and  the 
reception  she  has  met  with,  recommending  that  these 
details  should  be  spread  in  an  unofficial  manner.  This 
will  be  a  counter-poison  to  all  the  false  reports  circulated 
by  the  English. 

"  Napoleon." 

The  coronation  having  been  decided  upon,  M.  de  Segur, 
Grand  Master  of  the  Ceremonies,  received  full  instructions 
upon  this  subject.  One  paragraph  ran  thus  :  "  If  it  be 
indispensable,  in  order  that  the  cortege  may  arrive  at 
Notre  Dame  with  greater  facility,  to  pull  down  some 
houses,  a  project  to  this  effect  must  be  presented.  .  .  ." 

M.  de  Segur,  who  had  been  taken  into  the  Imperial 
service  in  order  to  instruct  the  new  dignitaries  in  the 
etiquette  of  the  old  court,  drew  out  a  most  elaborate  plan 
of  the  ceremony  in  question,  with  the  aid  of  David  the 
painter.  In  a  very  short  time  the  etiquette  of  the  Imperial 
court  rivalled  in  severity  but  not  in  dignity  that  of  Ver- 
sailles in  its  palmy  days. 

In  a  long  and  rambling  letter  written  to  M.  de  Talley- 
rand on  the  2nd  August,  Napoleon,  harping  on  the  conduct 
of  Russia  and  her  occupation  of  Corfu,  where  they  feared 
an  attack  on  the  part  of  the  French,  wrote — "  This  does 
not  show  much  talent  on  the  part  of  the  Russian  War 
Office,  as  I  am  not  such  a  fool  as  to  throw  an  army  into 
islands  which  have  no  importance  for  me."  Formerly 
these  islands  were  worth  more  than  the  whole  of  Italy. 

On  the  3rd  August  Napoleon  wrote  a  long  letter  to  his 
ambassador  at  Vienna  complaining  of  a  certain  delay  in 
the  recognition  of  his  new  title.  Various  excuses  had  been 
offered,  but  his  Majesty,  expecting  that  an  alliance  with 


THE    BLACK    EMPIRE.  85 

Russia  was  on  the  tapis,  told  Champagny  to  speak  with 
vivacity  if  necessary.  "  You  will  say  that  there  is  a  coalition 
being  formed,  and  that  I  shall  not  allow  time  for  this  to 
be  done  ;  that  they  are  strangely  mistaken  if  they  suppose 
I  intend  to  invade  England  before  the  Emperor  sends  his 
recognition  ;  that  it  is  not  just,  by  this  equivocal  conduct, 
for  Austria  to  keep  300,000  men  with  arms  folded,  on  the 
shores  of  the  Channel ;  that  the  court  of  Vienna  must  cease 
this  ambiguous  conduct ;  that  if  they  are  mad  enough  to 
wish  for  war  at  Vienna,  and  to  lend  a  favourable  ear  to  the 
proposals  of  England,  so  much  the  worse  for  the  Austrian 
monarchy." 

-  It  is  rather  curious  to  find  that  Napoleon  offered  no 
objections  to  some  of  the  titles  assumed  by  the  Emperor 
of  Austria,  such  as  Duke  of  Burgundy  and  Lorraine. 

To  M.  FOUCHE. 

"  Calais,  jth  August,  1804. 

"  I    see  by  the   Gazette  de  France  that  Dessalines  has 

created  a  legion  of  honour.      It   will   be    well   to   verify 

this,    and  see    if  it    is    not    a    bad   joke   on    the   part    of 

a  journalist.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

This  appears  to  have  been  the  fact,  and  no  sooner  had 
the  French  been  either  driven  from  the  island  or  massacred 
than  the  blacks  set  to  work  to  imitate  their  institutions  and 
then  to  proclaim  an  Empire. 

In  a  letter  to  Talleyrand  on  the  conduct  of  Russia,  dated 
the  7th,  Napoleon  wrote :  "  There  is  no  court  so  poor  in 
men  as  Russia  ;  Markoff  is  an  eagle  there  ;  Woronzoff  is 
publicly  known  to  be  more  of  an  English  than  a  Russian 
citizen.  For  a  long  time  this  set  have  been  trying  to  sell 
the  national  interests  of  Russia  to  England." 

Then  followed  complaints  of  the  intrigues  carried  on  at 
Ratisbon,  which  Napoleon  said  had  been  defeated  by  his 
prudence. 


86      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

The  complaints  against  Russia,  or  Russian  impertinences, 
were  that  the  court  had  gone  into  mourning  for  the  Due 
d'Enghien,  that  she  had  addressed  a  note  to  the  Diet  of 
Ratisbon,  calling  on  the  princes  of  the  Germanic  Confede- 
ration to  demand  satisfaction  for  an  unparalleled  violation 
of  territory ;  that  she  had  protested  against  French  aggres- 
sion, against  French  troops  occupying  the  shores  of  the 
Adriatic,  and  the  Hans  towns,  and  threatening  the  inde- 
pendence of  Denmark. 

The  eagle  Markoff  had  called  upon  Napoleon  to  evacuate 
Naples,  to  come  to  some  arrangement  for  settling  the 
affairs  of  Italy,  to  keep  his  promise  with  regard  to  in- 
demnifying the  King  of  Sardinia,  to  evacuate  North 
Germany,  and  to  respect  the  Confederation  ! 

To  M.  F0UCH6. 

"  Dunkirk,  \oth  August,  1804. 
"  Have  the  woman  Bernet  arrested  if  she  is  an  hnigri 
travelling  between  Paris  and  St.  Petersburg.  Send  me  an 
account  of  the  escape  of  Bourmont  and  Andign^.  The 
commandant  of  the  fort  appears  to  be  compromised.  The 
conduct  of  Moreau,  who  embarked  at  Barcelona,  proves 
what  I  always  thought,' that  he  will  one  day  throw  off  the 
mask  and  join  our  enemies.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

And  to  a  certain  extent  Napoleon  was  right,  for  Moreau 
was  destined  to  perish   at  Dresden  in  the  ranks  of  the 

allies. 

To  M.  TALLEYRAND. 

"  Dunkirk,  loth  August,  1804. 
"  It  would  perhaps  be  di  propos  to  draw  attention  to  the 
immorality   of    the   court   of  St.  Petersburg,  where   the 
Emperor  confers  such  extraordinary  and   unusual  marks 
of  favour  on  the  murderer  of  his  father. 

.  "The  Austrian  ambassador,  Cobentzel,  at  Paris  is  very 
false,  and  very  persistent  in  painting  everything  here  in  the 


RUSSIAN    IMPERTINENCES.  87 

most  odious  colours.  He  appears  to  be  imbued  with  the 
duplicity  of  his  court.  I  think  it  necessary  to  mention 
this,  in  order  that  you  may  no  longer  be  the  dupe  of  his 
assumed  openness. 

"  Napoleon." 

Talleyrand  was  then  ordered  to  draw  up  a  note  com- 
plaining of  the  conduct  of  Russia,  and  the  tone  of  the 
despatches  received  from  St.  Petersburg.  In  reply  to  a 
note  from  M.  d'Oubril,  he  was  to  say — 

"'As  for  the  threats  contained  in  the  last  note  of  M. 
d'Oubril,  the  Emperor  orders  me  to  declare  that  the  history 
of  the  past  does  not  authorise  any  Power,  much  less 
Russia,  to  threaten  France;  that  if  Suwarrow  obtained 
successes  in  Italy,  the  Austrian  army  had  already  gained 
some  before  he  arrived  ;  and  that  if  his  army,  instead  of 
having  been  defeated  in  Switzerland  and  in  Holland,  had 
continued  victorious,  and  had  dictated  terms  of  peace  in 
the  plains  of  Champagne  or  Lorraine,  even  then  threats 
would  not  have  succeeded  with  France.  Let  Russia  com- 
prehend that,  the  French  Emperor  is  not  the  Emperor  of 
the  Turks,  or  the  Emperor  of  the  Persians.  ..." 

"  Napoleon." 

And  this  was  the  sharp  way  in  which  his  Majesty  replied 
to  Russian  impertinences. 

To  GENERAL  LACUilE. 

"  Dunkirk,  loth  August,  1804. 
".  .  .  .  I  have  not  inspected  a  single  regiment  which 
has  not  received  100  lame  conscripts,  sickly  and  quite 
unfit  for  service.  They  remain  in  the  depots,  constitute 
a  dead  loss,  wear  out  their  uniforms,  and  cost  money.  .  .  . 
It  is  complained  that  the  substitutes,  directly  they  get 
their  money,  desert.  .   .  . 

"  Napoleon." 


88  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  M.  TALLEYRAND. 

"OSTEND,  lifth  August,  1804. 
".  .  .  .  Reply  to  M.  de  Gravina  :  'I  have  laid  your  letter 
before  the  Emperor.  The  officer  Wright  was  captured 
by  our  cruisers  while  in  the  act  of  landing  Jean  Marie 
and  two  other  brigands.  On  three  consecutive  occasions 
this  officer  disembarked  brigands  charged  to  assassinate 
the  first  magistrate  of  France.  We  have  acquired  the 
proof  that  he  was  placed  at  the  disposal  of  Lord  Hawkes- 
bury  by  the  Admiralty,  which  had  no  idea  of  the  duty  he 
was  intended  for;  gallant  officers  like  the  Lords  of  the 
Admiralty  would  not  have  suffered  the  English  flag  and 
the  English  navy  to  be  thus  dishonoured.  We  are  con- 
vinced that  this  dishonourable  act  is  the  personal  affair 
of  the  officer  Wright  and  of  Lord  Hawkesbury,  who 
himself  drew  40,000/.  out  of  the  Treasury  as  the  price 
of  this  crime.  However,  the  present  minister  of  foreign 
affairs  having,  through  you,  claimed  Captain  Wright,  his 
Majesty,  always  ready  to  do  all  in  his  power  to  diminish 
the  evils  of  war,  has  ordered  me  to  declare  that  he  cannot 
consent  to  exchange  M.  Wright,  who  is  a  criminal,  for  a 
brave  and  loyal  officer ;  but  that  he  has  directed  him  to  be 
placed  at  the  disposal  of  the  English  Government  so  that 
he  may  be  treated  as  it  deems  fit.  It  is  for  posterity  to 
affix  the  brand  of  infamy  on  Lord  Hawkesbury  and  those 
cowards  who  have  adopted  assassination  and  crime  as  a 
means  of  war.'  ...  »  NAPOLEON." 

In  the  above  letter  Napoleon  says :  "  I  have  appointed 
Lesseps  commissary-general  of  commercial  affairs  in 
Egypt." 

To  THE  EMPRESS  JOSEPHINE. 

"OSTEND,  142"/^  ^«jf«rf,  1804. 

"  My  Friend, — I  have  not  received  any  news  from  you 
for  several  days ;  I  should,  however,  have  been  glad  to 
know  what  effect  the  waters  have  had,  and  how  you  pass 


AN    OLD    LOVE.  89 

your  time.  I  have  been  here  for  the  last  week,  and 
intend  going  to-morrow  to  Boulogne.  Let  me  know  by 
courier  what  you  intend  doing,  and  when  you  will  have 
finished  your  baths.  I  am  very  well  satisfied  with  the 
flotilla.  Eugene  is  still  at  Blois.  I  hear  no  more  of 
Hortense  than  if  she  were  in  Congo.  A  thousand  amiable 
things  for  all. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  M.  CAMBACfiRiS. 

"Pont  de  Briques,  i^th  August,  1804. 
"  The  fke  passed  off  very  well  yesterday,  only  there  was 
a  little  wind.     The  spectacle  was  new  and  imposing.     So 
many  bayonets  have  seldom  been  seen  together. 

"  Napoleon." 

to  madame  caroline  bressieux. 

"  Pont  de  Briques,  10th  August,  1804. 
"  Madame, — I  was  much  pleased  with  your  letter.  The 
recollection  of  your  mother  and  of  yourself  have  always 
interested  me.  I  shall  take  the  first  opportunity  of  being 
useful  to  your  brother.  I  see  by  your  letter  that  you  live 
near  Lyons;  I  must  therefore  reproach  you  with  not 
having  come  to  see  me  while  I  was  there. 

"  Napoleon." 

Napoleon  had  paid  his  addresses  to  this  lady  when 
he  was  a  lieutenant,  and  when  she  was  Mademoiselle 
Columbier. 

On  the  30th  July  the  Emperor  gave  orders  that  the 
Marquis  of  Tweeddale,  who  had  been  arrested  with  other 
Englishmen  on  the  rupture  of  the  treaty  of  Amiens, 
should  be  allowed  to  return  to  England  on  parole  for  a 
year,  "on  the  demand  and  as  a  proof  of  esteem  for  the 
talents  and  character  of  M.  Fox."  On  the  22nd  August, 
however,  we  find  a  note  to  Marshal  Earthier  to  the  effect 
that  through  consideration  for    Mr.   Fox,  permission  has 


90      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

been  given  to  Mr.  Phillips  to  transport  the  remains  of  the 
Marquis  of  Tweeddale,  who  died  at  Verdun,  to  England. 

Matters  were  looking  very  gloomy  in  the  North,  and 
notes  as  sharp  as  those  which  passed  between  the  French 
and  British  cabinets  were  exchanged  between  Paris  and 
St.  Petersburg. 

To  M.  TALLEYRAND. 

"  Pont  de  Briques,  24M  August,  1804. 
"Enclosed  you  will  find  the  note  which  ought  to  be 
addressed  to  M.  d'Oubril.  He  will  no  doubt  ask  for  an 
interview.  .  .  .  Should  he  demand  his  passports,  you  will 
grant  them,  and  tell  him  to  leave  Paris  at  once,  but  that 
he  will  not  be  able  to  pass  the  French  frontier  until  my 
chargi  d'affaires  has  crossed  the  Russian  frontier. 

"  Napoleon." 

The  note  complained  of  the  protection  afforded  by 
Russia  to  imigrh.  M.  de  Markoff,  when  Russian  minister 
in  Paris,  had  openly  encouraged  the  ^migrh  and  other 
agents  in  the  pay  of  England ;  the  court  of  Russia  had 
gone  into  mourning  for  a  man  condemned  by  the  French 
tribunals  of  having  conspired  against  the  security  of  the 
French  Government,  &c, ! 

To  M.  TALLEYRAND. 

"Pont  de  Briques,  i^th  August,  1804. 
■'  It  is  at  present  the  court  of  Vienna  which  stands  in 
need  of  my  recognition,  since  it  will  in  all  probability 
experience  difficulties  throughout  Europe.  The  vanity  of 
Russia  will  be  wounded,  and  that  of  Prussia  more  so. 
My  intention  is  not  to  yield  anything  to  the  Emperor  of 
Germany.  I  will  recognise  him  as  Emperor  of  Austria, 
but  it  has  always  been  understood  that  he  should  recognise 
me  first.   .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 


ORDERS    TO    SAIL.  9 1 

Several  despatches  were  exchanged  on  the  subject  of 
the  recognition  of  the  Emperor  of  Germany  as  hereditary 
Emperor  of  Austria,  and  the  etiquette  to  be  observed 
between  the  two  Emperors. 

To  THE  KING  OF  PRUSSIA. 

"  Camp  of  Arras,  30^%  August,  1804. 
"  Sir,  my  Brother, — On  recognising  my  house  as  Impe- 
rial, the  House  of  Austria  wished  in  its  turn  to  be  recog- 
nised as  the  Imperial  House  of  Austria.  This  circum- 
stance affords  me  the  opportunity  of  expressing  to  your 
Majesty  how  much  more  I  appreciate  the  conduct  of 
Prussia,  and  I  desire  to  inform  you,  through  M.  d'Arberg, 
of  my  firm  intention  to  contribute,  as  far  as  I  can,  to  the 
splendour  of  your  cro.wn.  .  .  .  "Napoleon." 

To  VICE-ADMIRAL  DECRES. 

"Aix  LA  Chapelle,  ^th  September,  1804. 
"  D'Oubril  has  gone.     Although  this  departure  is   not 
good  news,   still  it  does  not   mean  a  rupture;   but   it   is 
incalculable    what    may    happen    within     two    or    three 
months.  .  .  .  "Napoleon." 

And  on  the  same  day  Fouche  was  ordered  not  to  allow 
any  Russians  to  leave  Paris  without  haying  paid  their 
debts.  "Mention,"  said  his  Majesty,  "several  Russians 
who  have  left  debts  behind  them,  and  select  in  preference 
the  Dolgoroukis,  if  they  have  left  any  ;  also  mention  the 
names  of  several  well-known  shopkeepers  in  Paris  who 
have  been  ruined  by  some  of  them." 

To  VICE-ADMIRAL  GANTEAUME. 

"Aix  la  Chapelle,  dtk  September,  1804. 
"  I   have    given    orders    for    the    completion    of   your 
squadron.  .  .  .  With  twenty-one  vessels  I  hope  that  you 
will  be  able  to  do  something.     Your  sortie  has  filled  the 


92      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

English  with  terror ;  they  know  that,  having  the  whole 
ocean  to  defend,  a  squadron  escaping  from  Brest  might 
inflict  incalculable  damage  ;  and,  if  you  were  ready  to 
transport  i6,000  men  and  500  horses  to  Ireland,  the  result 
would  be  fatal  for  our  enemies.  Tell  me  when  you  think 
you  will  be  ready.  See  the  Irish  general,  O'Connor,  and 
talk  over  matters  with  him.  .  .  .  The  popinjays  of  the 
fleet  may  laugh  at  and  ridicule  grand  expeditions.  ,  .  . 

"  Napoleon.'" 

To  M.  FOUCH^. 

"  Aix  LA  Chapelle,  t^th  September,  1804. 

" ....  I  see  a  '  Letter  to  the  Army '  written  by  Barr^re. 

The  army  does  not  require  to  be  spoken  to ;  it  pays  no 

attention  to  pamphlets,  and  one  word  in  an  order  of  the 

day  would  have  more  effect  than  a  hundred  volumes  of 

Cicero   or   Demosthenes.     The   troops   can   be    animated 

against  England  without  speaking  to  them.     Tell  Barr^re, 

whose  invectives  and  sophisms  are  not  in  harmony  with  his 

colossal  reputation,    not   to   write  anything  more  in  this 

style.     He  believes  that  it  is  necessary  to  galvanise  the 

masses,  whereas,  on  the  contrary,  they  must  be  guided 

without  knowing  it.     On  the  whole  he  is  a  man  of  little 

talent. 

"  Napoleon." 

That  Napoleon  should  ever  have  employed,  even  as  a 
spy,  that  "  Jacobin  carrion,"  as  Macaulay  termed  Barr^re, 
does  not  say  much  for  him.  "  This  wretch  had  been 
branded  with  infamy  first  by  the  Convention,  then  by  the 
Council  of  Five  Hundred.  The  inhabitants  of  four  or  five 
great  cities  had  attempted  to  tear  him  limb  from  limb." 

To  M.  FOUCH^. 
"Aix  la  Chapelle,  \oth  September,  1804. 
"  The  report  entitled  'Vendue  '  appears  interesting.  .  .  . 
You    must   in    no    way    annoy   Mesdames   Lescure  and 
Laroche  Jaquelain.     The  husband  of  one  and  the  brother 


THE    POPE    INVITED    TO    PARIS.  93 

of  the  Other  waged  war  with  so  much  military  talent  that 
they  will  be  entitled  to  a  page  in  history,  and  will  be 
remembered  in  the  country.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 


At  this  period  hardly  a  day  passed  without  orders  being 
sent  to  Fouch6  to  arrest  or  banish  this  or  that  hnigri  or 
imigree,  and  there  was  hardly  a  court  of  Europe  which 
had  not  incurred  the  wrath  of  Napoleon  for  sheltering 
these  outcasts.  However,  Napoleon  could  now  and  then 
be  generous.  He  proved  a  true  prophet  as  far  as  Laroche 
Jaquelain  was  concerned,  for  the  memory  of  that  young 
hero  is  still  fresh  in  the  memory  of  his  countrymen, 
especially  of  those  who  cling  to  the  old  faith  and  the 
old  regime. 

To  HIS  HOLINESS  THE  POPE. 

"Cologne,  I'^th  September,  1804. 

"  Most  Holy  Father, — The  happy  effect  which  the 
re-establishment  of  the  Christian  religion  has  had  on  the 
morality  and  character  of  my  people  induces  me  to  ask 
your  Holiness  to  give  a  new  proof  of  the  interest  you  take 
in  my  destiny,  and  in  that  of  this  great  nation,  in  one  of 
the  most  important  circumstances  offered  by  the  annals 
of  the  world.  I  beg  you  will  come  and  give  a  religious 
character  to  the  anointing  and  the  coronation  of  the  first 
Emperor  of  the  French.  This  ceremony  will  acquire  a 
new  lustre  if  performed  by  your  Holiness  yourself  It  will 
draw  down  upon  us  and  our  people  the  benediction  of  the 
Almighty,  whose  decrees  regulate  the  fate  of  empires 
and  of  families. 

"Your  Holiness  is. aware  of  the  feelings  of  affection  I 
have  long  entertained  for  you,  and  you  will  comprehend 
the  pleasure  which  this  circumstance  affords  me  of  giving 
you  new  proofs  of  my  devotion. 

"  Napoleon." 


94  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  VICE-ADMIRAL  DECR^S. 

"  Cologne,  \ith  September,  1804. 
"  I  have  already  expressed  my  opinion  on  the  subject 
of  Admiral  Linois,  who  has  rendered  the  French  flag  the 
laughing-stock  of  the  universe.  The  least  he  can  be  re- 
proached with  is  having  shown  too  much  prudence. 
Vessels  of  war  are  not  merchant  ships.  It  is  honour 
which  I  wish  to  preserve,  and  not  a  few  pieces  of  wood 
and  some  men.  In  England  he  is  heartily  despised  by 
naval  officers.  I  would  rather  have  lost  three  ships  than 
that  this  unfortunate  event  should  have  happened.  If 
Captain  Larupe  is  the  same  officer  who  commanded  the 
Muiron  when  I  was  in  Egypt,  I  am  extremely  surprised 
that  a  man  who  was  able  to  approach  me  for  an  instant 
could  have  behaved  so  badly.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

Linois  was  a  very  gallant  officer  who  distinguished 
himself  at  Algesiras,  who  had  twice  fallen  into  our  hands, 
and  had  twice  been  exchanged.  However,  on  the  occasion 
referred  to  above  he  allowed  himself,  when  in  command 
of  an  eighty-four  gun  ship,  three  frigates,  and  a  brig,  to 
be  beaten  off  by  a  fleet  of  East  Indiamen.  It  is  calcu- 
lated that  that  fleet  was  worth  8,000,000/.  The  East 
India  Company  distributed  no  less  than  50,000/.  among 
the  officers  and  crews  for  their  gallant  conduct.  The  share 
of  each  common  seaman  was  six  guineas.  Admiral  Linois 
was  captured  a  third  time  in  1806,  and  remained  a  prisoner 
until  the  abdication  of  Napoleon. 

To  M.  LE  CARDINAL  FESCH. 

"Cologne,  16M  September,  1804. 
"  Sir,  my  Uncle  and  Cousin, — General  Cafferelli  is 
the  bearer  of  the  enclosed  letter  for  the  Pope.  .  .  .  The 
Holy  Father  will  travel  in  his  own  carriages  to  the  foot  of 


THE   AUSTRIAN    EMPIRE.  95 

Mont  Cenis ;  arrived  there,  my  carriages  will  bring  him 
on.  All  his  expenses  will  be  paid  from  the  moment  he 
sets  foot  in  France.  You  must  accompany  the  Pope  but 
return  with  him  to  Rome,  my  intention  being  that  you 
continue  to  reside  in  that  city.  I  desire  that  the  Pope 
may  reach  Paris  by  the  i8th  Brumaire.  ...  I  am  very 
anxious  that  the  King  of  Sardinia  should  not  return  to 
Rome.  It  is  disagreeable  to  me  to  see  a  Russian  agent 
at  Rome,  and  also  that  prince,  who  will  end  by  com- 
promising the  Pope.  ... 

"  Napoleon." 


The  recognition  affair  having  been  settled,  Napoleon 
addressed  the  following  letter  to  his  future  father-in- 
law: — 

To  THE  EMPEROR  OF  AUSTRIA. 

"Mayence,  lyd  September,  1804. 

"  Sir,  my  Brother, — I  feel  deeply  the  amiable  things 
contained  in  the  letter  of  your  Majesty.  I  beg  you  will 
receive  my  congratulations  on  the  erection  of  your  House 
into  the  Imperial  Hereditary  House  of  Austria.  A  long 
reign  to  your  Majesty,  and  perpetual  peace  between  us ; 
and  permit  me  to  add  that  everything  which  can  contribute 
to  the  internal  happiness  of  your  family  are  events  which 
will  never  be  foreign  to  my  own  welfare.  But  above  all, 
let  your  Majesty  conceive  no  doubt  as  to  my  constant  and 
sincere  desire  to  maintain  the  greatest  harmony  between 
our  two  States,  nor  concerning  my  sentiments  of  esteem, 
friendship,  &c.,  8z;c. 

"  Napoleon." 

The  captain  of  a  Russian  merchant  ship  having  refused 
to  take  a  hawser  on  board  to  prevent  a  gunboat  going 
ashore : 


96  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

DECISION. 

"  Mayence,  26M  September,  1804. 
"Referred  to  the  Minister  of  Marine  to  have  the  Russian 
captain  committed  to  prison  in  order  to  give  that  barbarian 
a  lesson  in  hospitality.^ 

"  Napoleon." 

To  M.  FOUCHE. 

"  Mayence,  i^th  September,  1804. 
"  What  happens  at  Bordeaux  happens  at  Turin,  at  Spa, 
at  Marseilles,  &c.  The  police  commissioners  derive  im- 
mense profits  from  the  gaming-tables.  My  intention  is 
that  the  towns  shall  reap  the  benefit  of  the  tables.  I 
shall  employ  the  200,000  francs  paid  by  the  tables  of 
Bordeaux  in  building  a  bridge  or  a  canal.  .  .  . 

"Napoleon." 

to  marshal  berthier. 

"  Mayence,  27 th  September,  1804. 
"My  Cousin, — The  expedition  to  Ireland  has  been 
decided  upon.  You  will  have  a  conference  on  this  subject 
with  Marshal  Angereau.  We  have  the  means  for  embark- 
ing 18,000  men  at  Brest.  General  Marmont,  on  his  side, 
is  ready  with  25,000  men.  He  will  endeavour  to  land 
in  Ireland,  and  will  act  under  the  orders  of  Marshal 
Angereau.  The  grand  army  of  Boulogne  will  be  em- 
barked during  the  same  time,  and  will  do  all  that  is 
possible  to  penetrate  into  the  county  of  Kent.  If  the 
information  which  I  have  received  from  Irish  refugees 
and  from  persons  whom  I  have  sent  to  Ireland  is  verified, 

^  It  is  a  well-known  saying  of  Napoleon — "Scratch  the  Russian, 
and  you  find  the  Tartar."  Nelson,  in  a  letter  to  Earl  Spencer,  dated 
Palermo,  6th  September,  1799,  used  a  somewhat  similar  expression— 
"  The  Russian  Admiral,"  he  wrote,  "  has  a  polished  outside,  but  the 
bear  is  close  to  the  skin.  .  .  .  The  Turk,  who  is  by  no  means  a  fool, 
on  the  contrary,  has  more  natural  sense  than  the  other,  is  our 
brother." 


ST.   HELENA..  97 

a  great  number  of  Irishmen  will,  range  themselves  under 
our  standard,  in  which  case  he  will  march  straight  upon 
Dublin.  ...  _  "Napoleon." 

In  a  letter  dated  the  28th  September  and  addressed  to 
M.  Cretet,  the  following  paragraph  occurs : — "  Let  me 
know  how  it  comes  that  a  Benedictine  convent  (at 
Mayence)  has  been  turned  into  a  Protestant  church — 
convent  which  might  have  served  as  barracks  for 
900  men ! " 

On  the  29th  September  Napoleon  sent  several  pages 
of  instructions  to  the  Minister  of  Marine  on  the  subject 
of  three  expeditions  which  he  contemplated,  in  addition 
to  those  to  be  directed  against  England  and  Ireland.  The 
first  expedition  was  to  secure  Martinique  and  Guadeloupe, 
and  to  seize  upon  St.  Domingo  and  Santa  Lucia  ;  second 
expedition,  to  capture  Surinam  and  other  Dutch  colonies  ; 
third  expedition,  to  capture  St.  Helena,  for  which  from 
1,200  to  1,500  men  would  be  necessary.  "As  for  the 
expedition  to  St.  Helena,"  wrote  his  Majesty,  "  I  handed 
you  a  memorandum  at  Boulogne.  Send  for  the  author 
of  that  memorandum,  who  is  at  Givet.  The  English  have 
no  suspicion  of  this  expedition ;  it  will  be  very  easy  to 
surprise  them." 

No  wonder  that  the  mirl'iflores  of  the  fleet  threw  ridicule 
upon  these  expeditions,  most  of  which  were  planned  as  if 
the  winds  and  the  waves  were  bound  to  obey  the  new 
Emperor. 

On  the  2nd  October  Talleyrand  was  ordered  to  complain 
of  the  Comte  de  Lille  being  allowed  to  remain  at  Warsaw. 
The  Emperor  said  he  would  prefer  to  see  the  Pretender 
take  up  his  residence  in  Russia  or  in  Sweden. 

To  M.  FOUCH^. 

"Mayence,  srrfOrfoiJ^^,  1804. 
"  M.  d'Oubril  has  left  this  town.     We  are  not  at  war 
with  Russia,  but  on  bad  terms.     Let  no  Russian  who  has 
VOL.  IL  H 


98      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

not  a  special  passport  remain  in  France.  Some  favour 
may  be  shown  to  the  Poles  who  are  not  too  bad.  Prince 
Sapieha  belongs  to  this  class.  As  for  Count  Mozerniski, 
have  him  arrested  and  seize  his  papers.  Do  not  hesitate 
to  arrest  any  Swedes  whom  you  may  suspect.  Send  me 
notes  concerning  the  Poles,  Russians,  and  Swedes  living 
in  Paris.  Have  Dubois,  Lamurra,  Cerutti,  and  RoUands 
arrested  directly.  .  .  .  For  God's  sake  see  that  Datry, 
Lajolais,  David,  and  la  Grimaudi^re  do  not  escape.  Have 
Bosquet,  the  cur^  of  .  .  .  .,  arrested,  and  inquire  if  the 
accusations  against  him  are  true.  If  what  you  say  of 
P.  ...  be  true,  have  him  arrested.  "NAPOLEON." 

To  THE  EMPRESS  JOSEPHINE. 

"  Treves,  dth  October,  1804. 
"  My  Friend, — I  arrive  at  Treves  at  the  same  time 
that  you  arrive  at  St.  Cloud.  Do  not  give  an  audience 
to  T  .  .  .  .  Receive  B  ....  in  public,  and  do  not  give 
him  a  private  audience.  Do  not  promise  to  sign  any 
marriage  contracts  before  they  have  been  signed  by  me. 

"Napoleon." 

To  M.  fouch£ 

"Treves,  bth  October,  1804. 
"  The  Prefecture  of  Boulogne  caught  fire  two  days 
before  the  English  tried  to  burn  the  flotilla.  This  may 
have  been  an  accident,  but  it  is  also  natural  to  suppose 
that  the  fire  was  due  to  the  English.  The  young  com- 
missioner who  is  there  is  not  acquainted  with  the  perversity 
of  the  human  heart.  "NAPOLEON." 

To  M.  CAMBAC^R^S. 

"  Treves,  ^th  October,  1804. 

'  I  have  received  the  proposed  decree  concerning  the 
lawyers.  There  is  nothing  in  it  which  gives  the  Grand 
Judge  the  power  of  controlling  them.     I  would  sooner  do 


LAWYERS.  99 

nothing  than  deprive  myself  of  the  means  of  taking 
measures  against  a  heap  of  babblers  and  revolutionists, 
who  are  almost  all  inspired  by  crime  and  corruption.  As 
long  as  I  -wear  a  sword  I  shall  never  sign  so  absurd  a 
decree.  What  I  want  is  to  be  able  to  cut  the  tongue  out 
of  any  lawyer  who  uses  it  against  the  Government.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

Always  very  hard  upon  lawyers,  Napoleon  declared, 
when  at  St.  Helena,  that  it  had  been  his  intention  to 
frame  a  law  by  which  no  barrister  or  attorney  could 
charge  fees  in  a  cause  which  they  lost.  This  would  prevent 
them  taking  bad  cases  into  court,  and  would  put  a  stop  to 
a  great  deal  of  expensive  and  useless  litigation. 

To  M.  F0UCH6. 

"Treves,  7M  October,  1804. 
" .  .  .  My  chief  object  is  to  prevent  the  Jesuits  from 
establishing  themselves  in  France.     They  assume  all  sorts 
of  disguises.      I    will  have  nothing  which   resembles  an 
organised  religious  militia.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  M.,  TALLEYRAND. 

"Treves,  "jth  October,  1804. 

"  Write  to  Spain,  saying  it  would  displease  me  to  see 

the  Jesuits  re-established  ;  that  I  will  not  tolerate  them  in 

France  or  in  Italy  ;  that,  seeing  the  nature  of  our  relations, 

I  hope  Spain  will  remain  firm  in  the  same  principles ;  that 

I  should  like  to  have  this  assurance.     Write  the  same  to 

the  Queen  of  Etruria. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  M.  FOUCH^. 

"  Treves,.  Tth  October,  1804. 

"  Immediately  after  the  affair  of  Drake,  Lord  Hawkes- 

bury  had  the  stupidity  to  write  a  circular  justifying  the 

conduct  of  that  minister.     To  make  the  folly  and  atrocity 

of  the  principles  he  propounded  more  apparent,  it  was  my 

H   2 


lOO    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

intention  to  answer  that  circular.  I  have  thought  better 
since.  I  desire  that  the  English  minister  at  Hamburg  be 
carried  off,  and  immediately  after  the  event  I  will  notify 
the  fact  to  the  various  courts  of  Europe.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

Bernadotte  was  to  be  charged  to  execute  this  fresh 
violation  of  German  territory.  What  took  place  was  this  : — 

On  the  night  of  the  25th  October,  a  party  of  French 
troops  passed  the  Elbe  (in  consequence,  as  it  was  in- 
sultingly said,  of  orders  given  by  the  Minister  of  Police  at 
Paris),  and  seized  Sir  George  Rumbold,  the  British  chargi 
d'  affaires  to  the  Circle  of  Lower  Saxony  and  the  Hans 
Towns,  at  his  country  house  in  the  vicinity  of  Hamburg, 
under  the  pretext  that  he  was  concerned  in  plans  similar 
to  those  of  Mr.  Drake  and  Mr.  Spencer  Smith.  His  house 
was  pillaged,  he  was  sent  to  Paris,  and  thrown  into  the 
Temple,  where  he  was  treated  with  great  harshness. 

To  M.  FOUCH]£. 

"  St.  Cloud,  i2,th  October,  1804. 
"  The  mother-in-law  of  the  Arch-chancellor  has  come  to 
Paris.  Her  object  is  to  trouble  the  repose  of  the  Arch- 
chancellor,  at  the  instigation  of  his  enemies.  I  beg  you 
will  see  her,  and  try  to  persuade  her,  by  gentle  means,  to 
return  home.     You  will  let  me  know  the  result. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  M.  FOUCHE. 

"St.  Cloud,  29/;%  October,  1804. 
"  You  will  see  in  the  Moniteiir  of  to-morrow  an  account 
of  an  unheard-of  attack  by  the  English  on  four  Spanish 
frigates.  Have  several  articles  inserted  in  the  papers  with 
the  object  of  exciting  France  to  war,  and  of  indisposing  as 
much  as  possible  the  other  Powers  against  England. 

"  Napoleon." 


SPANISH   GALLEONS.  lOI 

This  act  of  hostility  was  due  to  the  fact  of  Napoleon 
having  forced  a  treaty  upon  Spain  which  clearly  consti- 
tuted a  casus  belli  as  far  as  England  was  concerned.  We 
see  by  the  Annual  Register  that  "on  the  23rd  October  a 
despatch  from  Lord  Cornwallis  announced  that  a  small 
squadron  of  British  frigates  under  the  command  of  Captain 
Moore  of  the  Indefatigable  had,  after  a  short  action, 
captured  three  Spanish  treasure-ships  and  blown  up  one  off 
Cape  St.  Mary's.  Independently  of  4,800,000  dollars,  the 
captured  vessels  contained  the  most  precious  merchandise," 
a  list  of  which  is  given  in  the  Annual  Register,  with  the 
observation  that  this  was  the  first  act  of  hostility  against 
Spain.  The  English  loss  was  about  a  dozen  killed  and 
wounded.     Spain  paid  dearly  for  submitting  to  Napoleon. 

But  she  was  only  at  the  beginning  of  a  long  series  of 
cruel'  humiliations. 

To  THE  KING  OF  PRUSSIA. 

"  St.  Cloud,  loth  November,  1804. 
"  Sir,  my  Brother, — I  received  your  Majesty's  letter 
this  evening,  and  was  much  touched  by  the  expressions  of 
confidence  and  friendship  which  it  contained.  My  first 
movement  after  reading  your  letter  was  to  give  orders 
for  the  immediate  release  of  M.  Rumbold.  .  .  .  Since  this 
Rumbold  affair  has  so  deeply  affected  your  Majesty,  I  must 
myself  consider  it  as  a  most  unfortunate  event,  for  your 
personal  satisfaction  constitutes  a  portion  of  my  felicity. 
...  I  have  directed  my  foreign  minister  to  explain  to  your 
ambassador  here  my  peculiar  position  with  regard  to  Eng- 
land, which  respects  no  treaties,  no  international  law,  &c. 
The  plots  which  that  cabinet  is  constantly  hatching  against 
my  life  ought  to  excite  the  interest  of  all  who  have  a  horror 

of  crime.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

The  fact  is  that  Prussia  had  addressed  so  vigorous  a  note 
to  the  French  Emperor  on  this  fresh  violation  of  territory 


I02     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

that  Napoleon  at  once  released  Sir  G,  Rumbold  and  sent 
him  to  Cherbourg,  from  which  port  he  was  put  on  board 
the  Niobe  under  a  flag  of  truce. 

DECREE. 

"Paris,  iSih  November,  1804. 
"  All  the  furniture  belonging  to  the  chateaux  of  the  King 
of  Sardinia  is  mine. 

"  Napoleon," 

The  sister  of  Mirabeau  having  asked  for  a  commission 
in   the   navy   for  one   grandson,   the   place   of   page   for 
,  another,  that  of  menin  ^  for  a  third,  and  for  herself  the 
post  of  reader  in  the  Imperial  household — 

DECISION. 
"  I  beg  the  Arch-chancellor  to  let  me  have  his  opinion  on 
these  various  demands. 

"  Napoleon." 

In  the  reply  of  Napoleon  to  the  address  of  the  Senate, 
congratulating  him  on  the  Imperial  dignity,  occur  such 
paragraphs  as  these  : — 

"  My  descendants  will  long  preserve  this  throne." 

"  In  camp  they  will  be  the  first  soldiers  of  the  army 
sacrificing  their  lives  in  the  defence  of  the  country." 

"  Magistrates,  they  will  never  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that 
contempt  for  the  law  and  the  disturbance  of  social  order 
can  arise  only  from  the  '  uncertainty '  of  princes." 

To  M.  DE  TALLEYRAND. 

"  St  Cloud,  iitk  December,  1804. 

"  I  write  you  this  letter  to  make  known  my  displeasure  in 

that  you  have  permitted  the  word  'supper'  to  be  used  in 

the  invitations  of  Wednesday,  since  the  hour  for  which 

they  are  issued  is  that  of  my  dinner.     The  date  of  the  old 

1  Menin  means  the  page  to  a  dauphin,  and  there  was  no  dauphin  or 
direct  heir  to  the  throne  at  this  period. 


NAPOLEON    LOUIS.  103 

calendar  has  also  been  substituted  for  that  of  the  new 
one,  which  is  the  calendar  of  the  Empire.  My  intention 
is  that  in  my  palace,  as  elsewhere,  the  laws  shall  be 
obeyed.  « NAPOLEON." 

No  wonder  that  M.  de  Talleyrand  after  such  a  humiliat- 
ing reprimand  as  this  should  have  accused  his  Imperial 
master  of  being  a  very  ill-bred  person. 

A  cousin  of  General  Hoche  having  asked  for  the  place 
of  usher  or  valet-de-chambre — 

DECISION. 

"  Pakis,  idth  December,  1804. 
"  He  is  granted  a  small  place  in  the  Inland  Revenue 
Office.  «  Napoleon." 

to  the  emperor  of  austria. 

"  Serene  and  most  powerful  Emperor,  Sir,  my 
Brother, — My  sister-in-law,  the  Princess  Louis,  has  just 
given  birth  to  a  second  prince  (the  first  Imperial  prince 
born),  whom  I  have  named  Napoleon  Louis.  The  interest 
which  your  Imperial  and  Royal  Majesty  has  ever  shown  in 
all  that  can  please  me,  and  your  attachment  for  my  Imperial 
-house,  persuade  me  that  you  will  share  the  satisfaction  I 
feel  on  this  occasion,  &c.  «  Napoleon  " 

Similar  letters  were  addressed  to  the  Pope  and  other 
sovereigns. 

It  having  been  proposed  to  commit  to  prison  an 
Englishman  called  Gold,  because  he  had  fought  a  duel 
with  the  keeper  of  the  gaming  table  at  Verdun,  Napoleon 
decided — 

-  "  Paris,  25/A  December,  1804. 

"  This  proposal  is  not  just.  A  prisoner  of  war  on  parole 
may  fight  duels.  «  Napoleon." 


CHAPTER     III. 

THE   YEAR   1805. 

The  year  1805  was  fertile  in  startling  events.  It  opened 
with  insincere  assurances  of  peace  and  good  will  addressed 
to  the  sovereigns  of  Austria  and  England — assurances 
based  upon  the  assumption  that  Napoleon  was  to  be 
perfectly  free  to  treat  the  lesser  states  on  the  Continent 
as  he  liked,  and  to  violate  the  treaty  of  Luneville  which 
guaranteed  the  independence  of  the  Italian,  Helvetian, 
and  Batavian  republics.  The  unfavourable  reply  which 
Lord  Mulgrave  returned  to  the  overtures  of  the  French 
Emperor  was  read  out  in  the  three  French  chambers,  and 
commented  upon  in  the  most  violent  manner.  It  was 
considered  necessary  to  prove  to  the  French  people  that 
England  raised  insuperable  obstacles  to  that  peace  so 
ardently  desired  by  Napoleon.  Naval  and  military 
armaments  were  being  feverishly  carried  on  throughout 
France  ;  it  was  evident  that  the  new  Emperor  meditated 
striking  another  blow,  extending  his  dominion,  and  keeping 
the  countries  over  which  his  armies  had  swept.  It  might 
be  said  of  him  that — 

"  He  stood  like  a  hawk,  with  the' down  on  his  beak, 
And  stared,  with  his  foot  on  the  prey." 

His  troops  lined  the  shores  of  the  Channel ;  his  flotilla 
was  being  daily  increased,  and  his  squadrons  were  pre- 
paring for  that  naval   campaign  which  was  to  end  in  the 


OBJECTS    OF   THE    COALITION.  105 

destruction  of  England.  Had  not  medals  been  struck  to 
commemorate  the  capture  of  London,  and  stamped  as  if 
cast  in  London  ? 

In  April,  England  and  Russia  signed  a  secret  convention 
similar  to  that  which  had  been  signed  between  Russia  and 
Austria  in  November,  1804,  and  one  which  had  previously 
been  signed  between  Russia  and  Prussia.  With  the  view 
of  preventing  further  encroachments  on  the  part  of  France 
the  coalition  proposed  to  raise  a  force  of  500,000  men  in 
order  to  effect — 

1st.  The  evacuation  of  Hanover  and  North  Germany. 

2nd.  To  establish  the  independence  of  Holland  and 
Switzerland. 

3rd.   To  restore  the  King  of  Sardinia. 

4th.  To  guarantee  the  future  security  of  Naples. 

5th.  To  procure  the  complete  evacuation  of  Italy  and 
the  Isle  of  Elba. 

It  was  determined  to  open  negotiations  with  France 
before  proceeding  to  extremities.  Alexander,  who  was 
anxious  to  play  the  part  of  mediator,  and  to  earn  the 
gratitude  of  Europe,  was  desirous  for  peace,  and  both 
Austria  and  England  expressed  their  readiness  to  accept 
any  terms  compatible  with  the  tranquillity  and  security 
of  Europe  The  Czar  sent  M.  de  Novosiltzoff  to  nego- 
tiate with  Napoleon.  As  diplomatic  relations  had  been 
broken  off  with  Russia  he  was  to  ask  for  passports  on 
arriving  at  Berlin.  Napoleon,  on  the  ground  that  he  had 
no  confidence  in  the  mediation  of  so  fickle  a  sovereign  as 
Alexander,  refused  to  grant  passports  before  the  month  of 
July  !  This  circumstance  alone  shows  that  he  was  bent 
upon  war. 

M.  de  Novosiltzoff  never  got  beyond  Berlin.  While  he 
was  there,  news  arrived  that  Napoleon  had  been  crowned 
King  of  Italy  at  Milan,  had  annexed  Genoa,  had  trans- 
formed Lucca  into  a  principality  for  his  sister  Ehza,  and 
had  indulged  in  the  most  outrageous  and  threatening 
language  towards   the  Queen  of   Naples.      The  Russian 


I06     THE  CORRESPONDENCK  OF  NAPOLEON. 

diplomatist  was  at  once  ordered  to  return  to  St.  Peters- 
burg.    War  became  merely  a  question  of  time. 

It  might  have  been  thought  that  Napoleon  would  have 
been  satisfied  with  carrying  out  his  grand  scheme  for  the 
invasion  of  England,  and  would  have  desisted  for  the 
moment  from  aggravating  the  other  great  Powers.  This 
was  not  the  case,  and  it  has  been  surmised  that  in  the 
event  of  the  failure  of  his  naval  campaign  he  wished  to 
have  an  excuse  for  employing  that  grand  army  which  he 
had  brought  to  such  a  pitch  of  perfection,  and  which  was 
ready  to  go  anywhere  and  do  anything. 

None  of  the  French  naval  commanders  believed  in  the 
possibility  of  a  successful  invasion  of  England.  Nelson 
declared  the  scheme  impracticable  owing  to  the  strength 
of  the  currents  in  the  Channel,  but  considered  Napoleon 
equal  to  attempting  the  enterprise.  The  plan  of  the 
Emperor  was,  by  deceiving  the  British  admirals  to  gain 
the  temporary  mastery  of  the  Channel,  and  to  throw 
130,000  men  upon  different  points  of  the  English  coast. 
In-  the  whole  of  this  affair  he  betrayed  considerable 
obstinacy.  He  failed  to  make  any  allowance  for  the 
instability  of  the  elements  ;  a  fact  which  led  Nelson  to 
-write  :  "  I  ^knew  that  the  orders  given  by  Bonaparte  on 
the  banks  of  the  Seine  would  take  into  consideration 
neither  wind  nor  weather."  Napoleon,  as  we  have  seen, 
thought  that  the  British  fleets  and  their  crews  would  be 
worn  out  by  remaining  at  sea,  while  his  squadrons  would 
improve  in  the  harbours  where  they  were  blockaded. 
Nelson  wrote  to  the  Admiralty :  "  Those  gentlemen  are 
not  accustomed  to  the  storms  which  we  have  defied  for 
twenty-one  months  without  losing  a  mast  or  a  spar."  And 
to  Collingwood  he  wrote :  "  If  truth  reaches  the  ears  of 
Emperors,  Napoleon  must  know  to-day  that  his  fleets  suffer 
more  damage  in  one  night  than  ours  in  a  whole  year." 
Admiral  Jurien  de  la  Graviere  in  his  Guerres  Maritimes 
says  that  the  French  ships  waited  for  a  storm  to  blow  away 
the  blockading  squadron  before  venturing  to  sea,  and  that 


THE    HOSTILE   FLEETS .  107 

more  than  once  the  tempest  left  nothing  for  the  English 
to  do.  If  French  seamanship  became  bad  in  port,  that  of 
their  allies  the  Spaniards  was  probably  worse.  Brenton 
says  :  "  To  unmoor  they  take  twenty-four  hours  where  we 
take  twenty-four  minutes,"  and  "  when  they  cross  their 
top-gallant  masts  in  harbour  they  begin  the  day  before ; 
we  cross  them  in  one  minute  from  the  deck." 

The  consequences  of  Napoleon's  policy  by  land  and  his 
policy  by  sea  produced  very  different  results,  which  may 
be  summed  up  in  two  words — Austerlitz,  Trafalgar. 

His  naval  campaign  completely  broke  down.  Fifty  sail 
of  the  line  were  suddenly  to  assemble  in  the  Channel,  and 
to  secure  the  passage  of  the  flotilla  ;  but  Missiessy  failed 
to  form  his  junction  with  Villeneuve  ;  nor  could  Gan- 
teaume  escape  from  Brest,  which  was  closely  blockaded  by 
Cornwallis.  Villeneuve  managed  to  sail  to  the  West 
Indies,  whither  he  was  pursued  by  Nelson  with  an  inferior 
force,  and  to  return  home.  On  the  22nd  July  he  fell 
in  with  Sir  Robert  Calder  and  lost  two  Spanish  ships- 
Villeneuve  and  Sir  Robert  Calder  resembled  each  other, 
and  were  placed  in  a  similar  position.  Both  feared  to 
assume  responsibility,  and  both  had  an  important  mission 
to  fulfil.  The  consequence  was  that  neither  admiral  cared 
for  resuming,  on  the  23rd  July,  the  combat  commenced  on 
the  22nd  in  a  dense  fog.  Villeneuve  conceived  it  to  be 
his  duty  not  so  much  to  attack  Sir  Robert  as  to  form  his 
junction  with  the  Brest,  Rochefort,  and  Ferrol  squadrons  ; 
and  Sir  Robert  considered  it  more  prudent  not  to  renew 
an  engagement  with  a  superior  force  when  at  any  moment 
Villeneuve  might  be  joined  by  twenty-one  sail  of  the  line. 

Villeneuve  was  at  first  complimented  by  the  Emperor  for 
his  success  ;  but  was  afterwards  loaded  with  reproaches. 
As  for  Sir  Robert  Calder,  he  was  tried  by  court-martial 
and  reprimanded,  although  as  Brenton  remarks,  Admiral 
Hotham  was  made  a  peer  for  a  similar  victory.  This 
decision  drew  from  Dupin  the  following  observation  :  "  If 
Calder  with  an  inferior  force  was  tried  and  condemned 


Io8  THE   CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

for  capturing  only  two  ships,  what  would  have  been  done 
to  him  had  he  commanded  the  superior  force  and  had 
lost  two?  "1 

It  is  certain  that  Sir  Robert's  action,  though  not 
brilliant,  was  fraught  with  important  consequences — that 
he  fulfilled  his  mission,  which  was  to  leave  the  port  of 
Ferrol  open  and  to  intercept  Villeneuve ;  and  that  the 
French  admiral  did  not  accomplish  his,  which  was  to  form 
his  junction  with  the  other  French  fleets,  and  to  convoy  the 
flotilla  across  the  Channel.  The  affair  off"  Cape  Finisterre 
disheartened  both  Villeneuve  and  Gravina.  The  former 
became  aware  that  the  English  were  acquainted  with  his 
presence,  and  that  he  could  no  longer  conceal  his  move- 
ments, and  the  Spaniards  felt  deeply  the  fact  that  in  a  ,  ,  ,  , 
naval  engagement  in  which  fourteen  French  and  six 
Spanish  ships  had  taken  part  they  should  have  lost  two 
vessels,  and  their  allies  none.  The  inference  which 
their  pride  drew  was  that  the  Spanish  ships  had  been 
sacrificed. 

Villeneuve  remained  at  Ferrol  to  refit  until  the  nth 
August,  when  he  once  more  put  to  sea  with  the  view  of 
forming  his  junction  with  Ganteaume  ;  but,  informed  by 
a  merchant  vessel  of  the  proximity  of  a  British  fleet  of 
twenty-five  sail  of  the  line' — a  piece  of  false  intelligence — 
he  went  about  and  stood  for  Cadiz.  In  Cadiz  he  was 
soon  blockaded  by  Nelson,  who,  after  a  brief  holiday  at 
Merton,  had  consented  to  resume  active  service.  On 
receiving  positive  orders  from  the  Emperor  to  leave  Cadiz 
and  to  support  the  operations  of  General  St.  Cyr  by 
making  a  demonstration  on  the  coast  of  Naples,  Ville- 
neuve, threatened  with  a  successor  in  the  person^  of 
Admiral  Rosily,  most  reluctantly  put  to  sea.  The  con- 
sequence was  the  battle  of  Trafalgar. 

After  the  Calder  affair  and  the  flight  of  Villeneuve 
to    Cadiz,   the    Emperor,    exasperated  with   his  admiral, 

1  Villeneuve  had  twenty  line-of-battle  ships  and  seven  frigates ; 
Sir  Robert  Calder  fifteen  line-of-battle  ships  and  two  frigates. 


TRAFALGAR  AND  AUSTERLITZ.        1 09 

determined  to  commence  operations  against  Austria  and 
to  disable  that  power  before  the  Russians  could  arrive. 
Hanover  was  offered  to  Prussia  as  the  price  of  her 
neutrality.  By  a  series  of  bold  and  rapid  movements  the 
French  got  between  Ulm  and  Vienna,  and  forced  Mack 
to  capitulate.  Napoleon  shortly  afterwards  entered  the 
Austrian  capital,  and  on  the  2nd  December  fought  the 
battle  of  Austerlitz,  which  proved  a  deathblow  for  the 
third  coalition.  Austria  was  completely  crushed ;  the 
Czar  was  only  too  glad  to  be  able  to  fall  back  unmolested, 
and  with  the  remains  of  his  army  to  recross  his  frontier  ; 
Prussia  ceased  to  complain  of  the  violation  of  her  territory. 
In  England  the  news  of  Austerlitz  created  universal  dis- 
may. Pitt  was  dying  at  Bath,  and  none  of  the  ministers 
were  at  their  posts.  We  were  at  war  with  France  and 
Spain  ;  our  allies  had  been  defeated,  and  there  appeared 
to  be  nothing  capable  of  resisting  the  genius  and  the  force 
of  Napoleon.  After  the  battle  of  Trafalgar  Pitt  exclaimed, 
"  England  has  saved  herself  by  her  courage,  she  will  save 
Europe  by  her  example."  After  Austerlitz  he  turned  his 
his  face  to  the  wall  and  died,  murmuring,  "My  country! 
How  I  leave  my  country  !  " 

Among  the  other  events  of  importance  to  which  the 
correspondence  of  1805  refers,  may  be  mentioned  the 
coronation  of  Napoleon  at  Milan  as  King  of  Italy.  The 
French  Emperor  had  at  first  proposed,  on  assuming  the 
-  Iron  Crown,  to  take  the  title  of  King  of  Lombardy,  but  he 
renounced  this  intention  through  deference  to  the  Emperor 
of  Austria,  who  laid  claim  to  that  dignity.  As  in  Notre 
Dame,  so  in  the  cathedral  of  Milan,  Napoleon  placed  the 
crown  on  his  own  head,  and  in  the  second  instance  he  glared 
fiercely  round  him,  saying,  "  //  cido  me  la  diede,  guai  a  chi 
la  tocchera  ! "  Melzi,  Duke  of  Lodi,  had  been  instigated 
to  offer  the  crown  of  Italy  to  Napoleon,  and  on  the  4th 
June  a  similar  comedy  was  performed  by  the  Doge  of 
Genoa,  on  his  arrival  at  Milan,  to  implore  his  new  Majesty 
to  unite  the  ancient  Republic  to  the  Empire.     Genoa  had 


no  THE    CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

furnished  France  with  6,000  sailors,  and  had  ceded  her 
harbours,  her  dockyards,  her  arsenals,  &c.,  to  Bonaparte, 
as  the  price  of  its  independence,  and  this  was  its  reward. 
This  annexation  created  the  greatest  irritation  among  the 
Great  Powers ;  it  brought  England  and  Russia  together, 
and  caused  Austria  to  remonstrate  twice. 

In  the  beginning  of  the  year  the  Pope  returned  to  Rome, 
exceeding  sorrowful,  and  filled  with  apprehensions  lest  he 
should  be  deprived  of  the  last  vestiges  of  his  temporal 
power,  and  be  driven  from  his  capital  by  the  Russians 
and  the  English. 

During  the  march  of  his  troops  on  Vienna,  Napoleon  had 
violated  the  neutrality  of  Anspach  and  Baireuth,  and  this 
led  to  an  exchange  of  very  angry  despatches  between  him 
and  the  King  of  Prussia,  who  had  just  made  up  his  mind 
to  join  the  third  coalition  when  the  battle  of  Austerlitz 
was  fought. 

In  1805  the  construction  of  the  Confederation  of  the 
Rhine  was  commenced,  from  which  Austria  and  Prussia 
were  excluded  ;  the  Electors  of  Bavaria  and  Wirtemburg 
received  the  title  of  King,  and  Baden  became  a  Grand 
Duchy.  In  France  the  National  Guard,  destined  to  be 
disbanded  in  1871,  after  having  been  the  source  of  infinite 
trouble,  was  created. 

The  war  into  which  Napoleon  plunged  was  as  un- 
popular in  France  as  it  was  throughout  the  rest  of 
Europe.  It  was  productive  of  widespread  ruin.  The 
bank  had  to  suspend  payment,  and  there  were  numerous 
failures  in  Paris  and  in  the  provinces.  M.  Thiers  has 
given  a  graphic  description  of  the  financial  crisis  of  1805 
in  his  History  (vol.  vi.  p.  31),  consequent  on  the  dearth  of 
specie.  And  considering  that  Napoleon's  great  object  in 
life  was  to  ruin  England,  it  is  amusing  to  find  his  historian 
and  panegyrist  writing — "  A  considerable  portion  of  our 
specie  was  transported  to  Hamburg,  Amsterdam,  Genoa, 
Leghorn,  Venice,  and  Trieste,  to  pay  for  the  sugar  and 
coffee  which  the  English  landed  at  those  ports  either  by 


TREATY   OF   PRESBURG.  I  1 1 

free  commerce  or  by  smuggling.  All  the  commercial  men 
of  the  time  complained  of  this  state  of  affairs." 

Madame  de  R^musat,  who  has  much  to  say  on  the 
subject  of  the  affliction  caused  by  the  bella  matribus 
detestata,  writes  (vol.  ii.  p.  203)  that  after  the  capitulation 
of  Ulm  the  want  of  specie  was  severely  felt.  "  Commerce 
suffered,  the  theatres  were  deserted,  misery  increased,  and 
the  people  were  sustained  only  by  the  hope  that  a  brilliant 
campaign  would  be  followed  by  a  speedy  peace."  Every- 
thing shows  that  the  war  was  due  to  the  inordinate 
ambition  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte. 

The  year  ended  with  the  Treaty  of  Presburg,  which  was 
the  last  diplomatic  act  of  the  Revolutionary  era,  which 
expired  on  the  nth  Nivose,  Year  XIV.,  and  with  it  dis- 
appeared the  last  vestige  of  that  Republic,  that  freedom 
of  thought  and  of  action,  those  immortal  principles  for 
which  so  much  blood  had  been  shed. 

By  the  Treaty  of  Presburg  Austria  abandoned  the 
Venetian  States,  together  with  Istria  and  Dalmatia,  which 
were  united  to  the  kingdom  of  Italy,  and  the  Tyrol  and 
Austrian  Swabia,  which  went  to  Bavaria  and  Wirtemburg. 
All  the  small  German  States  became  his  vassals,  and  he 
was  free  to  turn  his  thoughts  towards  Naples  and  Prussia, 
but  it  never  occurred  to  him  to  return  to  Boulogne  with 
his  victorious  army. 

On  the  1st  January  Napoleon  wrote  to  the  Emperor  ot 
Austria,  announcing  that  he  had  ceded  his  rights  in  Italy 
to  his  brother  Joseph,  whom  he  had  proclaimed  hereditary 
king  of  that  country.  He  added  that  there  was  a  clause 
to  the  effect  that  the  crowns  of  France  and  Italy  should 
never  be  united  on  the  same  head,  and  said  that  "  having 
banished  all  uneasiness  which  may  have  been  inspired  by 
the  reported  union  of  Lombardy  to  France,"  he  hoped  the 
peace  of  the  Continent  would  not  be  disturbed,  and  that 
his  Majesty  would  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  the  instigations  of 
the  English. 

The  next  day  a  similar   letter  was  addressed  to  the 


I  1 2     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

King  of  England — a  letter  naturally  written  to  throw  dust 
in  the  eyes  of  the  French  people,  with  whom  the  war  was 
highly  unpopular.  Lord  Mulgrave  addressed  a  reply  to 
M.  Talleyrand  on  the  14th  January,  to  the  effect  that  his 
Britannic  Majesty  would  be  delighted  to  conclude  peace 
on  bases  compatible  with  permanent  security  and  the 
interests  of  his  country,  but  that  before  answering  more 
fully  it  would  be  necessary  for  him  to  communicate  with 
the  other  Powers,  with  whom  he  was  engaged  in  confiden- 
tial relations,  and  especially  with  the  Emperor  of  Russia, 
who  took  a  lively  interest  in  the  safety  and  independence 
of  the  Continent. 

To  show  the  insincerity  of  Napoleon,  it  is  merely  neces- 
sary to  refer  to  what  he  said  before  the  Council  of  State 
on  the  subject  of  the  resources  of  France :  "  For  the  last 
two  years  France  has  made  great  sacrifices.  A  Continental 
war  would  require  more.  I  have  a  strong  army,  a  com- 
plete military  organisation,  and  I  am  in  the  same  position 
as  if  war  was  about  to  be  declared.  But  to  assemble  this 
force  in  time  of  peace,  and  to  have  20,000  horses  for  artil- 
lery and  baggage  train,  required  a  pretext  in  order  not 
to  alarm  the  Continental  Powers,  and  this  pretext  has  been 
furnished  by  the  plan  for  invading  England.  I  know  that 
to  keep  all  these  horses  in  time  of  peace  is  throwing  thirty 
millions  into  the  water ;  but  to-day  I  am  twenty  days 
ahead  of  my  enemies,  and  I  shall  be  a  month  in  the  field 
before  Austria  has  bought  her  artillery  horses.  If  I  per- 
ceive that  events  in  Italy  (proposed  creation  of  a  kingdom 
of  Lombardy)  causes  her  to  move,  I  shall  declare  war 
before  she  begins  her  purchases.  You  now  know  the 
explanation  of  a  great  many  things  ;  but  we  shall  not 
have  war,  for  I  have  just  opened  direct  negotiations  with 
the  King  of  England  with  a  view  to  conclude  peace." 

Miot  de  Melito,  who  gives  the  above  in  his  Memoirs 
(vol.  ii.  p.  234),  was  evidently  uncertain  as  to  the  real  in- 
tentions of  Napoleon,  whether  he  all  along  meant  to  attack 
Austria,  or  whether  he  was  bent  upon  venturing  across  the 


APPEAL   TO    SPAIN.  II3 

Channel.  The  probability  is  that  he  had  prepared  every- 
thing for  a  march  on  Vienna  in  the  event  of  his  being 
foiled  in  his  attempt  on  London.  "  But,"  adds  the  count, 
"  the  more  he  desired  war  the  greater  was  his  interest  in 
persuading  people  that  he  was  anxious  for  peace,  and  the 
object  of  the  step  he  took  with  regard  to  the  King  of 
England,  was  to  be  able  to  prove  that  if  he  were  dragged 
into  a  new  war  he  had  done  all  in  his  power  to  avoid  it. 
Therefore  as  soon  as  the  reply  of  England  rejecting  the 
overtures  reached  Paris,  he  solemnly  communicated  it  to 
the  Senate,  the  Legislative  Body,  and  the  Tribunate. 

His  Majesty  on  the  same  date  wrote  to  his  dear  brother 
the  King  of  Spain,  saying,  among  other  things — 

"  I  should  have  conceived  a  sovereign  contempt  for  the 
Spanish  Cabinet  had  it  accepted  ignominious  terms  after 
the  insult  which  Spain  has  received  from  England.  .  . 
Your  Majesty  has  adopted  the  right  course  ;  it  is  only  by 
arms  that  such  sanguinary  affronts  are  revenged.  .  .  .  Your 
Majesty  has  thirty  ships  ;  let  them  be  armed.  You  have 
sailors  ;  you  require  only  money,  which  may  be  found 
without  difficulty  ;  since  you  have  united  to  your  crown 
the  property  of  the  Knights  of  Malta,  you  can  sell  it ;  you 
can  also  exact  from  the  clergy  and  the  various  orders  of 
the  State  contributions  and  patriotic  gifts.  Spain  has 
experienced  heavy  misfortunes  ;  Heaven  wished  to  chasten 
your  Majesty.  Let  your  Majesty,  let  the  queen  your  wife, 
let  the  princes,  the  princesses,  &c.,  be  the  first  to  make 
sacrifices.  ..." 

When  Napoleon  wrote  the  above  delectable  epistle,  one 
can  imagine  that  he  had  been  reading  such  a  passage  as 
this  from  the  pages  of  Voltaire  :  "  A  preacher  ascends 
the  pulpit  and  says  that  you  have  neither  good  conduct 
nor  courage,  and  that  you  were  beaten  at  Ramilies  because 
you  did  not  know  how  to  defend  yourself,  and  he  is  stoned. 
But  if  he  said — Your  sins  have  irritated  the  Almighty,  who 
handed  you  over  to  the  heretics  at  Ramilies ;  but  ^^hen 
you  returned  to  the  Lord,  He  blessed  your  work  at 
VOL.  n.  I 


114     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Denain,  &c.,  he  would  be  patiently  listened  to."  As  for 
the  poor  King  of  Spain,  he  had  more  sanguinary  affronts 
in  store  for  him  beyond  the  loss  of  his  galleons,  both  at  the 
hands  of  the  English  and  those  of  Napoleon. 

On  the  2nd  January  Napoleon  also  wrote  to  the  King  of 
Naples,  and  at  great  length  to  the  queen.  To  the  king  he 
said — ■ 

"  The  French  troops  occupy  the  kingdom  of  Naples  in 
virtue  of  the  treaty  of  Florence  ;  they  will  remain  there  as 
long  as  the  affairs  of  the  Levant  are  not  settled,  and  until 
England  has  evacuated  Malta,  and  Russia  Corfu.  .  .  . 
Let  your  Majesty  reject  the  perfidious  counsels  of  Eng- 
land. ..." 

To  the  queen  Napoleon  wrote — 

"  Madam, — Your  letter  has  been  handed  to  me  by  the 
Marquis  de  Gallo.  It  is  difficult  to  reconcile  the  sentiments 
it  contains  with  the  hostile  projects  current  at  Naples.  I 
have  in  my  hands  several  letters  written  by  your  Majesty 
which  leave  no  doubt  with  regard  to  your  secret  intentions. 
No  matter  what  the  hatred  which  your  Majesty  bears 
France,  after  the  experience  you  have  had  of  the  love  of 
your  husband,  of  your  children,  of  your  family,  and  of 
your  subjects,  how  comes  it  that  you  are  not  more  reserved, 
and  do  not  adopt  a  line  of  policy  more  in  conformity  with 
your  interests  .■'  Cannot  your  Majesty,  who  is  distin- 
guished among  women  for  your  wit,  divest  yourself  of 
the  prejudices  of  your  sex  .''  how  can  you  treat  the  affairs 
of  your  kingdom  as  love  affairs .''  You  have  lost  your 
kingdom  once  already ;  twice  you  have  been  the  cause  of 
a  war  which  threatened  the  total  destruction  of  your 
paternal  house  :  ^  you  wish  then  to  be  the  cause  of  a  third 
war  ?  Already  on  the  demand  of  your  ambassador  at  St. 
Petersburg  1 0,000  Russians  have  been  sent  to  Corfu. 
What !  Your  hatred,  is  it  so  implacable,  and  your  love  for 
England  so  ardent,  that  you  wish,  although  certain  to 
become  the  first  victim,  to  set  the  continent  in  a  blaze,  in 
'  That  of  Austria. 


THE    QUEEN    OF    NAPLES.  I  15 

order  to  operate  a  diversion  in  favour  of  England  ?  I 
acknowledge  that  I  should  conceive  some  esteem  for  such 
violent  passions  did  the  most  simple  ideas  of  common 
sense  not  make  me  feel  their  frivolity  and  impotence.  .  .  . 
Let  your  Majesty  patiently  listen  to  this  prophecy :  On  the 
occasion  of  the  first  war  you  cause,  you  and  your  posterity 
will  cease  to  reign,  and  your  children,  wandering  through 
the  different  countries  of  Europe,  will  demand  succour  for 
their  parents.  ...  I  have  no  intention  of  paying  court  to 
your  Majesty  in  this  letter  ;  that  would  be  disagreeable  to 
you.  However,  you  may  see  in  it  a  mark  of  my  esteem. 
It  is  only  to  a  person  possessed  of  a  force  of  character  far 
above  the  ordinary  run  that  I  should  give  myself  the 
trouble  of  writing  so  freely.  ..." 

And  her  Majesty  was  asked  to  dismiss  Mr.  Acton  her 
minister,  to  expel  Mr.  Elliot  the  British  ambassador,  and 
the  emigrh,  to  recall  her  ambassador  from  St.  Petersburg, 
and  to  disembody  the  militia  ! 

On  the  1 6th  January  Napoleon  forwarded  to  the 
Minister  of  Marine  his  ideas  on  the  subject  of  an  expedi- 
tion to  India.  He  proposed  to  attack  us  by  means  of 
three  squadrons,  consisting  of  twenty-eight  French  and 
five  Spanish  ships  of  the  line,  frigates,  &c.,  conveying 
20,000  French,  3,000  Spanish,  and  3,000  colonial  troops. 
He  was  convinced  that  the  various  princes  of  India  would 
throw  off  our  yoke,  and  that  he  would  be  able  to  regain  all 
that  Dupleix  and  Lally  had  lost. 

M.  Portalis  having  proposed  to  authorise  the  existence 
of  a  religious  association  at  Lyons  under  the  patronage  of 
Cardinal  Fesch — 

DECISION. 

"  Paris,  28M  January,  1805. 
"  I  will  have  no  ecclesiastical  associations  ;  they  are  not 
required.      Good  cm^es,  good   bishops,   good   priests,   and 
well-kept  seminaries,  are  all  that  are  necessary. 

"  Napoleon." 
I  2 


Il6     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Napoleon  would  have  no  Jesuits  in  France.  He  bore 
the  society  an  old  grudge.  Had  it  not  ruined  his  family 
in  Corsica .' 

To  THE  EMPEROR  OF  TURKEY. 

"  Paris,  30/,%  January,  1805. 

"Most    high,     most    excellent,    most    powerful,    most 

magnanimous  and   invincible    prince,   great   Emperor   of 

the    Mussulmans,    Sultan    Selim,    in    whom    honour    and 

virtue  abound,  our  very  dear  and  perfect  friend,  may  God 

augment    your   grandeur    and  r  accord    you  a  happy  end. 

Thou,  descendant  of  the  great  Ottomans,  emperor  of  one 

of  the  greatest  kingdoms  in  the  world,  hast  thou  ceased  to 

reign  .'     How  comes  it  that  you  permit  the  Russians  to 

dictate  to   you.?      If  the  Russians    have    15,000  men  at 

Corfu  they  do  not  threaten  me  ;  are  you  so  blind  as  not  to 

perceive  that  a  Russian  army,  favoured  by  the  Greeks,  will 

one  day  attack  your  xapital,  and  that   your  empire  will 

perish  with  you .''     Your  dynasty   will    descend    into   the 

night  of  oblivion.     The  reis  effendi  is  betraying  you  ;  half 

the   Divan  is  sold  to  Russia.  .  .  .  As  for  me,  I  desire  to 

be  your  friend.     If  you  persist  in  refusing  precedence  to 

France  at  Constantinople,  I  shall  turn  against  you,  and  I 

have  never  been  a  feeble  adversary.     Your  Divan  is  taking 

no  measures  to  re-establish  order  in  Egypt  and  Syria.  .  .  . 

I  write  to  you  because   you    are    the    only  friend  which 

France   has    preserved    in    the   seraglio.     Arouse   thyself, 

Selim  !     Form  a   ministry  among  your  friends,  and  drive 

out  the   traitors.     Confide  in   your   true    friends — France 

and    Prussia.  .  .  .  Your   real    enemies    are   the   Russians, 

because  they  wish  to  reign  in  the  Black  Sea.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  31st  January  Napoleon  wrote  to  Berthier,  giving 
orders  for  Marshals  Soult,  Davoust,  Jourdan,  Bernac^otte, 
Augereau,  and  General  Marmont  to  rejoin  their  respective 
corps,  for  war  was  becoming  more  and  more  imminent. 


LETTER    TO    THE    SHAH.  I  17 

On  the  1 6th  February  Napoleon  addressed  a  long  letter 
to  the  Shah  of  Persia,  in  which  he  said — 

"  Fame,  which  publishes  everything,  has  informed  you 
who  I  am  and  what  I  have  done  ;  how  I  have  raised 
France  above  all  the  nations  of  the  West,  and  in  what  a 
startling  manner  I  have  displayed  the  interest  I  feel  in  the 
kings  of  the  East." 

After  dipping  into  the  history  of  Persia,  praising  its 
climate,  the  fertility  of  its  soil,  the  talent  and  bravery  of 
its  inhabitants,  and  such  great  warriors  as  Nadir  and 
Mehemet  Shah,  the  Emperor  added — 

"  You  will  imitate  and  surpass  the  examples  they  have 
left  behind.  Like  them  you  will  distrust  the  counsels 
of  a  nation  of  shop-keepers,  who,  in  India,  traffic  the 
lives  and  crowns  of  sovereigns ;  and  you  will  oppose  the 
valour  of  your  people  to  the  incursions  of  the  Russians." 

And  in  conclusion  Napoleon  announced  the  despatch  of 
a  confidential  messenger  to  the  Shah. 


To  THE  PRINCE  REGENT  OF  PORTUGAL. 

"La  Malmaison,  February  iqth,  1805. 

"  The  present  letter  will  be  presented  to  your  royal 
highness  by  General  Junot,  my  ambassador.  I  have 
charged  him  specially  to  assure  you  of  the  interest  I  take 
in  the  welfare  of  Portugal,  and  the  hopes  I  entertain  that 
the  two  states  will  march  together  in  order  to  attain  that 
great  result,  the  equilibrium  of  the  seas,  threatened  by 
the  way  in  which  England  abuses  her  power,  and  by  her 
vexatious  conduct,  not  only  as  regards  Spain,  but  towards 
all  the  neutral  powers.  The  assurances  which  I  have 
received  from  your  royal  highness  are  a  certain  guarantee 
that  we  shall  come  to  an  understanding  in  order  to  inflict 
the  greatest  possible  damage  on  England,  and  to  force  her 
to  adopt  more  healthy  and  moderate  measures. 

"  Napoleon." 


Il8     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NArOLEON. 

On  the  2 1st  February  the  Emperor  having  received  a 
reply  from  the  Queen  of  Naples  wrote  once  more  a  long 
letter  to  her  Majesty  reiterating  his  previous  complaints, 
especially  concerning  those  Russian  troops  at  Corfu  (which 
threatened  not  him  but  the  Sultan).  In  this  strange 
epistle  Napoleon  said — 

"  A  direct  correspondence  with  your  Majesty  would  be 
agreeable  to  me  even  should  it  lead  to  nothing.  You 
must  pardon  me,  madame,  the  frankness  with  which  I 
shall  sometimes  be  obliged  to  write  to  you.  Your  am- 
bassador was  greatly  embarrassed  when  I  acquainted  him 
with  the  nature  of  the  documents  in  my  possession  which 
could  leave  no  doubt  with  regard  to  your  secret  sentiments 
a  few  months  ago.  But  God  forbid  that  I  should  think 
these  cannot  change !  The  affections  change,  and  common 
sense  and  the  rules  of  an  enlightened  policy  are  the  only 
things  which  never  change.  All  the  persons  who  arrive 
from  Naples  agree  that  your  Majesty  does  not  hide  your 
hatred  -towards  France.  .  .  .  All  that  M.  de  Gallo  says 
induces  me  to  believe  that  you  will  soon  entertain  dif- 
ferent feelings  towards  us,  and  when  I  can  boast  of  having 
brought  about  this  change  I  shall  feel  proud  of  the 
conquest." 

Napoleon  never  did  effect  the  conquest  of  the  spirited 
sister  of  the  unfortunate  Marie  Antoinette. 

On  the  23rd  of  February,  1805,  Napoleon  addressed 
several  pages  of  instruction  to  General  Junot,  who  was  to 
see  the  Prince  of  the  Peace  at  Madrid.  He  wrote  in  this 
manner — 

"You  will  inform  the  king  that  I  count  upon  all  the 
energy  of  Spain  to  enable  me  to  re-establish  the  equilib- 
rium of  the  seas  ;  that  I  am  too  well  acquainted  with  his 
elevated  character  to  doubt  that  he  will  use  every  effort  to 
avenge  Spanish  honour  so  violently  insulted.  You  will 
speak  to  the  queen  in  the  same  strain.  .  .  You  will  see  the 
Prince  of  the  Peace  several  times,  and  tell  him  that  I  have 
confidence  in  him  ;  that  I  have  seen  his  exhibition  of  energy 


PORTUGAL   THREATENED.  119 

with  pleasure ;  that  all  my  prejudices  with  regard  to  him 
have  disappeared,  &c.,  &c. 

"You  will  tell  the  Prince  of  the  Peace,  that  according  to 
your  instructions  you  are  to  employ  gentle  means  for  a 
fortnight,  but  that  should  Portugal  refuse  to  close  her  ports 
to  England  and  to  lay  an  embargo  on  English  merchandise, 
the  two  ambassadors  should  leave  Lisbon  simultaneously. 
War  will  be  immediately  declared  against  Portugal,  and 
the  property  belonging  to  Portugal  in  the  two  States  will 
be  confiscated.  In  this  case  I  will  furnish  all  the  troops 
Spain  may  require,  in  the  autumn,  and  we  will  seize  upon 
Portugal.  .  .  . 

"  You  will  tell  him  that  the  King  of  Prussia  has  sent  me 
twelve  grand  cordons  of  the  Prussian  eagle  to  distribute 
among  the  most  considerable  persons  in  France  ;  that  I 
should  see  with  pleasure  the  King  of  Spain,  on  his  own 
impulse  [!]  do  the  same  with  the  order  of  the  Golden 
Fleece.  .  .  .  You  will  give  him  to  understand  that  Beur- 
nonville  (the  French  ambassador  at  Madrid),  although  he 
enjoys  my  confidence  in  ordinary  matters,  does  not  enjoy 
it  in  private  affairs.  .  .  .  You  will  add  that  I  intend 
making  the  Prince  of  the  Peace  a  present  in  order  to  prove 
my  esteem,  but  that  I  shall  wait  until  the  Spanish  squadron 
has  done  something." 

During  the  first  months  of  1805  Napoleon  addressed 
frequent  despatches  to  his  minister  of  marine  and  to  his 
various  admirals  on  the  subject  of  putting  to  sea,  eluding 
the  vigilance  of  the  British  squadron,  forming  a  junction 
with  the  Spanish  fleet,  and,  by  means  of  skilful  combina- 
tions, destroying  our  naval  supremacy.  These  despatches, 
most  of  which  ran  to  a  considerable  length,  entered  into 
the  most  minute  details,  but  fortunately  Napoleon  had  no 
naval  commander  capable  of  carrying  out  the  vast  schemes 
intended  to  annihilate  our  sovereignty  of  the  seas.  The 
year  1805  witnessed  the  destruction  of  all  his  carefully 
elaborated  plans   of   invasion    and   naval   conquest,    and 


I20    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

settled  the  question  between  Mare  Clausum  and  Mare 
Liberuin,  not  in  favour  of  Grotius  but  in  favour  of 
Selden. 

To  M.  DE  CHAMPAGNY. 

"St.  Clovd,  gtk  Marc/i,  1805. 

"  A  great  many  persons  complain  that  classics  are  too 
dear.  It  would  be  well  to  appoint  a  commission  to  tax 
the  price  of  books  adopted  by  the  lyceums  at  so  much 
a  page. 

"  It  is  also  complained  that  as  the  shop-fronts  are  ad- 
vanced by  degrees,  so  the  stone  pillars  which  protected 
foot-passengers  against  carriages  have  become  useless.  It 
will  be  sufficient  to  have  these  placed  in  a  more  salient 
position.  «  Napoleon." 

In  some  of  the  old  streets  of  Paris  these  stone  pillars, 
intended  to  protect  foot-passengers,  may  still  be  seen,  and 
they  were  absolutely  necessary  before  the  introduction  of 
raised  sideways. 

On  the  17th  March  Napoleon,  who  had  a  month  pre- 
viously solemnly  declared  in  the  senate  that  he  had  no 
intention  of  incorporating  any  more  territory,  wrote  to  the 
Emperor  of  Austria  on  the  subject  of  Italy,  saying — 

"  I  had  the  very  natural  desire  of  relieving  myself  of  so 
weighty  a  burden.  But  the  Government  of  the  Italian 
Republic  considers  that  as  long  as  there  are  Russian 
troops  at  Corfu  and  English  troops  at  Malta  the  separation 
of  the  crowns  of  France  and  Italy  is  illusory,  for  there  can 
be  no  separation  of  crowns  wherever  there  is  any  army 
belonging  to  one  of  those  crowns.  There  is  no  possibility 
of  the  French  army  evacuating  the  territory  of  the  Italian 
Republic  before  the  affairs  of  the  Levant  are  settled." 

And  Napoleon  went  on  to  promise  that  as  soon  as  Corfu 
and  Malta  were  evacuated,  the  crowns  of  France  and  Italy 
would  be  separated. 

The  fact  was  that  he  had  offered  the  crown  of  Italy  to 
his   brother   Joseph,   on  condition  of  his   renouncing   all 


THE    LAW    OF    DIVORCE,  121 

claims  to  the  throne  of  France  ;  but,  contrary  to  the  advice 
of  his  friends,  Joseph  had  refused.  Napoleon  then  pro- 
posed to  settle  the  crown  of  Italy  on  the  eldest  son  of 
Louis,  concerning  whose  birth  there  were  such  strange 
rumours,  Louis  to  govern  the  country  until  his  son  came  of 
age.  This  arrangement  was  indignantly  rejected  by  the 
future  King  of  Holland,  who  was  well  aware  what  a 
scandal  would  ensue  and  how  evil  tongues  would  wag. 
Napoleon  was  so  angry  at  thus  being  thwarted  by  his 
brothers  that  he  took  Louis  by  the  shoulders  and  flung 
him  out  of  the  room.  Finally  he  determined  to  assume 
the  Iron  Crown  himself,  and  to  make  Eugene  Beauharnais 
his  viceroy  in  Italy. 

REPLY  TRANSMITTED  BY  THE  EMPEROR  TO  HIS 
HOLINESS  THE  POPE. 

"  La  Malmaison,  list  March,  1805. 

"Your  Holiness  declares  that  the  dispositions  of  the 
civil  code  on  the  question  of  divorce  are  not  in  har- 
mony with  the  religious  dogma  concerning  the  indissolu- 
bility of  marriage,  and  you  desire  a  change  to  be  made  in 
this  portion  of  French  legislation. 

"  The  civil  code  could  not  proscribe  divorce  in  a  country 
which  tolerates  religions  which  admit  of  it.  Besides,  it 
would  hardly  have  been  wise  suddenly  to  change  a  juris- 
prudence which  fifteen  years  of  revolution  has  naturalised 
in  France,  when  the  new  civil  code  was  drawn  up." 

This  reply,  which  extends  over  several  pages  and  re- 
capitulates all  that  Napoleon  had  done  for  the  Church, 
also  contains  such  paragraphs  as  these  : — 

"  It  is  the  intention  of  his  Majesty  that  no  married  eccle- 
siastics shall  be  employed  in  public  instruction,  nor  any 
priest  who  is  not  in  communion  with  his  bishop.  .  .  ." 

"  The  reconciliation  of  the  constitutional  bishops  with 
your  Holiness  having  been  effected,"  &c. 

His  Majesty  would  not  consent  to  the  re-establishment 


122     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

of  religious  ordei's  of  men  ;  but  he  "  hastened  to  re- 
estabhsh  the  sisters  of  charity  and  saurs  hospilalihes, 
devoted  to  the  service  of  the  sick  and  to  the  education  of 
poor  girls.  As  a  sign  of  "his  peculiar  protection  he  named 
Madame  (the  mother  of  the  emperor),  the  protectress  of 
these  establishments  so  useful  to  humanity.  .  .  ." 

"  Your  Holiness  demands  that  the  Catholic  religion  be 
declared  dominant  in  France.  It  is  dominant  de  facto, 
because  it  is  the  religion  professed  by  his  Majesty,  by  all 
the  members  of  the  Imperial  family,  and  by  the  large 
majority  of  Frenchmen.  .  .  . 

"  Circumstances  have  not  permitted  his  Majesty  to 
maintain  the  various  colleges  and  seminaries  founded  in 
France  for  the  benefit  of  Irish  Catholics.  None  of  these 
establishments  could  maintain  themselves,  as,  during  the 
Revolution,  all  lost  considerable  resources." 

It  may  be  easily  imagined  how  dissatisfied  the  Holy  See 
was  with  a  reply  which  eluded  all  its  demands,  and  which 
recognised  divorce,  and  those  constitutional  bishops  more 
hateful  to  Rome  than  the  disciples  of  Luther  and  Calvin. 

The  Elector  of  Baden  having  demanded  the  maintenance 
of  his  principality  in  Germany — 

DECISION. 

"Paris,  24^/2  March,  1805. 
"  Referred  to  M.  Talleyrand.     I  desire  M.  Talleyrand 
will  write   to  M.   Laforest   at   Berlin    to  make  overtures 
on  this  subject,  which  must  be  kept  secret  in  consequence 
of  Russia. 

"  Napoleon." 

The  Elector  had  expressed  himself  satisfied  with  the 
explanations  given  with  regard  to  the  arrest  of  the  Due 
d'Enghien  on  his  territory,  and  now  asked  for  his  reward. 

The  inhabitants  of  the  quarter  of  the  Petits  P^res 
having  asked  that  the  church  of  that  name  should  be 
restored  to  its  primitive  destination — 


FRANCE   AND    PERSIA.  1 23 

DECISION. 

"  St.  Cloud,  i-jth  March,  1805. 
"Referred  to  the  Minister  of  Finance.  I  desire  that 
this  church  be  restored  for  the  purpose  of  public  worship, 
and  that  the  Bourse  be  held  in  a  theatre.  There  are 
several  vacant,  and  every  one  will  gain  by  the  arrange- 
"lent.  «  Napoleon." 

The  money-changers  driven  out  of  the  temple  by 
Napoleon,  took  refuge  in  the  Palais  Royal.  The  present 
Bourse  commenced  by  the  Emperor  in  1808,  was  not 
finished  until  1826. 

On  the  30th  March,  Napoleon  again  addressed  the  Shah. 
He  said,  among  other  things — "  One  must  allow  oneself  to 
be  guided  by  the  inspirations  of  Heaven,  which  has  estab- 
lished princes  in  order  to  render  people  happy  ;  and  when, 
from  century  to  century,  it  causes  some  great  men  to 
appear,  it  imposes  upon  them  the  obligation  of  dissemin- 
ating themselves  so  that  the  joint  action  of  their  designs 
may  give  greater  splendour  to  their  glory,  and  greater 
force  to  their  desire  to  do  good. 

"What  other  object  can  we  have  .''  Persia  is  the  most 
noble  country  in  Asia  ;  France  is  the  first  empire  of  the 
West.  Reign  over  the  inhabitants  of  countries  which 
nature  has  been  pleased  to  embellish,  and  to  enrich  with 
abundant  productions  ;  command  the  industrious,  talented, 
and  brave  men  who  inhabit  them.  Is  not  this  the  finest 
of  all  destinies  .■' 

"  But  there  are  upon  the  earth  empires  where  nature 
has  been  sterile  and  harsh,  and  which  produce  only  with 
regret  what  is  necessary  for  existence.  In  these  countries 
men  are  born  restless,  greedy,  envious  ;  and  woe  to  the 
countries  which  Heaven  favours,  if,  in  loading  them  with 
bounties,  it  does  not  accord  them  vigilant  and  courageous 
princes  capable  of  defending  them  against  the  enterprises 
of  ambition,  of  rapacity,  and  of  misery ! 


124     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

"  The  Russians,  fretting  in  their  deserts,  encroach  upon 
the  most  fertile  portions  of  the  Ottoman  Empire  ;  the 
English,  shut  up  in  an  island,  which  is  not  worth  the 
smallest  province  of  your  empire,  excited  by  the  thirst  of 
wealth,  have  established  a  power  in  India  which  becomes 
every  day  more  formidable." 

And  Napoleon  finally  announced  that  General  Romien 
was  the  bearer  of  this  missive,  which  strongly  recom- 
mended the  Shah  to  form  a  well-drilled  army,  to  cast  guns, 
to  make  muskets,  to  construct  forts,  and  to  build  a  fleet 
for  the  Caspian  Sea.  General  Romien  would  aid  him  in 
these  matters. 

To  M.  TALLEYRAND. 

"  Chalon-sur-Saone,  ']th  April,  1805. 
"...  I  beg  you  will  inform  M.  de  Moustier  that  I  can- 
not conceive  how  a  man  of  so  much  judgment  allows 
30,000  Russians  to  alarm  him  for  Prussia  which  has 
300,000  men.  The  artillery,  cavalry,  and  officers  of  the 
Prussian  army  are  worth  thirty  times  those  of  Russia.   .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

Napoleon  was  now  on  his  road  to  Italy  to  get  crowned, 
and  to  divert  the  attention  of  Europe  from  the  camp  at 
Boulogne,  and  his  war-like  armaments. 

To  GENERAL  MARMONT. 

"  Lyons,  \ith  April,  1805. 
"  Your  courier  has  informed  me  of  the  capture  of 
Dominica.  .  .  .  My  Toulon  squadron  sailed  on  the  9th 
(Germinal),  or  thirteen  days  ago,  and  I  have  no  news  of 
it.  It  had  a  division  on  board  under  the  command  of 
Lauriston.  The  English  are  in  a  bad  way  in  India. 
Decaen  has  sent  several  batteries  of  light  artillery  and 
staff  and  engineer  officers  to  the  Mahrattas.  .  .  .  An 
expedition   to  Walcheren  is  absurd.  ...  I  shall   always 


JEROME    AND    HIS    WIFE.  1 25 

repent  having  listened  in  the  year  XI.  to  General  Monnet, 
and  having  lost  a  number  of  men  by  sickness.  Do  not 
keep  any  French  troops  in  the  Isle  of  Walcheren. 

"  Napoleon." 

The  ulterior  intentions  of  Sweden  being  suspected,  an 
embargo  was  laid  upon  some  Swedish  vessels  lying  in 
French  ports.  In  a  letter  to  Decr^s,  Napoleon  wrote — 
"The  negotiation  of  a  treaty  of  subsidies  is  a  commence- 
ment of  hostilities."  This  being  the  opinion  of  the 
Emperor,  he  was  not  justified  in  loading  us  with  invectives 
for  declaring  war  against  Spain. 

During  the  period  that  Napoleon  passed  at  Lyons  he 
kept  an  anxious  eye  on  the  doings  of  his  admirals,  and 
mentioned  more  than  once  the  hope  that  shortly  after  his 
return  to  Boulogne  a  combined  French  and  Spanish  fleet 
of  fifty  sail  of  the  line  would  make  its  apparition  and  give 
him  for  a  time  the  mastery  of  the  Channel.  From  Lyons, 
Napoleon  went  to  Chambery  and  from  thence  to  Turin, 
where  he  learned  that  Villeneuve  had  managed  to  elude 
the  vigilance  of  Nelson,  and  to  sail  for  the  West  Indies. 

On  the  23rd  April,  Napoleon  informed  the  Minister  of 
Marine  that  M.  Jerome  had  arrived  at  Lisbon  with  Mdlle. 
Paterson,  his  mistress,  but  that  she  was  not  to  be  allowed 
to  land  in  France  or  in  Holland.  To  Fouche  the  Emperor 
wrote  that  he  had  ordered  M.  Jerome  to  meet  him  at 
Turin  ;  he  was  to  travel  by  Perpignan,  Toulouse,  Grenoble, 
&c.,  and  if  he  deviated  from  the  road  he  was  to  be  arrested 
and  conveyed  to  Milan  by  the  gendarmerie. 

Poor  Jerome,  who  was  considered  a  sad  pickle  by  his 
Imperial  brother,  had  experienced  the  greatest  difficulty 
in  returning  to  Europe  with  his  American  wife.  Two 
frigates,  the  Didon  and  the  Cybele,  had  been  sent  across 
the  Atlantic  to  bring  him  home,  and  after  much  hesitation 
he  embarked  on  board  the  former.  However,  he  had 
hardly  got  out  of  New  York  bay  when  the  Cambrian  and 
Boston  obliged  him  to  put  back.     After  waiting  for  some 


126     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

time,  M.  Jerome  chartered  a  private  vessel,  and  once  more 
put  to  sea  with  his  bride,  but  alas  !  they  were  cast  ashore 
in  Delaware  Bay.  They  next  tried  the  Presidente,  which 
had  taken  the  French  ambassador  out  to  the  States,  but 
H.M.S.  Resolution  barred  the  way,  and  the  French  captain, 
who,  much  to  the  wrath  and  humiliation  of  Jerome, 
declined  battle,  put  back  into  harbour.  The  fact  is,  that  a 
very  sharp  look-out  was  kept  in  the  hope  of  catching  the 
young  gentleman,  as  one  may  guess  from  the  following 
letter  written  by  Nelson  to  the  Right  Honourable  Henry 
Addington : — 

'"  Amphion,'  Gibraltar,  June  ^th,  1803. 

"  My  DEAR  Sir, — We  arrived  here  last  night.  Bona- 
parte's brother,  Jerome,  passed  from  Martinique  a  few  days 
ago  in  a  ship  of  the  line.  It  would  have  been  pleasant 
to  have  laid  a  little  salt  on  his  tail,  but  I  hope  to  do 
it  yet." 

However,  Jerome  and  his  bride  eventually  managed  to 
reach  Lisbon  safely  on  board  the  Yankee  brig  Erin,  but 
Jerome  alone  was  allowed  to  land.  We  shall  have  to 
refer  to  this  marriage,  which  was  fraught  with  serious 
political  consequences,  further  on. 

To  VICE-ADMIRAL  DECRfeS. 

"Stupinigi,  21  th  April,  1805. 

"  I  forward  you  a  report  concerning  Creusot.  It  is 
essential  to  keep  up  this  establishment.  It  will  not  be 
well  to  purchase  it ;  but  I  think  it  will  be  useful  to  give  a 
fixed  amount  of  orders,  so  that  it  may  have  a  basis  of 
operations,  and  be  able  to  support  itself 

"  Napoleon." 

The  world-famed  works  of  Creusot  therefore  owed  at 
their  birth  a  debt  of  gratitude  to  a  paternal  government. 


LIBERTY    OF   THE    PRESS.  127 

To  M.  FOUCH]^. 

"Stupinigi,  iZth  April,  1805. 

"  The  newspaper  reforms  will  soon  take  place,  for  it  is 
too  stupid  to  have  journals  which  represent  all  the  incon- 
veniences of  the  liberty  of  the  press  without  its  advan- 
tages, and  which  by  malevolence  or  incapacity  spread 
reports  calculated  to  alarm  commerce,  and  always  in  a 
sense  favourable  to  England.  .  .  .  The  editors  shall  not 
be  allowed  to  enjoy  good  revenues  for  rendering  me  no 
service,  but  on  the  contrary  for  injuring  me-.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

The  Debats  was  supplied  with  a  Government  inspector, 
to  whom  it  had  to  pay  40/.  a  month  ! 

On  the  6th  May,  Napoleon,  who  had  removed  to  Ales- 
sandria, wrote  to  Cambac^r^s  to  know  what  steps  it  would 
be  necessary  to  take  in  order  to  annul  his  brother  Jerome's 
marriage.  Jerome  himself  had  arrived  at  Alessandria,  but 
it  was  some  days  before  he  was  received  into  the  Imperial 
presence.  Unable  to  resist  his  powerful  brother,  he  con- 
sented to  repudiate  Miss  Paterson,  who  shortly  afterwards 
landed  at  Dover.  To  his  sister  Eliza  Baciocchi,  who  had 
recently  been  made  Grand  Duchess  of  Tuscany,  Napoleon 
wrote — 

"Alessandria,  bth  May,  1805. 

"  My  Sister, — M.  Jerome  has  arrived.  I  am  satisfied 
with  his  sentiments.  His  secretary,  who  is  at  Milan,  is 
about  to  repair  to  Miss  Paterson  to  tell  her  how  matters 
stand,  and  to  make  her  feel  that  her  marriage,  null  in  the 
eyes  of  religion  and  of  the  law,  should  be  so  in  her  eyes 
also.  Speak  to  M.  Lecamus  (the  secretary)  and  write  to 
M.  Jerome  in  the  same  sense.  Impress  upon  him  the  neces- 
sity of  adhering  to  his  promises,  for  it  is  on  this  condition 
alone  that  I  shall  restore  him  my  friendship. 

"  Napoleon." 


128     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

On  the  9th  May  Napoleon  addressed  a  long  letter  to  the 
King  of  Prussia,  sending,  at  his  request,  passports  for  a 
Russian  envoy.  At  the  same  time  he  expressed  but  little 
confidence  in  the  success  of  negotiations  with  St.  Peters- 
burg, for  "  the  Worouzoffs  are  sold  to  England,  and  the 
character  of  the  Emperor  Alexander  is  too  fickle  and  too 
feeble  to  hope  that  any  good  will  result." 

Towards  the  close  of  this  letter,  which  was  exceedingly 
vague,  the  French  Emperor  said — 

"  Sir,  my  Brother, — I  desire  peace,  but  I  cannot  submit 
to  my  people  being  cut  off  from  the  commerce  of  the 
world.  I  have  no  ambition.  I  have  twice,  without  being 
constrained,  evacuated  the  third   of  Europe.  .  .  ." 

Direct  diplomatic  relations  had  not  been  re-established 
with  Russia  since  the  death  of  the  Due  d'Enghien,  but  as 
the  Emperor  Alexander  was  anxious  that  peace  should  not 
be  broken  he  sent  M.  Novosiltzoff,  who  had  already  sub- 
mitted a  plan  of  mediation  to  Pitt,  on  a  mission  to  Paris. 
This  messenger  of  peace  did  not,  however,  get  further  than 
Berlin.  Napoleon  did  not  absolutely  refuse  him  a  pass- 
port, but  said  that  he  must  wait  two  months  for  it ;  long 
before  that  delay  had  expired  fresh  aggressions  on  the 
part  of  the  French  Emperor  led  Alexander  to  recall  his 
ambassador,  and  to  join  the  third  coalition. 

On  the  13th  May  the  Emperor  wrote  from  Milan  to 
M.  Schimmelpennick,  praising  the  energy  of  his  most 
faithful  ally,  the  King  of  Spain,  asking  the  Grand 
Pensioner  of  Holland  to  increase  his  Texel  fleet,  and 
saying — 

"  It  is  scandalous  that  five  vessels  and  several  frigates 
which  you  have  on  the  Indian  station  have  inflicted  no 
damage  on  the  English,  while  the  cruisers  we  have  in 
those  seas,  fewer  in  number,  have  played  havoc  with 
their  commerce." 


GENERAL    PERRON.  I  29 

To  M.  CAMBAC^RES. 

"  Milan,  i^ik  May,  1805. 
"  I  am  not  of  your  opinion  as  concerns  Jerome.  If  he 
had  been  married  in  France  before  the  civil  authorities  a 
judicial  decision  would  be  necessary.  But  married  abroad, 
his  contract  not  having  been  inscribed  upon  any  register,  a 
minor,  without  publication  of  banns,  there  was  no  more  of 
a  marriage  than  between,  two  lovers  united  in  a  garden, 
upon  the  altar  of  love,  in  presence  of  the  moon  and  the 
stars,  .  .  .  The  Pope  believed  there  was  a  religious  mar- 
riage, but  he  is  now  convinced  of  his  error.  I  have  sent 
the  young  lady  back,  and  I  am  satisfied  with  the  young 
man,  who  has  talent,  who  knows  that  he  has  committed  a 

folly,  and  wishes  to  repair  it. 

"  Napoleon." 

The  Fope  was  convinced  that  the  marriage  was  valid, 
and  adhered  to  this  opinion,  in  spite  of  threats  and  per- 
secution, to  the  intense  anger  of  Napoleon. 

To  M.  FOUCH^. 

"Milan,  19M  May,  1805. 

"Let  me  know  the  destination  of  the   500,000  francs 

which  General  Perron  sent  to  France.  .  .  .     Let  him  be 

informed  that  he   will  be   well  received  in   France.  .  .  . 

I  am  not  in  a  position  to  judge  whether  he  was  right  or 

wrong  in  abandoning  Scindia.  ...     I  shall  see  him  with 

pleasure  transport  his  fortune  and  his  information  to  this 

country. 

"  Napoleon." 

Perron  was  an  accomplished  soldier,  whose  career,  traced 
by  Colonel  Malleson  in  his  Final  French  Struggles  in 
India,  was  cut  short  by  Lord  Lake,  to  whom  he  surren- 
dered at  the  close  of  the  year  1803.  He  had  brought 
Daolat   Rao's  army  to   a   very   high   state   of  efficiency. 

VOL.  II.  ^ 


130     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

According  to  the  Annual  Register  Lord  Lake  marched 
414  miles  in  eighteen  days,  his  force  doing  seventy  miles 
without  resting  and  surprising  Rao's  army.  Perron, 
although  taken  prisoner,  was  not  despoiled ;  he  managed 
to  return  home  with  400,000/.,  and  to  marry  one  of  his 
daughters  to  a  De  la  Rochefoucauld,  and  the  other  to  a 
Montesquiou. 

On  the  24th  May  the  Emperor  wrote  to  the  Pope, 
congratulating  him  on  his  health  and  his  safe  arrival  at 
Rome,  saying  that  he  had  given  orders  for  the  execution 
of  the  Concordat,  announcing  that  he  was  going  to  be 
crowned  on  Sunday,  and  talking  of  a  balloon  which,  sent 
up  in  Paris  on  the  day  of  his  coronation,  alighted  at  Rome. 
Napoleon  added : — 

"I  have  several  times  spoken  to  your  Holiness  of  a 
young  brother  of  nineteen  years  old  whom  I  sent  out  on 
board  a  frigate  to  America,  and  who,  after  a  month's  stay 
at  Baltimore,  married  a  Protestant,  the  daughter  of  a 
merchant  of  that  city.  This  young  man  has  just  returned 
home.  He  is  aware  of  his  fault.  I  have  sent  back  Made- 
moiselle Paterson,  his  soi-disant  wife,  to  America.  The 
marriage  is  null.  A  Spanish  priest  was  sufficiently  obli- 
vious of  his  duties  as  to  give  them  his  benediction.  I 
desire  a  Bull  from  your  Holiness  which  shall  efface  all 
trace  of  this  marriage.  I  forward  to  you  several  opinions 
on  the  subject,  one  of  which  is  by  Cardinal  Caselli,  whose 
handwriting  you  will  recognise.  It  would  be  easy  for  me 
to  have  the  marriage  broken  by  the  Archbishop  of  Paris, 
the  Gallican  Church  not  recognising  such  unions  ;  but  it 
appears  to  me  more  suitable  that  the  immediate  inter- 
vention of  your  Holiness  should  give  a  greater  importance 
to  this  affair,  if  only  because  it  concerns  the  member  of  a 
reigning  house.  I  beg  your  Holiness  not  to  give  publicity 
to  this  first  communication,  because  before  you  have 
agreed  to  it  I  shall  make  no  public  demand.  It  is  im- 
portant for  many  reasons,  and  in  the  interest  of  religion 


ENGLISH    AND   RUSSIAN   ALLIANCE.  131 

in  France,  that  I  should  not  have  a  Protestant  woman 
about  me,  and  it  would  be  a  dangerous  example  if  a  minor 
should  be  exposed  to  seductions  which  are  at  variance 
with  the  civil  laws  and  all  kinds  of  propriety. 

"  Napoleon." 

There  were  several  mis-statements  in  this  letter.  For 
example,  Jerome  had  not  been  married  by  some  obscure 
Spanish  priest,  but  by  the  Roman  Catholic  Primate  of  the 
United  States.  However,  the  Pope  was  intimately  ac- 
quainted with  all  the  details  of  the  case,  and  would  never 
lend  himself  to  a  divorce. 

To  M.  FOUCHE. 

"  Milan,  26M  May,  1805. 
"  Have  several  letters  printed  in  the  papers,  as  if  from 
St.  Petersburg,  declaring  that  the  French  are  much  better 
treated  ;  that  court  and  town  feel  the  necessity  of  making 
friends  with  us  ;  that  all  are  persuaded  English  avidity  is 
the  real  cause  of  the  war  ;  that  the  English  are  unpopular  ; 
that  their  scheme  of  a  coalition  has  broken  down  ;  that  at 
all  events  Russia  will  not  stir  ;  that  she  is  too  far  off  to 
meddle  on  her  own  account  in  an  effective  and  direct 
manner.  <<  NAPOLEON." 

To  PRINCE  MURAT. 

"  Milan,  2.6th  May,  1805. 

"  Sir,  my  Brother-in-law  and  Cousin, — What  you 
write  to  me  concerning  the  conclusion  of  a  treaty  of  alliance 
between  England  and  Russia  is  nonsense ;  it  is  entirely 
false.  These  reports,  spread  by  the  English  so  that  they 
may  for  the  moment  escape  from  their  difficulties,  are 
unfounded.  « NAPOLEON." 

The  Emperor  was  perfectly  well  aware  of  the  truth  of 
these  reports,  but  the  country  was  already  sufficiently 
alarmed. 

K  2 


132  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  M.  CAMBAC^RES. 

"  Milan,  Tjth  May,  1805. 
"  The  coronation  took  place  yesterday  with  pomp.  The 
church  was  splendid.  The  ceremony  passed  off  as  well  as 
that  in  Paris,  with  this  difference,  that  the  weather  was 
superb.  In  taking  the  iron  crown  and  placing  it  on  my 
head,  I  added  these  words  :  '  God  gives  it  to  me  ;  woe  to 
whoever  touches  it ! '     I  hope  this  will  be  a  prophecy. 

"  Napoleon." 

If  the  weather  proved  fine,  there  were  two  elements 
wanting  at  Milan  which  had  greatly  added  to  the  lustre 
of  the  ceremony  in  Notre  Dame.  Napoleon  was  crowned 
without  Josephine,  and  the  Pope  had  refused  to  be  present. 
Josephine  was  present  in  the  cathedral,  but  took  no  part  in 
the  ceremony.  As  for  his  Holiness,  he  was  still  smarting 
under  the  ill-treatment  he  had  experienced  in  France,  and 
was  slowly  wending  his  way  back  to  the  eternal  city  a 
sadder  and  a  wiser  man.  All  his  illusions  had  been  dis- 
pelled, all  his  sacrifices  had  been  made  in  vain,  he  had  met 
with  nothing  but  harshness  and  ingratitude  at  the  hands  of 
the  new  Charlemagne  whom  he  had  consented  to  crown. 
By  the  Concordat  and  the  voyage  to  Paris  he  had  hoped 
to  derive  serious  benefits.  In  her  attempts  to  gain  the 
protection  of  Napoleon,  the  Church,  as  Lanfrey  remarks, 
had  adopted  for  motto  :  Omnia  serviliter  pro  dominatione. 
The  reward  of  all  her  condescension  had  been  humiliation 
and  shame.  The  court  of  Rome  had  been  obliged  to  give 
up  M.  de  Vernegues  ;  the  constitutional  clergy  had  not 
been  obliged  to  retract ;  it  saw  French  bishops  employed 
like  functionaries,  sometimes  aiding  the  civil  power  in 
carrying  out  the  laws  of  the  conscription,  sometimes  de- 
nouncing or  playing  the  spy  on  political  conspirators,  so 
that  Fouch6  was  able  to  write  in  a  circular  to  the  bishops : 
"  Between  your  function  and  mine  there  is  more  than  one 
point  of  resemblance."  It  saw  liberty  of  worship  estab- 
lished in  France  in  spite  of  the  remonstrances  of  Consalvi, 


THE    ISLE    OF    ELBA.  1 33 

who  urged  that  "  a  Catholic  cannot  protect  false  doctrines, 
the  essence  of  the  Catholic  religion  being  intolerance." 
The  Pope  had  hoped  to  obtain  from  his  powerful  friend 
not  only  spiritual  concessions,  but  the  restoration  of  the 
legations  and  of  Avignon  and  Carpentras.  No  wonder 
that  he  left  Paris  with  an  ulcerated  heart.  What  advan- 
tages had  he  obtained  ?  He  had  forced  Napoleon,  on  pain 
of  not  being  present  at  the  coronation,  to  consent  to 
marrying  Josephine  at  the  altar,  had  persuaded  him  to 
adopt  the  Gregorian  calendar,  and  had  not  been  obliged 
to  receive  Madame  de  Talleyrand. 

To  M.  BARBE-MARBOIS. 

"  Milan,  2yiA  May,  1805. 
"  The  Isle  of  Elba  should  have  yielded  500,000  francs 
for  the  years  X.,  XI.,  XII.,  and  XIII.  It  appears  that  it 
only  paid  80,000  francs  in  the  year  XII.,  and  65,000  francs 
for  the  year  XIII.  My  intention  is  that  you  take  im- 
mediate steps  to  enforce  payment.  The  isle  is  not 
blockaded.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  M.  CAMBACERfeS. 

"  Milan,  29/^  May,  1805. 
"  The  people  of  Genoa  appear  to  desire  their  union  to 
France.  The  advantages  of  this  union,  and  circumstances, 
are  such  as  to  induce  me  to  pay  no  attention  to  the 
blustering  of  a  few  Powers.  In  fact,  this  can  excite  the 
animadversion  of  England  alone. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  M.  FOUCH^. 

"  Milan,  29^  May,  1805. 
"  I   have   already   told   you   that    the   treaty   between 
England  and  Russia  was  false  {sic).     It  is  a  ruse  of  the 
English  cabinet;  these  intrigues  have   completely  failed. 


134     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Even  were  you  to  see  this  treaty  published  in  the  English 
gazettes,  and  Pitt  announce  it  to  Parliament,  you  may  say 
it  is  untrue. 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  1st  June,  Napoleon,  in  a  letter  to  Fouch^, 
propounded  his  ideas  concerning  the  press.     He  said  : — 

"  I  should  like  to  have  an  organisation  without  censor- 
ship, but  I  do  not  wish  to  be  held  responsible  for  all  they 
say.  I  should  like  the  editors  of  the  journals  allowed  to 
exist,  to  be  devoted  men,  with  sufficient  sense  not  to 
publish  news  detrimental  to  the  nation.  These  journals 
should  direct  their  attacks  against  English  manners, 
customs,  literature,  &c.  Geoffroi  is  recommendable  from 
this  point  of  view  only,  and  Voltaire,  by  preaching  Anglo- 
mania, did  us  infinite  harm.  .  .  ." 

When  at  St.  Helena,  Napoleon  studied  English  with  the 
view  of  making  himself  acquainted  with  our  literature. 

To  M.  DE  TALLEYRAND. 

"  Milan,  dth  June,  1805. 
"  As  nothing  would  give  me  a  better  idea  of  the  exact 
feeling  of  the  court  of  Vienna  than  a  negotiation  with  the 
view  of  exchanging  a  certain  number  of  cordons  of  the 
Legion  of  Honour  against  Austrian  cordons,  write  to 
M.  de  la  Rochefoucauld  to  tell  M.  de  Cobentzel  that 
during  my  sojourn  at  Milan  I  have  received  the  cordons 
of  Prussian,  Bavarian,  and  Portuguese  orders,  and  that 
not  seeing  any  reason  to  make  an  exception,  which  would 
be  a  symptom  of  coolness,  I  am  disposed  to  propose  an 
exchange  with  Austria.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  7th  May  Napoleon  issued  a  decree  appointing 
Eugene  Beauharnais  Viceroy  of  Italy,  to  whom  he  gave 
voluminous  instructions,  from  which  we  detach  the  follow- 
ing paragraphs :—"  As    you   are    not   of    an    age    to    be 


INSTRUCTIONS    TO   PRINCE   EUGENE.  1 35 

acquainted  with  the  perversity  of  the  human  heart,  we 
cannot  recommend  too  much  prudence  and  circumspec- 
tion. Our  subjects  in  Italy  are  natui'ally  more  false  than 
the  citizens  of  France.  The  only  means  you  have  of 
preserving  their  esteem,  and  of  being  useful  to  their 
happiness,  will  be  by  not  according  your  entire  confidence 
to  any  one.  .  .  .  Dissimulation,  natural  at  a  certain  age, 
is  for  you  a  matter  of  principle.  When  you  have  spoken 
according  to  your  heart  and  without  necessity,  say  that 
you  have  committed  a  fault,  and  do  not  fall  again  into  the 
same  error.  Show  the  nation  over  which  you  rule  all  the 
more  esteem  on  discovering  motives  for  esteeming  it  less. 
A  time  will  come  when  you  will  perceive  little  difference 
between  one  nation  and  another.  .  .  .  Speak  as  little  as 
possible,  for  your  education  has  not  been  sufficiently 
cared  for  to  allow  you  to  indulge  in  discussions.  Know 
how  to  listen,  and  be  sure  that  silence  has  often  the  same 
effect  as  science.  .  .  .  Do  not  accord  any  confidence  to 
spies ;  there  is  more  inconvenience  than  advantage  in 
having  them,"  &c.  &c. 

In  fact,  his  Majesty  might  have  recommended  to  his 
viceroy  the  device  qui  nescit  dissimulare  nescit  regnm'e. 

Hardly  a  day  passed  without  long  despatches  and  orders 
being  sent  to  the  Minister  of  Marine  on  the  subject  of 
Villeneuve,  Missiessy,  Ganteaume,  the  Dutch  and  Spanish 
fleets,  Nelson,  Cornwallis,  Cochrane,  Calder,  &c. 

On  the  9th  June,  Napoleon,  after  indulging  in  many 
speculations,  said  : — "  If  England  is  aware  of  the  serious 
game  she  is  playing,  she  will  raise  the  blockade  of  Brest ; 
but  I  know  not,  in  truth,  what  kind  of  precaution  will  pro- 
tect her  from  the  terrible  chance  she  runs.  A  nation  is 
very  foolish  when  it  has  no  fortifications  and  no  army  to 
lay  itself  open  to  seeing  an  army  of  100,000  veteran  troops 
land  on  its  shores.  This  is  the  masterpiece  of  the  flotilla  1 
It  costs  a  great  deal  of  money,  but  it  is  necessary  for  us  to 
be  masters  of  the  sea  for  six  hours  only,  and  England  will 
have  ceased  to  exist.      There  is  not  a  fisherman,  not  a 


136     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

miserable  journalist,  not  a  woman  at  her  toilette,  who  does 
not  know  that  it  is  impossible  to  prevent  a  light  squadron 
appearing  before  Boulogne.  .  .  ." 

We  see  by  a  letter  of  the  13th  June  that  Napoleon 
thought  Nelson  had  sailed  not  to  the  West  but  to  the 
East  Indies. 

On  the  14th  June  Napoleon  wrote  to  M.  Champagny, 
who,  with  M.  Jerome  Bonaparte,  was  blockaded  by  the 
English  at  Genoa,  that  the  Baron  de  Giusti  could  stay  or 
could  leave  that  place  just  as  he  liked.  The  country  being 
French,  his  mission  was  finished.  The  union  of  Genoa  to 
France,  added  Napoleon,  did  no  harm  to  Germany,  but 
only  to  England  ;  but  if  Austria  was  in  quest  of  a  pretext 
for  declaring  war,  she  might  make  use  of  this. 

This  seizure  of  Genoa  proved  the  feather  which  broke 
the  camel's  back,  and  it  was  as  highly  resented  at  St. 
Petersburg  as  at  Vienna,  and  in  fact  by  all  the  members  of 
the  coalition. 

Before  leaving  Italy,  Napoleon  was  intent  upon  arrang- 
ing the  affairs  of  his  new  kingdom,  and  instructing  his 
youthful  viceroy,  who  was  only  twenty-three  years  of  age, 
in  the  art  of  governing.  On  the  19th  of  June  he  wrote  no 
less  than  seven  letters  to  "  his  cousin  "  upon  various  topics. 
The  next  day  he  sent  him  six  more  letters,  all  dated  from 
Mantua,  and  the  day  following  three  from  Bologna.  In 
fact,  during  the  month  of  June,  Prince  Eugene  received  no 
less  than  thirty-four  despatches  from  his  indefatigable 
suzerain,  cousin,  and  stepfather. 

To  PRINCE  EUGENE. 

"  FONTAINEBLEAU,  13M  July,  iSoJ. 

"  I  arrived  here  eighty-five  hours  after  leaving  Turin. 
However,  I  lost  three  hours  at  Mont  Cenis,  and  I  was 
constantly  delayed  by  the  Empress  one  or  two  hours  for 
breakfast,  and  one  or  two  hours  for  dinner.  This  made 
me  lose  eight  or  nine  hours  more.     When  the  legislative 


ORDERS  TO  EMBARK  FOR  ENGLAND,      1 37 

body  has  finished  its  sittings,  retire  for  a  month  to  Monza, 
and  have  the  palace  at  Milan  fitted  up.  I  think  I  told  you 
what  I  wanted.  Arrange  so  that  one  will  be  able  to  walk 
straight  through  the  grand  apartments  and  reach  those 
looking  on  the  Place  du  D6me,  In  this  way  the  bedroom 
destined  for  the  empress  will  be  the  king's  bedroom,  and 
the  place  where  the  boudoir  stands  will  be  the  king's 
drawing-room;  the  room  which  precedes  it  will  be  the 
throne-room.  The  queen's  room  will  be  that  which  was 
occupied  by  Madame  de  la  Rochefoucauld.  The  apart- 
ments which  I  occupied  will  be  the  '  little  apartments ' ; 
there  will  be  a  library,  a  study,  a  place  for  the  archives,  a 
topographical  ofifice,  a  small  bedroom,  bath-room,  drawing- 
room,"  &c.  &c. 

Nothing  appeared  to  be  too  minute  to  attract  the  atten- 
tion and  engross  the  mind  of  this  wonderful  genius. 

After  leaving  Fontainebleau,  Napoleon  repaired  for  a 
few  days  to  St.  Cloud,  whence  he  dictated  pressing  des- 
patches to  his  admirals  and  to  the  minister  of  marine. 


To  MARSHAL  BERTHIER. 

"  St.  Cloud,  20th  July,  1805. 

" ....  I  think  I  ordered  you  to  embark  everything, 
for  circumstances  may  present  themselves  at  any  moment. 
I  wish  you  to  embark  the  artillery,  powder,  and  all  the 
ammunitions,  so  that  in  twenty-four  bours  the  whole  expe- 
dition may  start.  A  general  of  brigade,  with  some  dashing 
officers,  should  embark  with  Marshal  Ney's  corps,  which 
will  be  the  first  to  land.  .  .  .  My  intention  is  to  land  at 
four  different  points,  at  a  short  distance  from  each  other. 
....  Inform  the  four  marshals ;  there  is  not  an  instant 
to  be  lost. 

"  Napoleon." 


138  THE   CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  CARDINAL  FESCH. 

"St.  Cloud,  24M  Jvly,  1805. 
"  The  King  of  Spain  has  placed  six  cordons  of  the 
Golden  Fleece  at  my  disposal ;  I  have  deemed  fit  to 
grant  you  one.  .  .  .  You  will  find  inclosed  several  numbers 
of  the  Moniteiir,  which  may  lead  you  to  suppose  that  war 
is  imminent.  This  is  not  the  case.  I  have  excellent  news 
of  my  squadrons.  Take  steps  to  procure  two  cardinals' 
hats.  .  .  .  You  will  inform  Cardinals  Rayane  and  Caselli 
that  I  have  accorded  them  the  Grand  Eagle  of  the  Legion 
of  Honour. 

"  Answer  my  last  dispatch  by  return  of  courier,  relative 
to  the  annulation  of  the  marriage  of  M.  Jerome. 

"  NAPOLEON." 

The  other  Spanish  cordons  were  given  to  his  brothers 
Joseph  and  Louis,  and  his  brothers-in-law,  Prince  Piombino 
{id  est  Bacciochi)  and  Prince  Borghese.  One  Napoleon 
probably  kept  for  himself. 

To  PRINCE  EUGENE. 

"  St.  Cloud,  27/^  July,  1805. 
"  I  have  directed  M.  Marescalchi  to  forward  you  a  de- 
■  cree,  ordering  the  Legislative  Body  to  terminate  its  sit- 
tings. My  intention  is  that  during  my  reign  in  Italy  it 
shall  not  meet  again.  I  had  too  good  an  opinion  of  the 
Italians.  I  see  that  there  are  still  beaiicoup  de  brouillons  et 
mauvais  siijefs.  It  is  incredible  that  a  bill  so  simple  as 
that  of  the  finance  should  have  enlisted  a  third  of  the 
chamber  against  it.  .  .  .  You  will  not  send  a  message  to 
the  Legislative  Body ;  you  will  pay  it  no  honours  ;  you 
will  simply  make  known  my  displeasure.  .  .  .  You  are 
wrong  to  look  upon  the  Italians  as  children.  There  is  a 
great  deal  of  malevolence  in  all  this.  Do  not  allow  them 
to  forget  that  I  am  master  to  do  what  I  like  with  them. 
This   is  necessary  for  all    people,  but  especially  for  the 


WARLIKE    INTENTIONS.  1  39 

Italians,  who  only  obey  the  voice  of  a  master.  They  will 
esteem  you  only  when  they  fear  you,  and  they  will  fear 
you  only  when  they  see  that  you  know  their  double  and 
deceitful  character.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  M.  TALLEYRAND. 

"  St.  Cloud,  31J/  July,  1805. 
"  All  the   news  I    receive  from    Italy   is   warlike,   and 
Austria    no    longer  conceals    her    intentions.      Prepare  a 
note  for  M.  de  Cobentzel,  let  it  be  long,  wily,  argumen- 
tative, and  in  similar  terms  to  the  inclosed. 

"  Napoleon." 

The  note  drawn  up  by  Talleyrand  was  approved  of,  and 
forwarded  to  Vienna.  At  the  same  time,  the  French  am- 
bassador, M.  de  la  Rochefoucauld,  was  instructed  to  say 
that  if  Napoleon  received  secret  assurances  that  the 
Austrian  troops  should  return  to  their  garrisons  in  Hun- 
gary and  Bohemia,  he  should  consider  himself  at  peace  ; 
but  that  if  the  movement  of  troops  and  formation  of 
magazines  continued,  he  should  consider  hostilities  de- 
clared, and,  in  the  impossibiUty  of  continuing  a  maritime 
war,  he  would  at  once  march,  in  order  to  "  pacify " 
Austria — that  if  the  Cabinet  of  Vienna  allowed  itself  to 
be  influenced  by  such  soldiers  as  Mack,  Zach,  &c.,  it  would 
be  drawn  into  difficulties.  Napoleon  added — "  There  is  no 
commonsense  in  a  war,  and  one  can  no  longer  fight, 
reasonably,  but  for  the  Empire  of  Constantinople — an  apple 
of  discord,  concerning  iwhich  France  and  Austria  will  in 
all  probability  march  united." 

To  M.  DARU. 
"  Camp  of  Boulogne,  dth  August,  1805. 
".  .  .  As  regards  the  encouragement  of  art,  the  Imperial 
Library  being  under  the  department. of  the  minister  of  the 
interior,  and  having  placed  2oo,ooof.  at  his  disposal,  this 


140    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

year,  I  am  not  aware  why  the  Treasury  refused  to  pay  the 
money  ;  a  large  portion  of  the  expenditure  of  the  civil  list 
is  devoted  to  furniture  and  to  painting  and  embellishing 
palaces,  which  is  so  much  encouragement  accorded  to  art. 
.  .  .  David  receives  considerable  sums  for  arts.  My 
librarian  has  made  me  subscribe  for  a  large  number  of 
engravings  and  other  works,  and  I  shall  not  refuse  any- 
thing you  may  deem  necessary  to  encourage  artists  ;  but  I 
do  not  wish  this  to  be  an  obligation  imposed  upon  me. 
The  manufactories  of  La  Savonnerie,  the  Gobelins  and 
Sevres,  ought  to  work  without  costing  the  Treasury  any- 
thing. .  .  .  Every  time  that  the  embellishment  of  a  palace 
is  proposed  it  must  be  considered  of  what  advantage  this  is 
for  art  and  manufactures.  The  Museum  is  at  my  expense  ; 
it  costs  me  considerable  sums  ;  it  is  intended  to  encourage 
art.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  8th  August  Napoleon,  in  a  letter  to  Cambac^r^s, 
mentioned  the  naval  battle  between  Villeneuve  and  Sir 
Robert  Calder.  Although  two  Spanish  vessels  had  been 
lost,  he  considered  that  the  French  fleet  had  gained  a 
success.  In  a  second  letter  to  the  minister  of  finance,  he 
said  : — 

"  It  would  have  been  very  fine  but  for  the  bungling 
of  the  Spaniards.  However,  we  remained  masters  of  the 
field  of  battle  for  two  days ;  the  English  retreated  and  we 
operated  our  junction.  You  know  how  little  the  Spaniards 
are  to  be  reckoned  upon  ;  unfortunately  they  had  been 
placed  in  the  rearguard,  and  they  executed  a  manoeuvre 
which  brought  them  under  fire  first.  The  English  appeared 
to  be  weak  in  ships  and  men.  Reassure  the  moneyed  men, 
and  give  them  to  understand  that  nothing  will  be  left  to 
chance.  Without  doubt  I  shall  embark  with  my  army,  but 
I  and  my  army  will  only  embark  with  every  possible 
chance  of  success.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon.  " 


SIR  ROBERT  CALDER  S  ACTION.        14I 

Napoleon  wrote  several  letters  on  the  subject  of  this 
naval  combat — to  Fouch6,  to  Talleyrand,  to  Decr^s,  to  M. 
Schimmelpennick,  &c.,  he  said  :  "  Villeneuve  has  fulfilled 
his  object — the  Junction.  The  English  squadron  refused 
action  for  three  days.  .  .  .  The  French  squadron  suffered 
very  little.  As  all  this  will  be  very  disagreeable  for  the 
Spaniards,  praise  Gravina,  and  make  a  thousand  con- 
jectures as  to  the  fate  of  the  Spanish  vessels  ;  say  that  it  is 
not  known  if  they  have  been  taken.  My  private  opinion 
is  that  they  have  been  captured.  .  .  .  The  enemy  has 
suffered  to  the  extent  of  20,ooo,ooof.  Three  English 
vessels  were  dismasted  and  one  sunk."  ^ 

Napoleon  changed  his  tone  afterwards.  He  naturally 
exaggerated  the  daniage  done  to  the  English  fleet,  which 
suffered  little  except  in  spars.  Two  ships  returned  to 
England,  but  neither  of  them  had  to  go  into  dock  for 
repairs,  and  they  were  speedily  able  to  rejoin  Sir  Robert. 
As  for  Villeneuve,  he  first  put  into  Vigo,  then  to  Corunna, 
and  afterwards  to  Ferrol,  where  he  remained  refitting  until 
the  nth  August. 

On  the  1 3th  August  Napoleon  wrote  a  long  despatch  to 
Talleyrand,  in  which  he  said  :  "  My  mind  is  made  up  ;  I 
desire  to  attack  Austria,  and  to  be  at  Vienna  before  the 
month  of  November,  in  order  to  meet  the  Prussians,  should 
they  present  themselves,  or  else  Austria  must  withdraw  her 
troops  from  the  Tyrol,"  &c.  The  Austrian  ambassador  was 
to  be  told  that  Napoleon  would  not  think  of  invading 
England  while  his  southern  frontier  was  threatened — that 
orders  had  been  given  for  operations  to  be  suspended — ■ 
that  unless  Austria  complied  with  the  demands  of  the 
Emperor  he  would  declare  war  in  a  month — that  he  was 
not  mad  enough  to  give  the  Russians  time  to  arrive.  M. 
de  Cobentzel  was  to  tell  his  master  that  if  he  desired  war 
he  would  not  spend  his  Christmas  at  Vienna,  that  he  might 
have  a  numerous  and   formidable   army ;    "  but   a  rapid 

^  Villeneuve,  in  his  report,  said — "But  I  still  fail  to  comprehend 
how  we  lost  the  two  sTiips  that  are  missing." 


142     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

movement  given  to  300,000  men  should  be  the  work  of  one 
head ;  a  cabinet  executes  similar  movements  slowly  ;  and 
when  the  French  nation  learns  that  Austria  attacks  us  at 
the  instigation  of  England,  the  French  Emperor  will  find 
600,000  men  who  will  be  well  worth  the  80,000  Hungarians 
which  the  gazettes  speak  of  as  having  offered  their  services 
to  the  Court  of  Vienna."  And  finally,  Talleyrand  was 
ordered  to  try  and  frighten  "this  skeleton  Francis  II., 
placed  on  the  throne  by  the  merit  of  his  ancestors." 

In  a  letter  to  the  minister  of  marine,  Napoleon  ex- 
pressed his  displeasure  with  Villeneuve,  who  had  executed 
none  of  his  orders  in  the  West  Indies.  "  All  this,"  he 
added,  "was  owing  to  his  fright,  and  yet  he  knew  that 
Nelson  had  only  twelve  ships.  .  .  .  This  proves  to  me  that 
Villeneuve  is  a  poor  creature,  who  sees  double,  and  who 
has  more  perception  than  courage.  .  .  .  What  can  Ville- 
neuve have  to  complain  of  with  regard  to  the  Spaniards  ? 
They  fought  like  lions.  .  .  . ! ! ! " 

On  the  same  day  his  Majesty  wrote  a  long  and 
flattering  despatch  to  Villeneuve  himself  He  was  pleased 
with  the  combat  of  22nd  July,  although  he  thought  the 
admiral  should  not  have  allowed  the  Windsor  Castle  and 
the  Malta  to  get  away,  nor  Sir  R.  Calder  to  have  carried 
off  the  two  Spanish  vessels.  The  letter  of  Napoleon 
terminated  thus  :  — 

"  The  English  are  not  so  numerous  as  you  seem  to  think. 

"If  you  can  appear  here  for  three  days,  or  even  for 
twenty- four  hours,  you  will  have  fulfilled  your  mission. 
Send  a  special  courier  to  Ganteaume  to  inform  him  that 
you  have  sailed.  Never,  for  so  great  an  object,  will  a 
squadron  have  run  some  risks,  and  never  will  my  land  and 
sea  forces  be  able  to  shed  their  blood  for  a  greater  and 
more  noble  cause.  In  order  to  favour  the  invasion  of  that 
Power  which,  for  the  last  ten  centuries  oppresses  France, 
we  could  all  die  without  regretting  life.  These  are  the 
sentiments  which  ought  to  animate  you  and  all  my 
soldiers.  .  .  .  "NAPOLEON." 


NELSONS    RETURN.  143 

To  VICE-ADMIRAL  DECRlfcS. 

"  Camp  of  Boulogne,  14M  August,  1805. 
"  With  thirty  vessels  my  admirals  ought  not  to  be  afraid 
of  twenty-four  English  ships,  or  else  we  must  give  up  the 
idea  of  having  a  marine.  ...  If  Villeneuve  remains  at 
Ferrol  beyond  the  i6th,  I  shall  consider  him  the  last  of 
men.  According  to  the  news  from  London,  Nelson  is  still 
far  away.  If  Villeneuve  sails  with  his  thirty  vessels  he  will 
be  sure  of  forming  a  junction  with  Allemand.  Nelson  and 
Collingwood  are  '  out  of  the  field  of  battle  ; '  likewise  the 
squadrons  of  Cochrane  and  of  India  ;  there  are  twelve 
vessels  at  Texel.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

Nelson  was  home  from  the  West  Indies  at  this  date,  and 
landed  at  Portsmouth  on  the  1 8th  August,  meeting  with  an 
enthusiastic  reception. 

To  THE  PRINCESS  ELIZA. 

"  Camp  of  Boulogne,  igth  August,  1805. 
"  My  Sister, — I  have  ordered  the  grand  marshal  of  my 
palace  to  send  you  my  portrait,  in  accordance  with  your 
request,  as  you  think  it  will  be  agreeable  to  the  people  of 
Lucca.  Send  me  a  detailed  account  of  your  coasts  and  a 
list  of  the  batteries  which  are  necessary.     I  will  send  you 

the  guns. 

"Napoleon." 

To  M.  TALLEYRAND. 
"Camp  of  Boulogne,  iind August,  1805. 
"  The  situation  of  my  armies  and  the  position  of  my 
forces  do  not  permit  of  any  transaction  approaching  to 
weakness.  In  giving  Hanover  to  Prussia  I  give  her  a 
territory  which  will  augment  her  forces  to  the  extent  of 
40,000  men,  and  will  also  improve  the  situation  of  her 
states.  ...  I  understand  in  giving  Hanover  to  Prussia,  to 
guarantee  the  integrity  of  her  states,  and  also  that  Prussia 
shall  guarantee  the   integrity  of  my  present  possessions 


144    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

without  asking  me  to  enter  into  any  engagement  as  regards 
Switzerland,  Holland,  and  the  Neapolitan  States.  If  it  be 
asked  what  are  my  present  frontiers  you  can  reply — the 
Rhine  on  the  German  side,  and  on  the  Italian  side  my 
limits  are  those  which  border  my  kingdom  of  Italy 
and  Tuscany.  The  King  of  Prussia  must  guarantee 
my  kingdom  of  Italy  to  me  and  my  descendants. 
...  I  will  listen  to  nothing  in  favour  of  the  King  of 
Sardinia,  or  of  the  Bourbons.  ...  As  for  Holland, 
I  will  give  no  guarantee.  .  .  .  This  is  an  offer 
which  I  make  to  Prussia,  but  it  must  be  understood  that 
it  is  an  offer  which  I  shall  not  make  again  in  a  fortnight ; 
if  the  gift  of  Hanover  induces  Prussia  to  declare  in  my 
favour,  makes  Russia  and  Austria  tremble,  and  leaves  me 
free  to  continue  my  maritime  war,  I  shall  consider  myself 
indemnified  for  this  great  increase  of  power  accorded  to 
Prussia.  But  once  I  raise  my  camp  on  the  ocean  I  shall 
not  be  able  to  stop  myself;  my  plans  of  maritime  war  will 
have  failed,  and  I  shall  have  nothing  to  gain  by  giving 
Hanover.     Prussia  must  therefore  decide  immediately.  .  . . 

"  Napoleon." 

Still  anxiously  awaiting  the  arrival  of  his  fleets  Napoleon 
wrote  to  Decr^s  on  the  22nd  August,  saying  that  Ville- 
neuve  had  only  the  qualities  requisite  to  command  a 
frigate  ;  that  he  was  a  man  without  resolution  or  moral 
courage.  To  Ganteaume :  "  If  Villeneuve  arrives  at 
Brest  with  the  intention  of  anchoring  do  not  permit  him  to 
do  so,  but  sail  at  once  for  your  destination.  There  is  not 
a  moment  to  be  lost."  And  in  a  second  letter  written  the 
same  day  Napoleon  said  he  desired  to  take  advantage  of 
the  superiority  which  fifty  sail  of  the  line  would  give  him, 
in  order  to  avenge  six  centuries  of  insult  and  shame.  "  I 
count  upon  your  talents,  your  firmness,  and  your  courage 
in  this  important  juncture,"  he  added. 

The  next  day  Napoleon  addressed  a  letter  to  the  King 
of  Prussia  on  the  Hanover  business,  in  which  he  said  :  "  I 
have  made  up  my  mind  to  march  into  Bavaria  myself  at 


THE  FERROL  AND  BREST  SQUADRONS.     1 45 

the  head  of  100,000  men.  It  will  be  necessary,  therefore, 
to  fight  again.  God,  my  conscience,  your  Majesty,  and 
Europe,  will  bear  witness  that  I  am  attacked,  since  my 
frontiers  are  threatened  at  a  time  when  all  my  troops  and 
ships  are  on  the  coast.  The  house  of  Austria  is  not  in  a 
position  to  hold  its  own  against  me.  .  .  ." 

To  M.  TALLEYRAND. 
"Camp  or  Boulogne,  zzrd August,  1805. 

"  It  is  necessary  to  come  to  a  decision.  In  reality  I 
I  have  nothing  to  expect  from  Austrian  expeditions. 
Austria  will  employ  fine  phrases  in  order  to  gain  time  and 
to  prevent  me  from  accomplishing  anything  this  year  ;  her 
treaty  of  subsidies  and  act  of  coalition  will  be  signed  this 
winter,  and  in  April  I  shall  find  100,000  Russians  in 
Poland,  fed  by  England ;  20,000  English  at  Malta,  and 
15,000  Russians  at  Corfu.  I  should  then  be  in  a  critical 
position.     My  mind  is  made  up. 

"  My  squadron  sailed  from  Ferrol  on  the  14th  August — 
thirty-four  vessels ;  there  was  no  enemy  in  sight.  If  it 
follows  my  instructions  it  will  effect  its  junction  with  the 
Brest  squadron  and  enter  the  Channel ;  there  will  yet  be 
time :  I  shall  be  master  of  England.  If  on  the  contrary 
my  admirals  hesitate,  if  they  manoeuvre  badly  and  do  not 
fulfil  their  mission,  I  shall  be  obliged  to  wait  for  the 
winter  and  to  cross  over  with  my  flotilla.  .  .  . 

"Napoleon." 

Writing  two  days  later  to  Talleyrand  Napoleon  an- 
nounced that  he  had  commenced  his  movements,  and  that 
by  the  17th  September  he  would  be  in  Germany  with 
200,000  men.  He  added  :  "  Continue  to  insert  letters 
from  Salsburg,  Trieste,  and  Inspruck  in  the  Moniteur,  so 
as  to  accustom  public  opinion  to  the  idea  of  war.  Declare, 
however,  that  I  am  making  no  preparations,  but  simply 
protecting  my  frontiers." 

On  the  25th  August  Napoleon  notified  to  the  Elector 
VOL.  II.  L 


146     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

of  Bavaria  his  intention  of  marching  through  his  states. 
"  Bavaria,"  he  wrote,  "  will  gain  additional  territory  and 
splendour.  .  .  .  My  heart  bleeds  at  the  thought  of  the 
ills  which  will  result.  But  God  knows  I  am  innocent.  I 
have  twice  saved  Germany,  twice  re-established  Austria 
on  her  tottering  throne.  ...  I  beg  your  Royal  Highness 
will  not  communicate  this  letter  even  to  your  ministers." 

To  VICE-ADMIRAL  DECRES. 

"  Camp  of  Boulogne,  lUh  August,  1805. 
"It  results  from  news  received  from  London  that  the 
greatest  alarm  is  felt  and  peace  anxiously  desired  ;  that 
Calder  will  not  be  tried  nor  disgraced  for  i,ot  displaying 
more  obstinacy ;  that  he  had  only  a  third  of  his  crews. 
Calder's  squadron  suffered  more  than  they  say  ;  most  of 
his  vessels  returned  to  port  disabled. 

"  Napoleon." 

Despatch  after  despatch,  dated  from  the  camp  of  Bou- 
logne, followed  in  quick  succession,  and  with  marvellous 
rapidity  everything  was  prepared  for  the  great  blow  about 
to  be  aimed  at  the  new  coalition.  It  is  easy  to  understand 
at  what  a  disadvantage  the  Aulic  Council  was  placed  in 
presence  of  so  much  activity,  vigour,  powerful  conception, 
and  practical  knowledge  combined  in  a  single  person, 
whose  orders  were  supreme  and  whose  will  was  unfettered. 
In  the  postscript  of  a  letter  addressed  to  Duroc  on  the  28th 
August,  Napoleon  wrote  : — 

"  The  whole  army  has  marched,  and  I  shall  be  ready  on 
the  27th  September.  I  have  confided  the  army  of  Italy  to 
Massena.  Austria  is  too  insolent  ;  she  is  redoubling  her 
preparations.  My  squadron  has  entered  Cadiz.  Keep 
this  secret  to  yourself  Obtain  all  the  maps  you  can  of 
Bavaria  and  bring  me  the  organisation  of  the  Russian  and 
Austrian  armies." 

In  the  midst  of  all  these  orders  and  despatches  dealing 


HORSE    RACING.  1 47 

with  a  host  of  military  and  poh'tical  affairs,  it  is  curious  to 
come  across  the  following  decree  dated  the  31st  August : — 

"  Art.  I.  There  shall  be  established  successively  horse 
races  in  those  departments  of  the  Empire  the  most  remark- 
able for  the  horses  they  breed  :  prizes  shall  be  awarded  to 
the  fleetest  horses. 

"Art.  2.  From  year  XIV.  races  shall  be  run  in  the  de- 
partments of  the  Orne,  Corr^ze,  Seine,  Morbihan,  Sarre 
and  Hautes  Pyrdn^es. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  M.  CAMBACERES. 
"Camp  of  Boulogne,  ist  September,  1805. 
"  My  Cousin, — I  must  tell  you  in  the  greatest  con- 
fidence that  there  is  no  longer  a  single  man  at  Boulogne 
beyond  those  necessary  for  the  protection  of  the  port.  In 
the  course  of  a  few  days  we  shall  see  whether  the  laughers 
will  be  on  my  side  or  on  that  of  the  court  of  Vienna.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

After  giving  a  few  more  orders  and  forwarding  in- 
structions to  General  Gouvion  St.  Cyr  to  invade  the 
kingdom  of  Naples,  Napoleon  set  out  for  Paris.  On  the 
4th  September  he  was  at  the  Malmaison,  whence  he 
wrote  a  violent  letter  to  Decres  on  the  subject  of 
Villeneuve : — 

"  The  admiral,"  he  said,  "  has  filled  the  measure  to  over- 
flowing ;  on  leaving  Vigo  he  ordered  Captain  Allemand  to 
Brest,  and  informed  you  of  his  intention  of  going  to  Cadiz. 
This  is  certainly  treason.  .  .  .  There  is  Jno  name  for  this. 
Villeneuve  is  a  wretch,  who  must  be  dismissed  with 
ignominy.  Devoid  of  combinations  and  of  courage,  he 
would  sacrifice  everything  in  order  to  save  his  skin.  .  .  . 
After  this  I  am  obliged  to  regard  Missiessy  as  a  hero." 

And  all  Villeneuve's  crimes  were  recapitulated,  including 
his  conduct  in  not  renewing  his  battle  with  Sir  Robert 
Calder's  disabled  fleet,  &c.  &c. 

L  2 


148  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF   NAPOLEON. 

Villeneuve,  we  know,  had  hardly  left  Ferrol  with  the 
intention  of  carrying  out  his  instructions  to  form  a 
junction  with  Ganteaume,  and  then  make  his  appearance 
in  the  Channel,  when  he  learned  that  false  intelligence  at 
sea  which  decided  him  to  seek  refuge  at  Cadiz. 

To  GENERAL  DUROC  {on  Mission  to  Berlin). 

"St.  Cloud,  nth  September,  1805. 
"  M.  Talleyrand  will  inform  you  that  I  approve  of  the 
article  proposed  by  M.  de  Hardenberg,  and  that  if  war 
does  not  take  place  I  will  guarantee  the  present  state  of 
Italy.  I  very  much  wish  to  know  positively  if  the  Russians 
have  entered  Austrian  territory.  M.  Laforest  (French 
ambassador)  must  not  be  sparing  with  spies  ;  let  him  send 
Prussian,  or  other  officers,  to  observe ;  and  if  necessary  let 
him  be  prodigal  of  money.  The  King  of  Prussia  can 
avoid  a  great  war  by  signing  the  treaty.  .  .  .  Don't  stop  at 
anything  ;  try  and  conclude  the  treaty.  I  will  overlook 
everything  else  provided  it  does  not  prevent  me  from 
marching  at  once.  .  .  . 

"Napoleon." 

note  for  the  minlster  of  marine. 

"  St.  Cloud,  i3//z  September,  1805. 
"  Art.  I.  I  wished  to  assemble  forty  or  fifty  ships  of  the 
line  at  Martinique  by  means  of  combined  operations,  cause 
them  to  return  suddenly  to  Boulogne,  remain  for  a  fortnight 
master  of  the  sea,  have  150,000  men  and  10,000  horses 
encamped  on  the  coast,  a  flotilla  of  3,000  or  4,000  craft, 
and  on  the  arrival  of  my  squadron  disembark  in  England, 
and  seize  upon  London  and  the  Thames.  This  plan  has 
failed.  If  Admiral  Villeneuve  instead  of  putting  into 
Ferrol  had  been  satisfied  with  forming  a  junction  with  the 
Spanish  fleet,  and  had  sailed  for  Brest,  and  united  himself 
with  Ganteaume,  my  army  would  have  disembarked,  and 
it  would  have  been  all  over  with  England." 


AUSTRIANS    GROSS    THE   INN.  1 49 

Napoleon  went  on  to  explain  that  it  was  his  intention 
to  keep  up  a  considerable  force  at  Boulogne ;  the  camp 
there  was  healthy ;  England  would  be  kept  in  a  continual 
state  of  alarm,  and  if  necessary  the  troops  might  be  rapidly 
thrown  into  Germany. 

On  the  15th  September  came  the  following  address 
to  the  nation  : — 

"  Frenchmen, — I  have  passed  the  Rhine  at  the  head  of 
my  army  in  order  to  re-establish  one  of  our  allies  (the 
Elector  of  Bavaria)  on  his  throne,  from  which  he  has  been 
driven  by  the  injustice  and  ambition  of  the  house  of 
Austria.  ...  It  is  said  that  100,000  Russians  paid  by 
English  gold  are  marching  to  his  aid.  Well !  Let  100,000 
more  Frenchmen  rally  round  my  standards.  Live  without 
commerce,  without  colonies,  and  subject  to  the  unjust  will 
of  our  enemies  is  not  to  live  like  Frenchmen.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

Napoleon  was  loud  in  his  complaints  against  Austria 
for  having  invaded  Bavaria,  and  he  addressed  a  violent 
note  on  this  subject  to  the  Diet  of  Ratisbon.  The  French 
Emperor  in  fact  was  more  than  angry,  he  was  surprised 
at  the  rapidity  with  which  the  Austrians  had  crossed  the 
Inn,  and  had  obliged  the  Elector  to  fly  from  Munich. 

On  the  17th  September  Napoleon  at  last  determined  to 
remove  Villeneuve  from  the  command  of  the  combined 
squadrons,  and  instructions  were  forwarded  to  Admiral 
Rosily  to  repair  with  due  diligence  to  Cadiz,  and  to  assume 
the  command  of  the  fleet. 

On  the  1 8th  September  Napoleon  sent  instructions  to 
Massena  saying  that  he  hoped  to  pass  the  Rhine  on  the 
27th  September,  and  that  he  would  not  halt  until  he  had 
reached  the  Inn.  "  I  put  trust,"  he  said,  "  in  your  talent 
and  your  bravery."  Gain  me  victories.  In  a  letter  to 
Prince  Eugene  of  the  same  date  he  wrote — "  Make  Marshal 
Massena  a  present  of  a  carriage  and  six,  of  four  riding  horses, 


150     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

and  of  50,000  francs.  At  the  same  time  write  to  him  a 
friendly  letter  in  my  name,  saying  that  I  ordered  this  present 
to  be  made  to  him  as  a  proof  of  my  esteem,  &c." 

On  the  same  i8th  September,  the  minister  of  marine 
having  proposed  to  give  some  of  the  crew  of  the  Topaze 
who  had  been  wounded,  a  gratification,  Napoleon  decided — 
"  Rejected.  Bravery  is  not  paid  for  in  money."  The 
Topaze  and  consorts  had  captured  the  Blanche  with  the 
loss  of  one  killed  and  eleven  wounded,  according  to  the 
French  account. 

Napoleon  was  still  uncertain  as  to  the  side  which  Prussia 
would  take,  for  if  jealous  of  Austria,  that  Power  was 
alarmed  at  the  threatening  attitude  of  Russia. 

To  M.  TALLEYRAND. 

"St.  Cloud,  19^,%  September,  1805. 
"  Send  a  special  courier  to  Berlin.  New  efforts  must  be 
made  to  induce  Prussia  to  conclude  the  treaty  of  alliance. 
If  that  be  not  possible,  Duroc,  if  they  allow  him  to  quit 
Berlin,  can  say  on  taking  leave  of  the  king  that  he  has 
just  received  fresh  instructions  directing  him  to  negotiate 
a  treaty  of  neutrality.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

Prussia,  bound  by  a  secret  treaty  signed'  May  24th,  1804, 
to  Russia,  insisted  on  the  independence  of  Holland  and 
Switzerland  being  guaranteed,  and  only  consented  with 
bad  grace  to  remain  neutral  in  return  for  Hanover. 

To  M.  PORTALIS-. 

"  St.  Cloud,  \<^th  September,  1805. 
"  Let  M.   Robert,  priest  at  Bourges,  know  that  I  am 
displeased  with  the  very  bad  sermon  which  he  preached 
on  the   isth  August. 

"  Napoleon." 

The  iSth  August  was  the  Imperial //^^  day,  on  which  oc- 
casion a  good  deal  was  naturally  expected  from  the  church. 


FRENCH    LINE    OF    MARCH. 


151 


Despatch  after  despatch  now  followed  each  other  with 
marvellous  rapidity  directing  the  operations  of  the  Grand 
Army.  On  the  22nd  September,  Napoleon  with  his  own 
hand  drew  up  the  following  direction  for  the  march  of  his 
army  corps  which  twenty-five  days  later  brought  about 
the  capitulation  of  Ulm. 


Bernadotte. 

Wurzburg. 

Anspach. 

Nuremburg. 

Ratisbon. 

Marmont. 

id. 

id. 

id. 

id. 

Davoust. 

Manheim. 

Mergentheim. 

Anspach. 

Dietfurt. 

Ney. 

Setz. 

Crailsheim. 

Weissemburg. 

Ingolstadt. 

Lannes. 

Strasburg. 

Gmiind. 

Nierdlingen. 

Neubourg. 

Soult. 

Landau. 

Aalen. 

Donauwerth. 

Napoleon  had  up.  to  this  moment  been  profuse  in  pacific 
assurances  ;  and  although  the  Austrians  had  crossed  the 
Inn  on  the  7th,  it  was  only  on  the  22nd  September  that 
France  was  made  aware  of  the  new  war  into  which  she 
was  about  to  be  plunged. 

On  the  Republican  New  Year's  day  (23rd  September), 
Napoleon  informed  the  Senate  that  he  was  about  to  place 
himself  at  the  head  of  his  troops.     He  added  : — 

"  The  desire  of  the  eternal  enemy  of  the  continent  is 
accomplished  ;  war  has  commenced  in  the  centre  of  Ger- 
many ;  Austria  and  Russia  have  joined  England.  ...  A 
few  days  ago  I  still  hoped  that  peace  would  not  be  dis- 
turbed; threats  and  insults  found  me  impassable  ;  but  the 
Austrian  army  has  passed  the  Inn  ;  Munich  is  invaded. 
...  It  was  at  this  moment  that  the  wickedness  of  the 
enemies  of  the  continent  was  unveiled.  They  still  feared 
the  manifestation  of  my  profound  love  of  peace  ;  they 
feared  that  Austria  at  the  sight  of  the  gulf  dug  under 
her  feet  would  revert  to  sentiments  of  justice  and  mode- 
ration ;  they  hurried  her  into  war.  I  groan  over  the  blood 
which  this  will  cost  Europe;  but  the  French  name  will 
obtain  fresh  lustre.  .  .  ." 

The  demands  of  Prussia,  Austria,  and  Russia  sufficiently 
explain  the  causes  of  this  war. 


152     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

The  cabinet  of  Vienna  said  in  a  manifesto  that  peace 
between  France  and  Austria  reposed  upon  the  treaty  of 
Luneville,  the  stipulations  of  which  had  been  violated  by 
Napoleon,  and  demanded  the  independence  of  the  Italian 
republics.  The  manifesto  added — "  Peace  is  disturbed 
when  one  Power  arrogates  to  itself  the  right  of  occupation 
and  protection,  and  exercising  an  influence  provided  for 
neither  by  international  law  nor  treaties  ;  when  it  speaks 
of  the  rights  of  victory  after  they  have  been  abolished  by 
peace ;  when  it  employs  force  to  dictate  laws  to  its 
neighbours  to  wring  from  them  alliances,  concessions,  and 
acts  of  submission,"  &c.,  &c.  Thus  ran  the  unanswerable 
and  unanswered  Austrian  manifesto.  As  regards  Bavaria 
the  cabinet  of  Vienna  thought  that  by  immediately  invading 
that  country  the  Elector  would  be  induced  to  join  the 
coalition.  This  was  a  fatal  error  which  cost  Austria  the 
loss  of  an  army. 

To  PRINCE  JOSEPH  BONAPARTE. 

"  Strasburg,  ^i>th  September,  1805. 
"  I  have  arrived  at  Strasburg.     All  the  army  has  passed 
the    Rhine.      The  enemy  is  at  the  issues   of  the  Black 
Forest.    Our  manoeuvres  will  soon  commence.    Do  all  you 
can  to  induce  the  nation  to  adopt  the  conscription.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  TALLEYRAND. 

"  Strasburg,  i^th  September,  1805. 
"...  Things  are  proceeding  rapidly.  The  Austrians 
hold  the  issues  of  the  Black  Forest.  God  grant  that  they 
may  remain  there.  My  only  fear  is  lest  we  should  frighten 
them  too  much.  A  great  many  things  will  happen  in 
a  fortnight.  "NAPOLEON." 

To  PRINCE  EUGENE. 

"  Strasburg,  2<)tk  September,  1805. 
"...  Here  are  my  allies  in  Germany :  the  Electors  of 
Bavaria,  Baden,  and  Wirtemburg,  and  the  Landgrave  of 


PROCLAMATION    TO    THE   ARMY.  1 53 

Hesse  Darmstadt,  have  each  entered  into  an  alliance  with 
me,  and  have  joined  me  with  tolerably  strong  army  corps. 
Have  it  printed  in  the  Gazettes  that  I  am  with  the .  army 
and  that  the  Austrians  are  flying ;  that  fear  and  disorder 
have  succeeded  arrogance  and  presumption.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  30th  September  Napoleon  addressed  a  procla- 
mation to  the  Grand  Army,  in  which  he  announced  that 
the  war  of  the  third  coalition  had  commenced ;  that 
Austria  had  violated  treaties,  and  that  the  independence 
of  the  Germanic  Body  must  be  assured.     He  added  : — 

"  Soldiers, — Your  Emperor  is  in  the  midst  of  you ;  you 
are  only  the  advanced  guard  of  a  great  people.  If  it  be 
necessary  the  whole  nation  will  rise  at  my  voice  in  order 
to  confound  and  dissolve  this  new  league  woven  by  the 
hatred  and  the  gold  of  England.  But,  soldiers,  we  shall 
have  forced  marches  to  make  and  fatigues  and  privations 
of  all  sorts  to  endure.  No  matter  what  obstacles  are 
thrown  in  our  way  we  shall  overcome  them,  and  we  shall 
only  repose  ourselves  after  having  planted  our  flags  on 
the  territory  of  the  enemy." 

To  MARSHAL  ANGEREAU. 

"  Strasburg,  loth  September,  1805. 
"...  My  dear  and  good  brother  of  Austria  came  to 
Memmingen,  but  he  appears  to  have  returned  to  Vienna 
after  having  held  a  grand  council.  God  grant  that  his  army 
may  remain  in  its  present  position  for  a  week,  or  better 
still,  that  it  may  advance  to  the  Rhine.  .  .  .  Woe  to  the 
Austrians  if  they  allow  me  to  gain  a  few  marches.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

Josephine,  who  had  accompanied  the  Emperor  to 
Strasburg,  was  left  behind  in  that  city. 


154  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  THE  EMPRESS  JOSEPHINE. 

"Ettlingen,  ind  October,  1805. 
"I  am  still  here  in  good  health.     I  am  about  to  leave 
for   Stuttgard.     The  grand   manceuvres  are   commencing. 
The  armies  of  Wirtemburg  and  Baden  have  joined  mine. 
I  am  in  a  good  position,  and  I  love  you. 

"  Napoleon." 

The  Emperor  sent  Josephine  another  similar  note  from 
Ludwigsburg,  and'  also  wrote  to  Joseph  announcing  his 
junction  with  the  Bavarians,  and  saying — "  I  heard  the 
German  opera  of  Don  Juan  at  the  Court  Theatre  last 
night.  I  fancy  that  this  opera  is  the  same  as  the  one 
given  in  Paris.  It  appeared  to  me  very  good."  His 
Majesty  also  sent  a  few  lines  to  Cambaceres,  declaring 
himself  satisfied  with  the  state  of  public  opinion  in  Ger- 
many, and  adding — "  The  people  in  general  are  very  much 
irritated  against  the  English,  and  pity  the  conduct  of  the 
house  of  Austria."  To  Champagny,  his  home  minister, 
he  wrote  this  brief  epistle  :  "  I  am  at  the  court  of  Wirtem- 
burg, and,  although  waging  war,  heard  some  very  good 
music  here.  The  German  singing,  however,  appears  to 
me  rather  harsh.  Is  the  reserve  getting  on .''  Where  are 
you  with  the  conscription  for  Year  XIV.?"  Fouch6  also 
was  written  to,  directing  him  to  animate  public  opinion 
in  the  newspapers. 

To  THE  ELECTOR  OF  BAVARIA. 

"  Ludwigsburg,  2nd  October,  1805. 
"  My  Brother, — I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  ist 
October.  The  King  of  Prussia  never  attached  any  im- 
portance to  troops  passing  through  Baireuth  and  Anspach. 
Our  constant  custom  during  the  last  war  was  to  pass 
through  the  territory  in  question  as  often  as  we  liked.  .  .  . 
In  a  letter  which  I  wrote  a  month  ago,  I  promised  you 
that   on   the  7th  October  I  should  be  in   the   centre  of 


THE    FIRST    BULLETIN.  1 55 

Germany  ;  I  hope  to  be  able,  with  God's  assistance,  to 
re-establish  you  soon  at  Munich.  ...  I  shall  employ  all 
possible  means  to  fix  the  power  of  your  house  on  such 
bases  that  you  will  not  have  to  dread  being  again  driven 
from  your  capital.  ...  I  hope  that  you  will  be  able  to 
resist  the  first  efforts  of  the  Austrian s,  and  to  wait  for 
the  aid  of  the  allied  armies.  «  NAPOLEON." 

And  on  the  20th  Murat  was  ordered  to  respect  Prussian 
territory,  for  "  I  have  already  had  a  serious  quarrel  about 
the  first  passage." 

On  the  7th  October  the  Emperor  issued  his  first  bulletin, 
in  which  the  positions  of  the  various  army  corps  were 
enumerated,  and  the  plan  of  operations  partially  disclosed. 
It  terminated  thus — "  This  great  and  vast  movement  has 
in  the  course  of  a  few  days  carried  us  into  Bavaria,  allowed 
us  to  avoid  the  Black  Mountains,  the  line  of  parallel  rivers 
which  fall  into  the  valley  of  the  Danube,  and  has  placed 
us  several  marches  in  the  rear  of  the  enemy,  who  has 
no  time  to  lose  if  he  would  save  himself  from  utter 
destruction." 

In  the  second  bulletin  the  following  paragraphs  occur : — 
"  Colonel  Maupetit,  at  the  head  of  the  9th  dragoons,  was 
mortally  wounded.  His  last  words  were — '  Let  the  Em- 
peror be  informed  that  the  9th  showed  itself  worthy  of 
its  reputation,  and  that  it  charged  and  conquered  to  the 
cry  of  Vive  F Empereur  ! ' 

"  It  rains  heavily,  but  this  does  not  slacken  the  march  of 
the  army.  The  Emperor  sets  the  example.  On  horse- 
back day  and  night,  he  is  always  in  the  midst  of  his  troops 
and  wherever  his  presence  is  necessary.  He  rode  fourteen 
leagues  yesterday ;  he  slept  in  a  small  village,  without  a 
servant  or  any  kind  of  baggage.  However,  the  Archbishop 
of  Augsburg  had  his  palace  illuminated,  and  awaited  his 
Majesty  a  portion  of  the  night." 

The  third  bulletin  mentioned  that  there  had  been  some 
hard  fighting,  but  that  the  enemy  had  been  driven  back, 


156     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

and  that  the  extent  and  complication  of  the  combinations 
of  the  French  army  had  entirely  disconcerted  the  Austrians. 
This  time  we  find — "  The  Emperor  has  taken  up  his 
quarters  at  Augsburg,  in  the  palace  of  the  Elector  of 
Treves,  who  treated  the  suite  of  his  Majesty  with 
magnificence  while  they  were  awaiting  the  arrival  of 
their  carriages." 

The  fourth  bulletin,  dated  the  12th  October,  announced 
the  capture  of  Munich  by  Bernadotte,  the  repulse  of  the 
Austrians  at  several  points,  and  that  their  communications 
were  almost  entirely  cut  off.  And  then — "  The  Emperor 
was  on  the  bridge  of  Lech  when  Marmont's  army  corps 
defiled.  He  formed  each  regiment  in  a  circle,  spoke  to  it 
of  the  position  of  the  enemy,  the  imminence  of  a  great 
battle,  and  of  his  confidence  in  the  troops.  The  weather 
was  fearful  during  this  harangue.  The  snow  fell  heavily, 
and  the  men  were  up  to  their  knees  in  mud  and  suffering 
from  cold.  But  the  words  of  the  Emperor  acted  like 
flame ;  while  listening  to  them  the  soldiers  forgot  their 
fatigues  and  privations,  and  grew  impatient  for  the  hour 
of  conflict." 

The  following  day,  in  a  proclamation  to  the  army. 
Napoleon  said — 

"  Soldiers, — A  month  ago  we  were  encamped  on  the 
shores  of  the  ocean,  opposite  England,  when  an  impious 
league  forced  us  to  fly  to  the  Rhine.  Not  a  fortnight 
ago  that  river  was  passed,  and  the  Alps,  the  Neckar, 
the  Danube,  and  the  Lech,  the  celebrated  barriers  of 
Germany,  have  not  for  a  minute  delayed  our  march.  .  .  . 
The  enemy,  deceived  by  our  manoeuvres  and  the  rapidity 
of  our  movements,  is  entirely  turned.  .  .  .  But  for  the 
army  before  you  we  should  be  in  London  to-day,  have 
avenged  six  centuries  of  insult,  and  have  liberated 
the  sea. 

"  Remember  to-morrow  that  you  are  fighting  against 
the  allies  of  England.  .  .  .  "NAPOLEON." 


CAPITULATION    OF    ULM.  1 57 

The  sixth  bulletin  (iSth  October)  announced  a  series  of 
successes,  the  flight  of  the  Archduke  Ferdinand,  that  the 
Emperor  had  not  taken  off  his  boots  for  a  week,  and  that 
since  the  beginning  of  the  campaign  the  enemy  had  lost 
20,ooo^men,  thirty  guns,  and  twenty  standards.  Also  that 
— "  So  much  devotion  on  the  part  of  the  soldier,  so  many 
touching  proofs  of  affection  given  to  the  Emperor,  and  so 
many  great  deeds,  deserve  a  more  detailed  account.  ..." 

On  the  1 8th  October  a  message  informed  the  Senate 
that  Ulm  had  capitulated  and  reinforcements  were  de- 
manded, "  so  that  we  may,  without  effusion  of  blood  and 
without  effort,  repulse  the  armies  formed  by  English  gold 
and  confound  the  auxiliaries  of  the  tyrants  of  the  seas." 
Napoleon  also  directed  the  bishops  to  thank  God  for  his 
victories  "against  that  unjust  league  fomented  by  the 
hatred  and  gold  of  England." 

On  the  same  day  appeared  another  bulletin,  in  which 
the  Emperor,  after  stating  that  he  might  have  carried 
Ulm  by  storm  but  that  he  desired  to  spare  bloodshed, 
added — "  General  Mack  was  in  the  place;  it  is  the  destiny 
of  generals  opposed  to  the  Emperor  to  be  captured  in 
fortified  towns.  It  may  be  remembered  that  after  the 
skilful  manoeuvres  of  Brenta  the  old  Field-Marshal 
Wurmser  was  made  prisoner  at  Mantua ;  Melas  was 
taken  at  Alessandria;  Mack  at  Ulm." 

Melas  was  not  taken  prisoner  after  Marengo,  but  merely 
signed  an  armistice,  in  virtue  of  which  his  army  fell  back 
on  Mantua.  It  is  a  curious  fact  that  Melas  should  have 
been  selected  to  preside  over  the  court-martial  summoned 
to  try  Mack,  and  which  condemned  him  to  death.  This 
sentence  was  commuted.  The  defence  of  Mack  was  that 
he  had  been  tied  down  to  act  on  the  defensive,  and  was 
obliged  to  divide  his  corps  in  presence  of  an  enemy  which 
concentrated  his  forces.  That  he  had  been  led  to  expect 
the  co-operation  of  the  Prussians,  who  never  made  their 
appearance  ;  of  the  Bavarians,  who  joined  the  French  ;  and 
of  the  Russians,  who  did  not  arrive  in  time.      He  also 


158     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

complained  that  he  had  been  deceived  as  to  the  date  upon 
which  hostilities  would  commence,  the  position  of  the 
French  army,  &c.  Napoleon,  after  the  capitulation,  was 
generous  enough  to  hand  Mack  a  certificate  attesting  his 
military  talents  and  judicious  measures — -a  certificate 
which  reminds  us  of  the  encomiums  lavished  upon  Provera, 
in  the  hope,  as  he  himself  acknowledged,  that  the  Aus- 
trians  would  employ  him  again.  Mack's  military  career, 
in  spite  of  his  fine  theories,  closed  at  Ulm,  and  he  narrowly 
escaped  being  shot  as  a  traitor.  It  is  perhaps  only  fair  to 
the  memory  of  Mack  to  quote  the  following  appreciation 
from  Lanfrey  (vol.  iii.  p.  308) : — ■ 

"  Napoleon  had  an  army  more  than  double  that  of  his 
adversary,  he  was  quite  unhampered,  he  could  freely 
dispose  of  all  the  resources  of  a  vast  empire;  nothing 
remained  of  that  famous  position  of  Ulm  in  which  Kray 
had  held  out,  thanks  to  the  instructions  which  paralysed 
Moreau.  The  town  was  still  fortified,  but  the  entrenched 
camp  had  been  destroyed,  and  could  no  longer  offer  any 
protection  to  the  Austrian  army." 

Ulm  having  capitulated,  and  Mack  and  his  garrison 
having  defiled  before  the  Emperor  : — 


PROCLAMATION. 

"  Imperial  Quartees,  Elchingen, 
2isi  October,  1805. 

"  Soldiers  of  the  Grand  Army, — In  -a  fortnight  we 
have  accomplished  a  campaign.  We  have  driven  the  troops 
of  Austria  out  of  Bavaria.  .  .  .  But  what  does  this  matter  to 
England  .'  She  has  attained  her  end.  We  are  no  longer 
at  Boulogne.  ...  Of  the  100,000  men  composing  the 
Austrian  army  60,000  are  prisoners ;  they  will  go  and 
replace  our  conscripts  in  their  agricultural  labours.  .  .  . 
Soldiers,  I  announced  a  great  battle,  but  thanks  to  the 
faulty  combinations  of  the  enemy  I  was  able  to  obtain 
success  without  running  any  risk  ;    and,  what  is  without 


MACK    AND    HIS    COMRADES.  1 59 

any  example  in  the  history  of  nations,  so  great  a  result 
has  only  weakened  us  by  1,500  men. 

"  Soldiers,  this  success  is  due  to  the  unlimited  confidence 
you  have  in  your  Emperor,  to  your  patience,  and  to  your 
intrepidity. 

"  But  we  shall  not  stop  there  :  you  are  impatient  to 
commence  a  second  campaign.  This  Russian  army  which 
English  gold  has  transported  from  the  extremities  of  the 
universe  must  experience  a  similar  fate.  .  .  .  They  have 
no  generals  in  fighting  against  whom  I  can  acquire  glory  ; 
all  my  care  shall  be  directed  towards  obtaining  victory 
with  the  least  possible  effusion  of  blood  ;  my  soldiers  are 
my  children.  "NAPOLEON." 

Before  Napoleon  started  for  Augsburg  the  ninth  bulletin 
made  its  appearance.  In  this  it  is  related  how  the 
Emperor,  addressing  the  Austrian  generals  captured  at 
Ulm,  said : — 

" '  Gentlemen,  your  master  has  waged  an  unjust  war 
against  me :  I  tell  you  frankly  that  I  do  not  know  why 
I  am  fighting  or  what  is  required  of  me.  ...  I  give  this 
advice  to  the  Emperor  of  Austria,  my  brother — let  him 
hasten  to  make  peace.  ...  I  do  not  desire  anything  on 
the  Continent.  Vessels,  colonies,  and  commerce  are  what  I 
want,  and  these  would  be  as  advantageous  to  you  as 
to  me.' 

"  General  Mack  replied  that  the  Emperor  of  Germany 
did  not  desire  war,  but  that  he  had  been  forced  into  it  by 
Russia.  '  In  that  case,'  said  the  Emperor,  '  you  are  no 
longer  an  independent  power.' 

"An  Austrian  Colonel  expressed  his  astonishment  to 
see  the  Emperor  wet  through,  covered  with  mud,  and  as 
worn  out  with  fatigue  as  the  lowest  drummer  in  the  army. 
The  Emperor  told  his  aide-de-camp  to  reply:  'Your 
master  wished  to  remind  me  that  I  was  a  soldier  ;  I  hope 
he  will  admit  that  the  throne  and  the  Imperial  purple  have 
not  caused  me  to  forget  my  first  trade.' 


l6o     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

"The  sight  offered  by  the  army  on  the  15th  October 
was  truly  interesting.  For  two  days  the  rain  had  been 
falling  in  bucketfuls,  and  every  one  was  drenched ;  no 
rations  had  been  served  out ;  the  men  had  mud  up  to  their 
knees  ;  but  the  sight  of  their  Emperor  restored  them  their 
gaiety,  and  directly  they  saw  him  whole  columns  in  this 
condition  shouted,  Vive  I'Empereur  ! 

"  It  is  reported  that  the  Emperor  replied  to  some  officers 
who  admired  the  manner  in  which  the  soldiers  forgot  their 
privations,  and  exhibited  such  pleasure  on  seeing  him — 
'  They  are  right,  for  it  was  to  spare  their  blood  that  I 
made  them  undergo  such  great  fatigue.'  Won  victories 
with  legs  instead  of  with  arms,  as  he  expressed  it. 

"  The  Emperor,  when  the  army  occupied  the  heights 
which  commanded  Ulm,  sent  for  Prince  Leichtenstein  to 
say  that  he  wished  him  to  capitulate,  telling  him  that  if  he 
took  the  place  by  assault  he  would  be  obliged  to  do  as 
he  had  done  at  Jaffa,  where  the  garrison  was  put  to  the 
sword — that  this  was  the  melancholy  right  of  war.  .  .  ." 

Napoleon's  intention  of  course  was  merely  to  frighten 
the  Austrian  general.  The  reference  to  Jaffa  was, 
however,  rather  impolitic. 


To  THE  EMPRESS  JOSEPHINE. 

"  Abbaye  d'Elchingen,  2gik  October,  1805. 

"  My  good  Josephine,— I  have  fatigued  myself  more 
than  was  prudent.  All  day  long  for  a  whole  week  wet  to  the 
skin,  and  the  feet  cold,  have  made  me  rather  unwell ;  but 
I  have  not  been  out  to-day,  and  that  has  rep'osed  me. 

"  I  have  carried  out  my  designs  ;  I  have  destroyed  the 
Austrian  army  by  simple  marches  ;  I  have  made  60,000 
prisoners,  and  taken  120  guns,  90  colours,  and  more  than 
30  generals. 

"I  am  going  to  march  against  the  Russians;  they 
are   lost.      I  am  satisfied  with  my  army.      We  have  lost 


THE   AUSTRIAN    ARMY.  l6l 

only    1,500    men,    two-thirds   of  whom   are   but    sHghtly 
wounded. 

"Adieu,  my  Josephine  ;  a  thousand  kind  things  to  every 
one.     Prince  Charles  is  covering  Vienna. 

"  Napoleon." 

In  the  tenth  bulletin  occurs  the  following  paragraph : — 

"It  is  difficult  to  form  an  idea  of  the  misery  of  the 
Austrian  army  ;  it  is  paid  with  notes  which  lose  40  per 
cent. ;  therefore  our  men  jokingly  call  the  Austrians  paper 
soldiers.  They  have  no  credit,  and  the  house  of  Austria 
would  find  it  difficult  to  raise  10,000  francs.  The  generals 
themselves  have  not  seen  a  piece  of  gold  for  years.  The 
English,  as  soon  as  they  heard  of  the  invasion  of  Bavaria> 
sent  the  Emperor  of  Austria  a  little  present,  which  has  not 
made  him  richer.  .  .  ." 

On  the  24th  October — matters  looking  more  and  more 
gloomy  in  Prussia — fresh  instructions  were  sent  to  Duroc. 
The  Emperor  required  his  services ;  but  before  leaving 
Berlin  he  was  to  seek  an  interview  with  the  King,  and  to 
use  this  language : — 

"  The  Emperor  has  sent  me  to  you.  He  wished  to  write 
to  your  majesty  to  inform  you  of  his  successes,  but  he  has 
been  informed  that  his  enemies  have  triumphed  at  Berlin. 
Sire,  you  have  in  the  Emperor  more  of  a  man  of  heart 
than  a  politician.  Can  it  be  possible  that  your  majesty 
desires,  by  dubious  conduct,  to  alienate  a  man  of  such 
noble  character  ?  The  affair  of  Anspach  is  but  a  vain 
pretext." 

The  General  was  also  to  declare  that  the  Emperor  was 
the  person  in  the  world  upon  whom  threats  had  the  least 
effect,  and  who  was  the  most  irritated  by  them ;  that 
Frederick  resisted  all  Europe,  and  that  the  Emperor  was 
greater  than  Frederick,  &c. 

If  Prussia   had    timidly    refrained    from    resenting   the 
violation  of  Anspach  before  the  capitulation  of  Ulm  her 
indecision  was  naturally  increased  by  that  startling  event. 
VOL.  IL  M 


l62     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

To  M.  FOUCH^. 

"Munich,  idth  October,  1805. 
"  Have    the    English    prisoner   Wright    put    in   a    cell ; 
this   miserable  assassin    endeavoured  to  escape  from  the 
Temple.  .  .  .  "NAPOLEON." 

The  case  of  Captain  Wright  may  be  thus  succinctly- 
narrated.  In  1804  he  was  in  command  of  the  Vicengo 
brig,  which  was  captured  off  Morbihan  by  some  French 
gun-boats  which  had  surrounded  her  during  a  calm.  He 
was  at  once  sent  to  his  old  prison,  the  Temple,  in  Paris,  where 
he  had  formerly  shared  the  captivity  of  Sir  Sidney  Smith. 
He  was  accused  of  having  been  connected  with  the 
Georges'  conspiracy,  and  of  having  landed  most  of  the 
conspirators  against  Bonaparte  in  France.  He  replied 
that  being  a  prisoner  of  war  he  could  make  no  deposition, 
and  that  as  an  English  subject  he  could  answer  no  ques- 
tions. It  is  probable  that  Napoleon  hated  him  not  only 
for  having  landed  conspirators,  but  because,  after  having 
made  his  escape  from  the  Temple  with  Sir  Sidney  Smith, 
he  had  aided  that  officer  in  the  defence  of  St.  Jean  d'Acre 
and  continued  to  be  his  bosom  friend.  He  was  several 
times  referred  to  in  the  Moniteiir  as  "the  worst  of  assas- 
sins," and  the  Emperor  in  his  conversation  and  in  his 
correspondence  exhibited  the  most  violent  hatred 
towards  him. 

On  the  26th  October,  1805,  the  unfortunate  Captain 
Wright  was  found  dead  in  his  cell.  His  throat  was  cut, 
and  at  his  side  was  lying  a  razor  and  a  copy  of  the 
Monitcur,  containing  the  account  of  the  capitulation  of 
Ulm,  which  was  said  to  have  determined  the  suicide.  Sir 
Sidney  Smith  afterwards  brought  to  light  a  number  of 
suspicious  circumstances  in  connection  with  this  tragedy. 
During  the  whole  of  the  evening  preceding  the  pretended 
suicide  Captain  Wright  had  been  heard  playing  the  flute 
and  had  exhibited   no  symptoms  of  dejection  ;  the  head 


CAPTAIN   WRIGHT.  1 63 

had  nearly  been  severed  from  the  body,  and  the  razor  had 
been  shut  after  the  wound  had  been  inflicted.  Then  there 
were  marks  of  people  having  trampled  in  the  blood  with 
which  the  floor  was  covered,  and  during  the  night  cries 
had  been  heard  and  the  noise  of  a  struggle.  Nor  was  this 
all :  Captain  Wright  had  several  times  told  Lieutenant 
Wallis  and  other  companions  in  the  Temple  that  the  fate 
of  Pichegru  was  in  store  for  him,  but  that  they  were  in  no 
case  to  believe  in  a  suicide.  Such  was  the  evidence 
elicited  ten  years  after  the  event. 

In  the  Annual  Register  for  1805,  November  ist,  one 
finds  : — "  There  can  exist  no  doubt  of  the  falsehood  of  the 
assertion  that  Captain  Wright  committed  suicide.  The 
moral  temper  of  his  mind,  and  the  reliance  he  placed  on 
the  protection  of  the  Government,  were  opposed  to  such 
an  act  of  despair.  He  was  aware  of  the  measures  adopted 
for  his  release.  The  second  surgeon  of  the  Temple  re- 
cently blew  out  his  brains  after  having  forwarded  to  three 
ambassadors  an  account  of  the  sufferings  of  Captain 
Wright,  who  was  twice  tortured. "^ 

Again,  on  the  nth  July,  we  find: — "Mr.  Windham 
moved  for  copies  of  the  correspondence  of  the  French 
Government  on  the  subject  of  Captain  Wright  of  H.M. 
sloop  Vicengo,  now  a  prisoner.  Sir  Sidney  Smith  seconded 
the  motion,  and  dwelt  upon  the  sufferings  of  his  friend. 
He  was  so  overcome  by  his  feelings  that  he  could  hardly 
articulate." 

In  the  Naval  Chronicle,  1805  (vol.  xi.  p.  376),  the  motive 
assigned  for  self-destruction  is  treated  as  beneath  contempt, 
and  Captain  Wright  is  set  down  as  "the  victim  of  an 
usurper."  In  vol.  xv.  p.  190,  the  belief  is  expressed  that 
"  Wright  was  put  to  torture  in  order  to  force  him  to  reveal 
the  plans  of  the  Admiralty."  In  the  volume  for  1815  we 
find  that  "his  lieutenant  Wallis  was  threatened  with  torture 
if  he  did  not  incriminate  him.  In  the  next  volume  we  find 
that  the  narrative  of  Captain  Wright  was  given  up  to  Sir 
Sidney   Smith   by  the  French   Government.      In    this  he 

M    2 


164    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

complained  of  harsh  treatment,  of  threats,  of  having  been 
questioned  by  Savary  (whom  he  had  met  in  Egypt  during 
the  Al-Arish  negotiation),  whom  he  found  the  most  despic- 
able of  men.  The  narrative  is  filled  with  noble  sentiments, 
and  the  hope  is  expressed  that  the  Government  will 
consent  to  no  sacrifice  to  save  him. 

Lanfrey  cannot  believe  Napoleon  to  have  been  guilty  of 
this  atrocious  crime  because  it  was  useless,  and  yet  he  points 
out  that  he  constantly  spoke  of  Wright  as  an  assassin  of 
the  worst  description.  In  summing  up  the  evidence  in  the 
case  of  Pichegru,  Lanfrey  admitted,  too,  that  the  murder 
of  that  purer,  more  innocent,  and  more  interesting  victim 
(the  Due  d'Enghien)  dispensed  with  the  necessity  of  re- 
plying to  the  question  — "  Was  Bonaparte  capable  of 
employing  such  means  to  get  rid  of  Pichegru  ? "  It  seems 
to  us  that  if  Bonaparte  were  capable  of  having  Pichegru 
strangled  he  was  equally  capable  of  having  that  "  wretched 
assassin  Wright "  done  to  death.  He  had  not  shown  him- 
self very  particular  in  the  case  of  Mourad  Bey,  in  that  of 
Toussaint  Louverture,  or  of  the  Marquis  de  Frott6 ;  and 
how  did  he  afterwards  deal  with  the  bookseller  Palm  and 
the  patriot  Hofer  ? 

The  letter,  too,  of  the  26th  October — the  day  upon 
which  Captain  Wright  was  assassinated — is  very  suspi- 
cious. It  has  all  the  appearance  of  having  been  written 
in  favour  of  the  defence,  and  to  prove  that  Bonaparte  was 
innocent  before  he  was  accused.  At  St.  Helena  Napoleon 
protested  against  the  accusation  levelled  against  him  in 
connection  with  this  affair,  saying  that  during  the  Austerlitz 
campaign  he  had  too  much  on  his  hands  to  be  able  to 
think  of  a  wretched  English  captain.  But  the  letter  of 
the  26th  October  disproves  this  assertion. 

To  PRINCE  JOSEPH. 

"Braunau,  zotA  October,  180;. 
"  My  Brother, — I  arrived  here  to-day.    The  snow  is  fall- 
ing in  large  flakes.     The  Russians  appear  terrified  at  the 


OPINION    OF   THE   RUSSIANS.  165 

fate  of  the  Austrian  army.  They  left  me  Braunau,  which  is 
one  of  the  keys  of  Austria,  and  is  furnished  with  stores  of 
all  kinds.  We  shall  see  what  the  Russian  army  will  do  ; 
it  has  lost  its  head.  The  people  are  very  discontented  in 
Austria,  as  the  Russians  plunder  and  violate  everywhere. 
They  despise  the  Austrian.  The  Russian  officers  get  on 
well  enough,  but  the  soldiers,  who  are  brutes,  cannot  tell  an 
Austrian  from  a  Frenchman. 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  2nd  November,  Napoleon  wrote — "  Let  my 
squadrons  sail;  let  nothing  hinder  them."  A  fortnight 
before  that  date  the  squadrons  in  question  had  ceased  to 
exist. 

To  M.  CAMBACfiRES. 

"  LiNZ,  iith  November,  1805. 
"  My  Cousin, — I  have  received  your  letter,  and  beg  you 
will  thank  the  Council  of  State.  We  are  within  a  few  days' 
march  of  Vienna.  We  have  attacked  the  Russians  but 
lightly,  for  no  matter  how  quickly  we  march,  they  retire 
more  quickly  still.  The  country  is  extremely  dissatisfied 
with  them.  In  fact  they  are  not  amiable ;  they  are  not 
satisfied  with  plundering,  but  kill  and  burn. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  M.  TALLEYRAND. 

"  LlNZ,  f^th  November,  1805. 
"  I  think  there  will  be  no  inconvenience  in  your  coming 
to  meet  me  at  the  Abbaye  de  Moelk.  You  can  pass  by 
Braunau  where  you  will  see  General  Lauriston.  The 
Emperor  of  Germany  is  still  at  Vienna.  He  has  written  me 
several  letters,  and  would  like  to  come  to  an  arrangement. 

"Napoleon." 

Several  letters  in  fact  passed  between  the  two  Emperors, 
but  although  they  were  filled  with  friendly  assurances  they 
were  insincere  on  both  sides  and  came  to  nothing. 


1 66     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

In  the  twenty-first  bulletin,  the  Grand  Army  was  in- 
formed that  the  Abbey  of  Moelk,  where  the  Emperor  had 
established  his  head-quarters,  was  one  of  the  finest  in 
Europe  ;  that  it  occupied  a  strong  position  commanding 
the  Danube;  that  it  had  been  built  by  the  Emperor 
Commodus,  and  that  the  cellars  were  well  stocked  with 
good  Hungarian  wine  which  would  be  grateful  to  the 
army.  The  troops  were  also  told  that  war  had  been  un- 
dertaken by  the  Austrian  cabinet  against  the  wishes  of  the 
imperial  family  ;  that  Colloredo  was  governed  by  his  wife, 
a  Frenchwoman,  who  hated  her  country  ;  that  Cobentzel 
trembled  at  the  very  name  of  a  Russian,  and  had  probably 
been  corrupted  by  English  agents.  To  these  two  ministers, 
and  to  the  "  wretched "  Mack,  the  war  was  attributed. 
As  for  the  army  and  the  people,  the  bulletin  declared 
that  they  were  perfectly  aware  they  were  fighting  for  the 
English ,  "  those  artisans  of  the  misfortunes  of  the  Con- 
tinent who,  by  their  monopoly,  are  the  authors  of  the  high 
price  of  goods." 

The  twenty-second  bulletin,  dated  the  13th  November, 
1805,  informed  the  army  that  Vienna  had  been  evacuated, 
and  that  the  Emperor  and  his  Court  had  fled  to  Briinn 
where  the  Czar  was  expected  coming  from  Berlin. 

"  In  Hungary,  as  in  Austria,"  continued  this  document, 
"  people  are  persuaded  that  the  Emperor  Napoleon  desires 
peace,  and  that  he  is  the  friend  of  all  nations,  and  of  all 
great  ideas. 

"  The  English  are  the  object  of  the  contiimal  impreca- 
tions of  all  the  subjects  of  the  Emperor  of  Germany,  and 
of  the  most  universal  hatred.  Is  it  not  time  for  princes  to 
listen  to  the  voice  of  their  people,  and  to  shake  off  the 
fatal  influence  of  the  English  oligarchy  .'  " 

There  had  been  some  sharp  skirmishing  with  the 
Russians,  but  no  pitched  battle.  On  the  14th  November, 
Napoleon,  who  had  taken  up  his  quarters  at  Schosnbrunn, 
ordered  Berthier  to  have  all  the  Russians  who  were  badly 
wounded  sent  into  Vienna,  so  that  the  Viennese  might  see 


NAPOLEON    ENTERS   VIENNA.  167 

that  the  Russians  had  sustained  severe  losses.  No 
wounded  French  soldiers  were  to  be  sent  in.  In  fact 
during  this,  as  well  us  during  other  campaigns,  the  French 
losses  were  carefully  concealed  so  that  neither  the  army 
nor  the  country  at  large  should  be  discouraged  beyond 
measure. 

To  M.  CAMBAC^RfeS. 

"  SCHCENBRUNN,  I'ith  November,  1805. 

"  You  will  have  seen  by  the  bulletin  that  I  have  arrived 
at  Vienna.  This  causes  me,  for  the  moment,  all  kinds  of 
embarrassment.  ...  I  don't  know  what  to  think  of 
Marbois  (Minister  of  Finance).  I  believe  he  has  gone 
mad.  He  wants  me  to  summon  the  Legislative  Body  in 
order  to  procure  money. 

"  It  is  really  extraordinary  that  knowing  me  so  busy  he 
should  preach  me  such  ridiculous  sermons.  ...  I  beg 
you  will  let  me  know  if  my  palace  of  the  Tuileries  is 
finished.  M.  Fontaine  (the  architect)  must  not  trust  too 
much  to  my  being  in  the  palace  of  the  Emperor  of 
Germany.  Find  out  also  if  my  palace  of  Brussels  is 
ready.  I  suppose  you  have  some  one  in  Paris  to  replace 
M.  Daru,  whom  I  have  appointed  my  Minister  of  Finance 
in  Austria. 

"  Napoleon." 

It  is  interesting  at  this  point  to  refer  to  some  reflections 
made  by  Madame  de  Remusat  on  this  iniquitous  war  and 
the  condition  of  France.^ 

^  "  The  English  were  far  from  having  the  same  confidence  in  their 
soldiers  which  they  have  since  deservedly  inspired.  The  tightness  of 
money  was  at  once  felt ;  shortly  afterwards  the  bank  suspended  pay- 
ment ;  money  became  dear,  and  was  sold  at  a  high  rate.  I  was  told 
that  our  exports  were  stopped  by  the  war,  and  that  they  augmented 
the  price  of  everything  which  came  from  abroad.  The  campaign  of 
Austerlitz  was  the  signal  for  numerous  failures  all  through  the  country. 
Private  uneasiness  added  to  the  general  gloom.  Already  many  dis- 
tinguished families  whose  children  had  embraced  the  career  of  arms 


1 68     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

In  the  twenty-fourth  bulletin  the  Grand  Army  was  in- 
formed that  the  palace  of  Schcenbrunn,  "where  the  Emperor 
is  staying,  was  built  by  Maria  Theresa,  whose  portrait  is  to 
be  found  in  nearly  all  the  apartments.  In  the  cabinet, 
where  the  Emperor  works,  is  a  marble  statue  of  that 
sovereign.  The  Emperor  on  seeing  it,  said,  '  If  that 
great  princess  were  still  alive  she  would  not  allow  herself 
to  be  influenced  by  the  intrigues  of  a  woman  like  Madame 
de  Colloredo.  She  would  never  have  given  the  command 
of  her  army  to  a  man  like  Mack,  appointed,  not  by  the 
will  of  the  sovereign  nor  the  confidence  of  the  nation,  but 
by  England  and  Russia.  .  .  .'  " 

On  the  1 6th  November,  Napoleon  wrote  a  letter  to  the 
Elector  of  Wirtemberg  asking  him  to  use  his  influence 
with  his  sister,  the  mother  of  the  Czar,  in  favour  of  the 
arrangements  he  contemplated.  "  She  cannot  be  opposed 
to  arrangements  which  will  benefit  her  family,"  he  said  ; 
"  it  is  in  the  interest  of  Russia  that  Austria  should  be 
weakened.  I  think,"  he  added,  "  that  a  mother  imploring 
her  son  in  favour  of  the  splendour  of  her  house  would 
have  a  fine  effect,  and  it  would  be  possible  to  draw  up 
the  treaties  in  such  a  manner  as  to  tickle  the  vanity  of 
Russia.  .  .  ." 

Russia  wanted  something  more  than  fine  words. 

On  the  same  day  the  twenty-fifth  bulletin  to  the  Grand 
Army  made  its  appearance.  It  related  among  other 
matters    that—"  General    Klein    made  an    incursion    into 

trembled  for  their  fate.  With  what  anxiety  did  parents  await  those 
bulletins  which  at  any  moment  might  annomice  the  loss  of  some  one 
dear  to  them  ?  What  torture  did  Bonaparte  impose  upon  mothers 
and  upon  wives  during  many  a  year  !  He  was  sometimes  astonished 
at  the  hatred  he  ended  by  inspiring ;  but  was  it  possible  to  pardon 
him  such  prolonged  and  painful  anxiety,  so  many  tears,  so  many 
sleepless  nights,  and  so  many  days  filled  with  terror?"  And  after 
Ulm — "  The  want  of  money  was  painfully  felt  ;  commerce  suffered ; 
the  theatres  were  deserted ;  poverty  increased  and  people  were  sus- 
tained alone  by  the  hope  that  so  brilliant  a  campaign  would  be 
followed  by  a  speedy  peace." 


THE   HORRORS    OF   WAR.  169 

Bohemia  with  his  dragoons.  He  found  the  Russians 
everywhere  held  in  horror  ;  the  devastations  they  commit 
malce  one  shudder.  The  irruption  of  these  barbarians, 
called  in  by  the  Government  itself,  has  nearly  extinguished 
in  the  hearts  of  Austrian  subjects  all  affection  for  their 
prince.'  We  and  the  French,  say  the  Germans,  are  the 
sons  of  the  Romans  ;  the  Russians  are  the  children  of  the 
Tartars.  We  prefer  a  thousand  times  over  to  see  the 
French  armed  against  us  to  having  such  allies  as  the 
Russians.  At  Vienna  the  very  name  of  Russian  inspires 
terror.  These  hordes  of  savages  are  not  satisfied  with 
plundering  for  their  subsistence  ;  they  carry  away  and 
destroy  everything.  An  unfortunate  peasant  who  has 
nothing  but  his  clothes  in  his  cabin  is  despoiled  of  them. 
.  .  .  No  doubt  this  is  the  last  time  that  an  European 
government  will  call  for  such  fatal  aid.  .  .  ." 

The  next  day  Napoleon  wrote  as  follows  to  the  Emperor 
of  Austria  : — 

"Znaym,  \']th  November,  1805. 

"  I  hasten  to  reply  to  your  Majesty's  letter,  to  thank 
you  for  the  confidence  you  display,  and  to  assure  you  of 
my  desire  to  be  agreeable.  .  .  "  I  wished  to  push  my 
advanced  guards  as  far  as  Briinn  to-day  ;  but  I  shall  remain 
here  all  to-morrow,  and  in  fact  as  long  as  your  Majesty 
remains  there,  for  I  would  not,  when  my  sole  desire  is  to 
pursue  the  Russian  army  and  force  it  to  evacuate  your 
states,  do  anything  you  might  consider  personally  dis- 
agreeable. I  beg  your  Majesty  to  permit  me  merely  to 
show  you  in  what  a  terrible  manner  Moravia  is  being 
devastated.  .  .  .      Your  subjects  come  to    us  with  trans- 

1  Napoleon  was  afterwards  convinced  of  his  error.  The  Emperor 
of  Austria  lost  none  of  his  popularity  by  misfortunes  for  which  he  was 
not  accountable.  After  his  return  to  Paris  Napoleon  learned  with 
astonishment  what  a  touching  reception  the  Viennese  had  given 
their  conquered  sovereign,  and  shrewdly  surmised  that  had  he 
returned  to  his  capital  under  similar  circumstances  matters  would 
have  assumed  a  very  different  aspect. 


170    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON, 

ports  of  joy,  show  us  where  the  Russians  are,  and  help  us. 

They  are  barbarians,  they  say,  and  if  you  give  us  arms 

we  will  aid  you  in  driving  them  out.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

There  can  be  no  doubt,  even  according  to  their  own 
historians,  that  the  French,  from  marshals  down,  pillaged 
in  the  most  shameless  manner,  and  sent  an  immense  booty 
to  France. 

To  VICE-ADMIRAL  DECR^S. 

"Znaym,  iZth  November,  1805. 
"  I  have  received  your  letter  relating  to  the  combat  of 
Cadiz.  I  await  the  ulterior  details  which  you  promise  me 
before  forming  a  decisive  opinion  on  the  nature  of  this 
affair.  In  the  meantime  I  hasten  to  inform  you  that  this 
will  in  no  way  change  my  plans  as  regards  naval  opera- 
tions. .  .  .  Let  all  the  troops  that  were  on  board  the 
squadron  await  orders  in  the  first  French  town. 

"  Napoleon." 

It  was  on  the  i8th  November  while  sitting  at  table,  and 
while  the  French  were  singing  Te  Deums  over  the  victory 
of  Austerlitz,  that  Berthier  silently  handed  Napoleon  the 
despatch  which  announced  the  fatal  disaster  of  Trafalgar. 
Villeneuve  had  obeyed  the  Emperor's  positive  orders,  and 
the  result  was  the  almost  total  destruction  of  the  com- 
bined fleet.  Out  of  thirty-five  vessels  eight  managed  to 
get  back  to  Cadiz,  where  they  fell  into  the  hands  of  the 
Spanish  insurgents ;  four  which  formed  the  vanguard 
under  the  command  of  Rear-Admiral  Dumanoir,  con- 
trived to  make  their  escape  for  a  time,  after  having  taken 
little  or  no  share  in  the  battle ;  the  remainder  were  either 
captured,  destroyed,  or  wrecked  upon  the  coast.  At  the 
battle  of  the  Nile  Villeneuve  had  been  complimented  for 
saving  a  portion  of  the  fleet  by  sheering  off  in  time,  and 
Dumanoir  thought  it  prudent  to  adopt  the  same  course. 
Unfortunately,  a  few  days  later,  he  and  his  four  ships  were 


DEATH    OF   ADMIRAL   VILLENEUVE.  171 

captured  by  Sir  Richard  Strachan.  The  failure  of  the 
naval  campaign  was  therefore  complete,  and  England 
heard  little  more  of  the  threatened  invasion.  Villeneuve 
would  fain  have  fallen  like  Nelson  on  his  quarter-deck,  but 
a  darker  and  more  mysterious  fate  was  in  store  for  him. 
He  was  taken  prisoner  and  sent  to  England.  After 
frequent  demands  to  be  allowed  home  on  parole  to  stand 
his  trial  he  was  permitted  to  return  to  France.  He  landed 
at  Morlaix,  from  which  place  he  wrote  to  Decr^s,  stating 
that  he  was  on  his  way  to  Paris  in  order  to  appeal  to  the 
justice  of  the  Emperor.  In  his  letter  to  Decres  he  said — 
"  Overwhelmed  with  the  extent  of  my  misfortune,  and  the 
responsibility  attending  so  great  a  disaster,  I  desire  to  lay 
at  the  feet  of  his  majesty  either  the  justification  of  my 
conduct,  or  the  victim  who  is  to  be  immolated  not  to  the 
honour  of  the  flag,  but  to  the  manes  of  those  who  have 
perished  by  my  hnpriidence"  The  imprudence  of  having 
obeyed  orders  contrary  to  his  better  judgment.  The  story 
goes  that  on  reaching  Rennes  Villeneuve  received  so  harsh 
a  reply  from  his  old  friend  the  Minister  of  Marine,  that  he 
committed  suicide  by  stabbing  himself  six  times  in  the 
region  of  the  heart.  On  his  table  was  found  a  most  noble 
and  touching  letter  to  his  wife,  in  which  he  announced  his 
intention  in  these  words — ■"  My  tender  friend,  how  will 
you  receive  this  blow  1  Alas  !  I  weep  more  for  you  than 
for  myself  .  .  .  Alone  here  ;  suffering  under  the  anathema 
of  the  Emperor ;  repelled  by  his  minister  who  was  my 
friend ;  overwhelmed  with  an  immense  responsibility  in  a 
disaster  which  is  attributed  to  me,  and  into  which  I  was 
hurried  by  fatality.  I  ought  to  die.  .  .  .  Live  tranquilly, 
derive  consolation  from  religion  ;  my  hope  is  that  you  will 
find  a  repose  which  is  denied  me.  Adieu  !  Dry  the  tears 
of  those  to  whom  I  may  be  dear.  I  wish  to  finish,  but  I 
cannot.  How  fortunate  that  I  have  no  child  to  receive 
this  horrible  inheritance,  and  to  bear  the  weight  of  my 
name  !  I  was  not  born  for  such  a  fate,  I  did  not  seek  it,  I 
was  drawn  into  it  in  spite  of  myself.  Adieu  !  Adieu  !  ..." 


172    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Lanfrey  tells  this  story,  adding  that  people  refused  to 
believe  in  a  suicide,  the  death  of  Pichegru,  the  tragedy  of 
Vincennes,  and  the  mysterious  end  of  Captain  Wright 
being  fresh  in  their  minds.  But  when  Lanfrey  wrote  his 
history  he  was  not  aware  of  some  important  facts  which 
will  one  day  be  published  by  the  Marquis  de  Villeneuve, 
the  grand-nephew  of  the  admiral.  In  the  first  place  no 
one  ever  saw  the  letter  asserted  to  have  been  written 
previous  to  the  suicide.  Madame  de  Villeneuve  applied 
for  it  in  vain,  and  at  last  Fouch6  declared  that  he  had  sent 
her  this  important  document  by  the  post,  and  that  it  had 
been  lost !  Out  of  the  six  wounds  which  the  admiral  was 
supposed  to  have  inflicted  on  himself,  two  were  mortal, 
having  pierced  his  heart.  Villeneuve  must  therefore  have 
stabbed  himself  at  least  once  after  death,  and  also  have 
thrown  the  weapon  away,  for  the  dagger  with  which  the 
blows  were  dealt  was  found  at  several  paces  from  his 
body  !  Again,  the  story  of  Decres  having  written  harshly 
to  the  unfortunate  admiral  is  pure  invention.  The  Marquis 
de  Villeneuve  possesses  the  letter  in  question,  which  is 
couched  in  the  most  affectionate  terms.  Is  it  probable, 
too,  that  Villeneuve,  who  was  so  anxious  to  stand  a  court- 
martial  in  order  to  clear  his  character,  should  have  put  an 
end  to  his  own  existence,  as  if  he  feared  an  inquiry  ?  A 
letter  which  Napoleon  wrote  on  the  day  that  the  admiral 
died  i.s,  taking  previous  circumstances  into  account,  calcu- 
lated to  heighten  rather  than  allay  suspicion.  It  ran 
thus : — 

To  DECRES. 

"St.  Cloud,  22nd  April,  1806. 
"  Order  Admiral  Villeneuve  to  go  home,  and  to  remain 
quietly  in  Provence  until  his  exchange  can  be  effected. 

"  If  Captain  Infernet  behaved  well,  inform  him  of  my 
satisfaction. 

"  Tell  Captain  Lucas  to  come  to  Paris.     I  shall  see  that 
brave  man  with  pleasure.  a  Napoleon  " 


VILLENEUVE  AND    TOURVILLE.  173 

This  letter,  if  sincere,  would  naturally  prove  that 
Napoleon  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  admiral's  death — 
that  his  resentment  had  vanished,  and  that  he  was  well- 
disposed  towards  two  of  the  captains  who  fought  under 
Villeneuve's  orders.  The  letter  is  altogether  too  moderate; 
it  makes  no  mention  of  the  court-martial  which  the 
admiral  demanded.  According  to  the  Marquis  de  Ville- 
neuve  it  was  this  court-martial  which  Napoleon  wished  to 
avoid.  Villeneuve  was  to  be  tried,  not  for  having  lost  the 
battle  of  Trafalgar,  but  for  having  sacrificed  the  combined 
fleet  in  a  hopeless  struggle.  And  he  had  Napoleon's 
positive  orders  to  fight  in  his  pocket.  In  fact,  the  instruc- 
tions of  the  Emperor  Napoleon  caused  the  destruction  of 
the  combined  fleets  at  Trafalgar,  as  those  of  General 
Bonaparte  caused   the  disaster  of  the  Nile. 

Villeneuve  had  been  placed  in  a  position  similar  to  that 
of  Tourville  under  Louis  XIV.  In  1691  it  was  deter- 
mined to  attempt  the  invasion  of  England,  and  Tourville, 
who  was  to  protect  the  flotilla,  received  orders  to  fight. 
In  reply  to  his  remonstrances  Pontchartrain  wrote — "  It  is 
not  for  you  to  discuss  the  orders  of  the  king  ;  if  you  will 
not  execute  them,  his  majesty  will  find  some  one  more 
obedient  and  less  circumspect  than  you  are."  Tourville 
put  to  sea,  fell  in  with  Admiral  Russell  off  Cape  Hogue, 
and  lost  a  dozen  vessels. 

One  version  of  the  death  of  Villeneuve  was  that  he  had 
been  murdered  by  Captain  Magendie,  of  the  Bucentaure, 
at  the  instigation  of  Napoleon,  and  so  persistent  was  this 
rumour  that  the  captain,  after  the  fall  of  the  empire,  con- 
sidered it  necessary  to  clear  his  memory,  and  to  protest 
against  having  dipped  his  hands  in  the  blood  of  the  "  dear 
and  good  admiral." 

In  consequence  of  these  rumours,  Napoleon  wrote  on 
the  26th  of  April  to  Decr6s,  saying  that  he  thought  it 
would  be  well  to  have  a  medical  report  made  on  the  death 
of  Villeneuve,  &c.,  adding  :  "  It  will  be  useless  to  say 
anything  about  his  wife's  letter!" 


174     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

According  to  Lanfrey,  Napoleon,  after  all  the  haughty- 
demonstrations  and  threats  he  had  made  against  England, 
at  one  time  desired  a  disaster  like  that  of  the  Hogue,  so 
that  he  might  be  able  to  throw  the  blame  of  failure  upon 
others,  and  escape  from  a  false  position  without  ridicule. 
It  is  certain  that  it  was  contrary  to  the  entreaties  of  his 
Minister  of  Marine,  and  of  his  own,  and  of  the  Spanish 
naval  officers,  that  the  battle  of  Trafalgar  was  fought. 

The  French  and  the  Spaniards  have  still  to  settle 
between  them  which  of  the  two  was  the  most  to  blame 
for  this  memorable  disaster.  Don  Jose  Guell,  of  Rente, 
recently  published  a  history  of  the  Spanish  navy,  in  which 
he  gives  the  following  description  of  Trafalgar — an  episode 
to  be  compared  neither  to  the  famous  battle  of  Lepanto 
nor  to  the  unfortunate  destruction  of  the  Spanish  Armada. 
"  The  battle  of  Trafalgar,"  he  writes,  "was  the  last  effort 
of  the  grandeur  and  the  courage  of  the  Spanish  marine, 
and  will  remain  the  eternal  glory  of  our  country.  Gravina, 
Alba,  Escano,  Cisneros,  Galiano,  Charruca,  Yriarte,  Vald^s, 
Hor6,  Butron,  Apodaca,  Falcon,  Alcedo,  and  Moyna  of 
Castanos,  are  immortal  names  which  a  grateful  nation 
should  inscribe  upon  marble  in  memory  of  the  noble 
actions  of  those  heroes."  After  criticising  the  conduct  of 
Villeneuve  previous  to  Trafalgar,  and  alluding  to  the 
council  of  war  held  before  the  battle,  the  author  continues  : 
"  The  Spaniards  were  opposed  to  a  sortie,  their  ships  not 
being  prepared.  Charruca  said  to  his  comrades,  '  I  do  not 
approve  of  a  sortie  of  the  combined  fleets ;  the  season  is 
too  far  advanced  ;  I  believe  the  squadron  would  hamper 
the  English  more  by  remaining  at  Cadiz,  than  by  fighting 
a  decisive  battle ! '  This  decision  was  known  to  the 
French  admiral,  but  he  determined  at  all  hazards  to  risk 
an  engagement,  and  in  fact  he  put  to  sea  without  any 
plans.  All  his  instructions  might  be  reduced  to  this 
phrase,  '  Let  every  one  do  what  he  thinks  best ;  I 
expect  great  things  from  each  captain.'  Nelson  was  more 
prudent.     On  the   19th  October,    1805,  the  fleet  put  out 


SPANISH   ACCOUNT    OF   TRAFALGAR.  1 75 

from  Cadiz ;  it  was  composed  of  fifteen  Spanish  and 
eighteen  French  ships,  five  frigates,  and  two  brigs  ;  and  on 
the  2 1st  October  a  terrible  action  was  fought. 

"  A  bitter  engagement  commenced  between  the  Royal 
Sovereign  and  the  Santa  Ana.  Both  ships  were  equally- 
ill-treated.  In  the  middle  of  the  engagement  CoUingwood 
was  obliged  to  go  aboard  the  frigate  Euryalus,  and  the 
Santa  Ana,  destroyed,  saw  the  gallant  Alava  and  the 
captain,  Gardoki,  fall  on  her  deck. 

"At  the  same  moment  the  combat  became  general. 
Rear-Admiral  Cisneros,  commanding  the  Santissima 
Trinidada,  exhibited  unexampled  courage ;  the  ravages 
caused  by  the  enemy  were  enormous. 

"  The  spectacle  offered  by  the  centre  of  the  Franco- 
Spanish  squadron  resembled  a  horrible  volcano ;  the  firing 
was  incessant  ;  a  lugubrious  gleam  was  shed  over  the 
ocean  to  a  great  distance ;  the  flames  enveloped  the 
combatants  ;  but  the  Santissima  Trinidada,  by  prodigies 
of  valour,  kept   her  flag  flying. 

"  However,  the  victory  remained  with  the  English,  who 
paid  dearly  for  their  triumph  by  the  death  of  the  great 
Nelson. 

"  It  was  in  this  same  battle  that  Yriarte  distinguished 
himself  by  resisting  until  half-past  five  in  the  evening,  and 
also  the  intrepid  sailor,  Vald^s.  The  latter,  who  led  the 
van  on  board  the  Neptune,  remarking  that  the  ships  in  the 
centre  were  about  to  be  captured,  and  that  Rear-Admiral 
Dumanoir,  under  whose  orders  he  had  been  placed,  had  no 
intention  of  fighting,  violated  discipline,  and  went  about 
alone  in  order  to  take  part  ih  the  engagement.  '  Where 
are  you  going  } '  demanded  Dumanoir.  '  Under  fire  ! '  he 
replied,  without  stopping,  and  he  was  followed  by  the 
captain  of  the  Rqyo.     (Captain  Macdonald.) 

"But  these  generous  efforts  were  useless.  The  Neptune, 
attacked  by  four  ships,  sustained  the  formidable  shock  as 
long  as  her  gallant  chief  had  a  voice  to  command  and  an 
arm  to  work  his  batteries. 


176     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

"  Seriously  wounded,  as  well  as  his  second  in  command, 
surrounded  by  dead  and  wounded  stretched  on  the  deck, 
and  interfering  with  the  working  of  the  ship,  he  could  not 
prolong  the  struggle.  But  the  tempest  snatched  the  prey 
from  the  conqueror,  and  the  vessel  was  dashed  to  pieces  on 
the  rocks  of  Santa  Catalina. 

"  The  Principe  de  les  Asturias  was  attacked  by  five 
ships,  and  resisted  for  four  hours.  Gravina,  severely 
wounded,  handed  over  the  command  to  Escano,  who  was 
struck  by  a  splinter  in  the  leg.  But,  nevertheless,  this 
valiant  mariner  continued  to  fight,  and  it  was  only  when 
all  hope  had  been  lost  that  he  gave  the  signal  for  retreat. 

"  The  same  ardour  and  the  same  heroism  appeared  to 
animate  all  the  combatants  on  that  fatal  day.  Galiano, 
who  commanded  the  Bahama,  defended  himself  against 
three  vessels.  Wounded  in  the  midst  of  his  crew,  he  cried, 
'  Gentlemen,  bear  in  mind  that  the  flag  is  nailed  to  the 
mast,  and  cannot  be  hauled  down  ! '  And  the  Bahama,  torn 
to  shreds  after  an  heroic  struggle,  disappeared  in  the  deep. 

"  The  fate  of  the  San  Juan  Nepomuceno  was  equally 
glorious.  She  was  commanded  by  Charruca,  one  of  those 
gallant  men  who  know,  like  the  eagle,  how  to  soar 
above  the  tempest.  When  the  squadron  received  orders 
to  sail,  he  sent  for  his  brother-in-law,  Cepodaca,  and  said 
to  him,  '  Write  to  your  parents  that  you  are  about  to  take 
part  in  a  battle  which  will  be  sanguinary.  Bid  them  adieu, 
for  your  fate  will  be  mine ;  rather  than  surrender  my  ship, 
I  shall  blow  her  up.  Such  is  the  duty  of  those  who  serve 
king  and  country.' 

"And  to  a  friend  he  wrote  the  same  day,  saying,  '  If  you 
happen  to  hear  that  my  ship  has  been  captured,  say  that  I 
am  dead.' 

"  The  San  Juan  fought  alone  against  six  vessels.  During 
the  engagement  the  masts  were  shot  away,  grape-shot  and 
dead  bodies  strewed  the  deck,  and  yet  Charruca  never  for 
a  moment  lost  his  serenity.  ...  In  the  thickest  of  the 
fight   a   cannon-ball   carried   away  his  right  leg.     '  It   is 


DEFENCE    OF    DE   VILLENEUVE.  177 

nothing ! '  cried  the  hero,  brandishing  his  sword.  '  Continue 
firing  ! '  His  noble  heart  deceived  him.  .  .  .  When  at  last 
it  became  necessary  to  lower  the  flag,  the  English  officers 
of  the  different  ships  which  surrounded  the  San  Juan 
leaped  on  board  to  ask  to  which  of  them  she  had 
surrendered,  disputing  such  a  victory.  The  worthy  son-in- 
law  of  the  gallant  Charruca,  the  brave  Falcon,  answered, 
'  Attacked  by  six  vessels  I  succumb  :  never  would  the  San 
Juan  have  struck  to  a  single  ship.' 

"  The  remains  of  the  San  Juan  were  taken  to  Gibraltar, 
and  preserved  for  many  years.  The  cabin  of  the  com- 
mander was  closed,  and  the  name  of  Charruca  was 
inscribed  on  the  door  in  letters  of  gold. 

"  Let  us  also  cite  the  Monarca,  which  was  one  of  the 
first  vessels  engaged.  She  fought  for  five  hours,  until  she 
was  dismasted  and  making  water  on  all  sides.  The  San 
Ildefonso  was  destroyed. 

"  Three  ships  were  captured  by  the  enemy,  three  were 
sunk,  and  four  were  driven  ashore  in  the  fearful  tempest 
which  succeeded  the  battle.  Such  were  the  results  of 
Trafalgar. 

"  It  may  be  said  that  Spain  closed,  with  this  catastrophe, 
the  history  of  her  great  marine.  .  .  .  The  disaster  of 
Trafalgar  was  the  winding-sheet  of  our  maritime  grandeur, 
and  the  signal  of  the  ruin  and  decadence  of  Spain." 

The  grand-nephew  of  Admiral  de  Villeneuve  has  taken 
exception  to  the  latest  Spanish  edition  of  Trafalgar.  He 
says  that  the  French  admiral  received  positive  orders  from 
the  Emperor  to  fight,  and  that  he  issued  the  most  minute 
instructions  to  his  captains.  Well  knowing  what  Nelson 
would  attempt,  he  said,  "  The  enemy  will  not  confine 
himself  to  forming  a  line  of  battle  parallel  to  ours,  and 
engaging  us  with  his  artillery ;  he  will  endeavour  to 
envelop  our  rear  division,  to  break  our  line,  and  to  fall 
upon  those  vessels  he  succeeds  in  detaching."  "  Never," 
he  adds,  "  did  Villeneuve  write  the  burlesque  phrase 
attributed  to  him  by  the  Spanish  historian."     The  text 

VOL.  II.  N 


178     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

of  the  last  order  issued  by  the  French  admiral,  and  which 
M.  Lanfrey  very  wrongly  says  might  be  taken  for  a  trans- 
lation of  that  signalled  by  Nelson,  was,  "  Captains  who 
cannot  perceive  the  signals  of  the  admiral  should 
manoeuvre  to  come  into  action,  they  cannot  do  wrong 
in  laying  their  vessels  alongside  those  of  the  enemy. 
The  captain  who  is  not  engaged  is  not  at  his  post  and  a 
signal  to  recall  him  will  be  a  stain  on  his  honour."  Nelson 
would  never  have  insulted  his  captains  by  supposing  any 
of  them  capable  of  sheering  off  in  the  moment  of  danger. 
The  Marquis  de  Villeneuve  further  observes  that  it 
was  the  unanimous  opinion  of  the  French,  as  well  as  of 
the  Spanish  officers  assembled  on  board  the  Bucentaure, 
that  an  engagement  could  end  only  in  a  disaster,  but 
when  Villeneuve  declared  that  he  had  positive  orders  to 
attack,  "  all  these  gallant  men  bowed  their  heads  in 
silence,  and  left  the  council-chamber  in  a  state  of  con- 
sternation, but  determined  to  make  the  English  pay 
dearly  for  their  victory."  The  count  adds  that  no  doubt 
several  Spanish  vessels  showed  themselves  worthy  of  their 
old  reputation,  and  defended  their  flags  with  great 
intrepidity,  and  that  the  names  of  Gravina,  Cisneros, 
Valdes,  and  Charruca,  deserve  to  be  handed  down  to 
posterity  with  those  of  Lucas,  Magon,  Baudoin,  and 
Infernet.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  there  were  numerous 
instances  of  weakness,  and  several  French  and  Spanish 
ships  re-entered  Cadiz  without  having  fired  a  shot.  One 
vessel,  placed  in  the  centre  of  the  line,  left  its  post  before 
the  engagement  commenced,  and  had  not  a  single  man 
placed  hors  de  combat. 

It  is  impossible  not  to  be  struck  by  several  points  of 
resemblance  in  the  tragical  end  of  Pichegru,  of  Wright, 
and  of  Villeneuve.  There  was  no  reason  to  suspect  that 
either  of  the  three  intended  suicide.  Pichegru  was  anxious 
to  speak  out  in  court,  Wright  declared  to  his  friends  that 
he  would  not  take  his  own  life,  and  Villeneuve  was  anxious 
to  stand  a  court-martial.      In  each  case  the  manner  of 


ALLIANCE    BETWEEN    RUSSIA    AND    PRUSSIA.        1  79 

death  seemed  contrary  to  the  presumption  that  suicide  had 
been  committed  —  that  Pichegru  could  have  strangled 
himself  as  he  was  strangled  ;  that  Wright  could  have  cut 
his  throat  as  his  throat  was  cut,  and  have  closed  the  razor 
after  the  deed ;  that  Villeneuve  could  have  stabbed 
himself  as  he  was  stabbed.  The  volume  of  Seneca,  the 
newspaper,  and  the  letter  which  Villeneuve  was  supposed 
to  have  written  to  his  wife,  seem  to  be  the  work  of  the 
same  mind,  as  also  the  order  that  Wright  should  be  put  in 
a  cell,  written  on  the  day  of  his  death,  and  the  order  that 
Villeneuve  should  repair  to  his  seat  in  the  country. 

In  the  twenty-seventh  bulletin  it  was  announced  that 
Murat  had  entered  Briinn  on  the  i8th  November,  and  that 
"the  Moravians  are  astonished  to  see,  in  the  midst  of  their 
immense  plains,  the  inhabitants  of  Ukrania,  of  Kam~ 
schatka,  of  Tartary,  and  Normans,  Gascons,  Bretons,  and 
Burgundians,  cutting  each  other's  throats,  without  their 
countries  having  anything  in  common,  and  without  the 
existence  of  any  immediate  political  interest.  They  have 
sufficient  good  sense  to  say,  in  their  bad  Bohemian,  that 
human  blood  has  become  merchandise  in  the  hands  of  the 
English.  A  large  Moravian  farmer  said  lately  to  a  French 
officer,  while  speaking  of  Joseph  II.,  that  he  was  the 
Emperor  of  the  peasants,  and  that,  had  he  continued  to 
live,  he  would  have  freed  them  from  the  feudal  rights 
which  they  pay  to  monasteries  and  convents.  .  .  .  The 
Emperor  of  Germany  has  retired  to  Olmiitz.  Our  outposts 
are  at  one  march  from  that  place." 

Negotiations  were  attempted,  and  Count  Stadion  and 
General  Gyulai  had  a  long  conference  with  Napoleon,  who 
demanded  that  Venice  should  be  ceded  to  the  kingdom  of 
Italy.  These  negotiations,  however,  were  not  destined  to 
bear  fruit,  and  now  the  Czar  made  his  appearance  on  the 
scene.  He  had  seen  the  King  of  Prussia  while  passing 
through  Berlin,  and  the  two  monarchs  had  sworn  inviolable 
friendship  before  the  tomb  of  Frederick  the  Great  at 
Potsdam. 

N    2 


l8o  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  THE  EMPEROR  OF  RUSSIA. 

"Imperial  Head- Quarters,  Brunn, 
2^th  November,  1805. 

"  Sire, — I  send  my  aide-de-camp.  General  Savary,  to 
your  Majesty  in  order  to  compliment  you  on  your  arrival. 
I  have  charged  him  to  assure  you  of  all  my  esteem,  and  of 
my  desire  to  find  opportunities  of  proving  how  ambitious  I 
am  to  win  your  friendship.  Receive  him  with  the  kindness 
for  which  you  are  distinguished,  and  hold  me  to  be  one  of 
the  men  the  most  anxious  to  be  agreeable  to  you,"  &c.,  &c. 

"  Napoleon." 

The  Czar  returned  a  reply  addressed  "  To  the  Chief  of 
the  French  Government,"  a  reply  which  led  Napoleon  to 
doubt  the  intentions  of  Prussia. 

DECREE. 

"BRtJNN,  28/A  November,  1805. 
"  Art  I.  A  contribution  of  ioo,ooo,ooof  shall  be  raised 
in  Moravia  and  the  other  provinces  of  the  House  of  Austria 
occupied  by  the  French  army. 

"  Art.  2.  This  sum  is  to  be  given  as  a  recompense  to 
the  army.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

In  a  letter  of  the  30th  November,  addressed  to  Talley- 
rand, Napoleon  said  he  had  just  seen  M.  Haugwitz,  who 
had  conversed  with  a  great  deal  of  finesse,  and  even  talent, 
and  had  left  on  His  Majesty's  mind  the  impression  that  the 
Prussian  Government  was  uncertain  how  to  act.  He 
added  : — 

"  To-morrow  I  shall  probably  have  a  serious  battle  with 
the  Russians ;  I  have  done  all  I  could  to  avoid  it,  for  it 
will  be  blood  shed  without  utility.  I  have  had  a  correspond- 
ence with  the  Emperor  of  Russia  ;  the  impression  which 


AUSTERLITZ.  l8l 

remains  on  my  mind  is  that  he  is  a  good  and  worthy  man 
under  the  influence  of  persons,  who  are  sold  to  England, 
to  such  a  point  that  they  wish  me  to  give  Genoa  to  the 
King  of  Sardinia,  and  to  renounce  Belgium  !  You  will  fall 
flat  on  your  back  when  you  learn  that  M.  de  Novosiltzof 
has  proposed  to  unite  Belgium  and  Holland.  All  reason- 
able persons  pronounce  this  to  be  madness.  .  .  .  Write  to 
Paris,  but  do  not  speak  about  a  battle,  for  that  would 
make  my  wife  uneasy.   .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  1st  December  Napoleon  announced  the  coming 
battle  to  the  army,  and  took  his  troops  into  his  confidence. 
He  said  : 

"  The  positions  which  we  occupy  are  formidable,  and 
while  the  Russians  march  to  turn  my  right  they  will 
expose  their  flank. 

"  Soldiers,  I  shall  myself  direct  all  your  battalions  ;  1 
shall  keep  out  of  range  if,  with  your  accustomed  bravery, 
you  carry  disorder  and  confusion  into  the  ranks  of  the 
enemy  ;  but  if  the  victory  is  for  a  moment  uncertain,  you 
shall  see  your  Emperor  expose  himself.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

The  knowledge  displayed  by  Napoleon  of  the  intentions 
of  the  Russians  was  afterwards  attributed  to  the  fact  of 
Weyrother's  plan  having  been  betrayed.  According  to  De 
Maistre,  no  doubt  existed  at  St.  Petersburg  that  such  was 
the  case. 

To  PRINCE  JOSEPH. 

"  AuSTERLiTZ,  yd  December,  1805. 
".  .  .  After  manoeuvring  for  a  few  days  I  fought  a 
decisive  battle  yesterday.  I  defeated  the  combined  armies 
commanded  by  the  Emperors  of  Russia  and  of  Germany. 
Their  force  consisted  of  80,000  Russians  and  30,000 
Austrians.     I  have  made  about  40,000  prisoners,  taken  40 


1 82  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

flags,  ICO  guns,  and  all  the  standards  of  the  Russian 
Imperial  Guard.  .  .  .  Although  I  have  bivouacked  in  the 
open  air  for  a  week,  my  health  is  good.  This  evening  I 
am  in  bed  in  the  beautiful  castle  of  M.  de  Kaunitz,  and 
have  changed  my  shirt  for  the  first  time  in  eight  days.  .  .  . 
The  Emperor  of  Germany  sent  Prince  Lichtenstein  to  me 
this  morning  to  ask  for  an  interview.  My  army  on  the 
field  of  battle  was  less  numerous  than  the  enemy,  who  was 
caught  in  flagrante  delicto  while  manoeuvring. 

"  Napoleon." 

According  to  the  allies  they  had  only  72,000  men,  while 
the  French  had  75,000.  Napoleon  himself  speaks  of 
having  had  80,000.  It  is  certain,  however,  that  the  victory 
was  crushing,  that  Austria  and  Russia  suffered  terrible 
losses,  that  Francis  II.  was  obliged  to  sue  for  peace  and  to 
accede  to  the  most  humiliating  terms  ;  that  Alexander 
effected  his  retreat  with  difficulty,  and  that  De  Haugwitz, 
frightened  out  of  his  wits,  consented  to  sign  an  offensive 
and  defensive  treaty,  and,  on  the  part  of  his  master,  to 
accept  Hanover  at  the  very  moment  that  Prussia  was 
about  to  receive  a  subsidy  from  England,  and  consequently 
to  join  the  coalition. 

In  the  thirtieth  bulletin  the  Grand  Army  was  assured  that 
the  negotiations  opened  by  Austria  were  simply  intended 
to  lull  the  vigilance  of  Napoleon^that  Savary  had  been 
very  well  received  by  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  and  in  con- 
versation with  the  thirty  coxcombs  by  whom  the  Czar  was 
surrounded,  had  convinced  himself  of  the  confusion  that 
reigned  in  the  enemy's  councils. 

The  bulletin  added  : — 

"  An  army  thus  led  could  not  be  long  before  committing 
blunders.  From  that  moment  the  plan  of  the  Emperor 
was  to  wait  and  watch  for  a  moment  to  take  advantage  of 
them.  He  immediately  gave  orders  for  his  army  to  retreat, 
and  retired  during  the  night,  as  if  he  had  been  defeated, 
took  up  a  strong  position  three  leagues  to  his  rear,  and  set 


AUSTRIA  SUES  FOR  PEACE.  1 83 

to  work  in  the  most  ostentatious  manner  to  fortify  it  and 
establish  batteries. 

"  He  asked  for  an  interview  with  the  Czar,  who  sent  him 
his  aide-de-camp,  Prince  Dolgorouki.  This  aide-de-camp 
was  able  to  remark  that  everything  betokened  reserve  and 
timidity  in  the  French  army.  .  .  .  Contrary  to  his  custom, 
the  Emperor,  who  generally  receives  negotiators  with 
distrust,  went  himself  to  the  outposts.  After  the  first 
compliments  the  Russian  officer  wished  to  enter  upon 
political  questions.  He  decided  everything  with  an  im- 
pertinence difficult  to  imagine.  He  betrayed  the  most 
complete  ignorance  of  the  interests  of  Europe  and  the 
situation  of  the  Continent.  He  was,  in  a  word,  a  youthful 
trumpeter  of  England.  .  .  .  The  Emperor  could  hardly 
restrain  his  indignation,  and  this  young  man,  who  has 
acquired  a  great  influence  over  the  Emperor  Alexander, 
returned  under  the  idea  that  the  French  army  was  on  the 
eve  of  destruction.  It  is  easy  to  conceive  what  the  Emperor 
suffered  when  it  is  known  that  he  was  asked  to  cede 
Belgium  and  to  place  the  Iron  Crown  on  the  head  of  one 
of  the  most  implacable  enemies  of  France"  (the  King  of 
Sardinia). 

Then  followed  a  long  description  of  the  field  of  Auster- 
litz,  which  terminated  thus  : — 

"  Never  was  field  of  battle  more  horrible.  In  the  midst 
of  immense  lakes  one  can  still  hear  the  cries  of  men  whom 
it  is  impossible  to  succour.  It  will  require  three  days  to 
transport  all  the  enemy's  wounded  to  Briinn :  the  heart 
bleeds.  May  all  the  blood  shed,  may  all  these  misfortunes, 
fall  upon  the  perfidious  islanders  who  have  caused  them  ! 
May  the  cowardly  oligarchs  of  London  support  the  con- 
sequences of  so  many  woes  ! " 

To  M.  TALLEYRAND. 

"  AUSTERLITZ,  i^h  December,  1805. 
"The   Emperor  of    Germany  asked   for   an  interview, 
which  I  granted;  it  lasted  from  2  till  4  P.M.     I  will  tell 


184    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

you  what  I  think  of  him  when  I  see  you.  He  wished  to 
conclude  peace  on  the  spot.  He  appealed  to  my  feelings; 
I  defended  myself,  a  kind  of  warfare  which  I  assure  you 
was  not  difficult.  He  asked  for  an  armistice,  which  I  con- 
ceded. .  .  .  You  will  tell  M.  de  Haugwitz  to  wait  for  me 
at  Vienna.  .  .  .  Inform  the  Austrians  that  the  battle  has 
changed  the  face  of  affairs,  and  that  they  must  expect 
harder  conditions ;  that  I  complain,  above  all,  of  their  con- 
duct in  sending  me  negotiators  on  the  day  they  intended 
to  attack  me,  in  order  to  throw  me  off  my  guard.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

Talleyrand  did  what  he  could  to  induce  his  master  to 
accord  such  terms  to  Austria  as  would  permit  of  friendly 
relations  being  established  between  the  two  countries. 
Napoleon,  however,  was  inexorable,  caring  little  for  that 
revenge  which  his  enemy  would  be  driven  to  seek  on  the 
first  opportunity.  The  Archduke  Charles,  on  dismissing 
his  troops,  is  said  to  have  exclaimed,  "  Repose  yourselves, 
my  children,  until  we  recommence."  Austria  was  allowed 
to  exist,  but  was  made  a  deadly  enemy. 

To  THE  ELECTOR  OF  VVIRTEMBERG. 

"  AUSTERLITZ,  ■c,th  December,  1805. 
"  My  Brother, — The  Emperor  of  Russia  is  surrounded 
by  twenty  scamps,  who  will  work  his  ruin,  and  yet  he  has 
so  many  great  qualities  that  I  think  some  advice  offered 
by  you,  through  your  sister,  might  be  useful.  .  .  .  Having 
demanded  an  interview  at  his  outposts,  he  sent  me  Prince 
Dolgorouki,  and  I  had  a  conversation  with  that  coxcomb, 
who  spoke  to  me  as  he  would  speak  to  a  Boyard  whom 
he  was  about  to  send  to  Siberia.  .  .  .  This  young  man, 
who  was  exceedingly  arrogant,  mistook  my  moderation 
for  fear — an  error  which  I  encouraged  for  military  rea- 
sons, and  which  brought  about  the  battle  of  Austerlitz, 
where  in  truth  the  enemy  behaved  with  an  amount  of 
ignorance  and  presumption  difficult  to  conceive.     This  has 


GENERAL    SAVARY    AND    THE    CZAR.  185 

made  the  Emperor  of  Russia  open  his  eyes,  and  I  have 
learned,  through  the  Emperor  of  Germany,  that  he  desires 
to  make  peace,  and  never  more  to  meddle  with  matters 
which  do  not  concern  him. 

"  Napoleon." 

The  thirty-first  bulletin,  after  entering  into  some  further 
details  of  the  battle  of  Austerlitz,  related  in  this  manner 
the  conversation  which  took  place  between  the  Czar  and 
General  Savary  after  the  battle.  According  to  the  bulletin 
the  Russian  army  was  surrounded,  and  not  a  man  could 
escape.  "  Prince  Czartorj^ski  introduced  General  Savary 
to  the  Emperor,  '  Tell  your  master,'  cried  the  Czar,  '  that 
I  am  going  away ;  that  he  performed  miracles  yesterday  ; 
that  that  day  has  increased  my  admiration  for  him  ;  that 
he  is  a  man  predestined  by  Heaven  ;  that  it  will  require  a 
hundred  years  for  my  army  to  equal  his.  But  can  I 
withdraw  in  safety  ? '  '  Yes,  sire,'  replied  Savary,  '  if  you 
will  ratify  what  the  two  Emperors  of  France  and  of 
Germany  have  agreed  upon.'  '  And  what  is  that } '  '  That 
your  Majesty's  army  shall  evacuate  Germany  and  Austrian 
Poland.'  .  .  .  '  What  guarantee  do  you  require .' '  '  Sire, 
your  word.'     '  I  give  it.' " 

The  bulletin  then  hoped  that  this  act  of  generosity 
would  not  be  forgotten  in  Russia. 

As  a  fact.  Napoleon  mistook  the  Russian  line  of  retreat, 
and  was  unable  to  intercept  Alexander  and  his  army. 

In  the  thirty-third  bulletin  we  find  that  in  counting  over 
the  dead  it  was  discovered  that  18,000  Russians,  6,000 
Austrians,  and  900  Frenchmen  were  slain  at  Austerlitz, 
and  that  General  Roger  Valhubert,  who  died  of  his 
wounds,  wrote  the  following  letter  to  the  Emperor,  shortly 
before  breathing  his  last : — "  I  wished  to  have  done  more 
for  you.  I  shall  be  dead  in  an  hour.  I  do  not  regret 
life,  since  I  have  participated  in  a  victory  which  assures 
you  a  happy  reign.  .  .  ." 

In  reality  the  French  appear  to  have  lost  8,500  men. 


1 86  THE   CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

DECREE. 

"  Imperial  Camp,  Austerlitz, 
"Jth  Dcce7nber,  1805. 

"  The  widows  of  the  generals  who  fell  at  Austerlitz  will 
enjoy  a  life  pension  of  6,000  francs  ;  the  widows  of  colonels 
and  majors,  2,400  francs  ;  the  widows  of  captains,  1,200 
francs  ;  the  widows  of  lieutenants,  800  francs  ;  the  widows 
of  soldiers,  200  francs. 

"  Napoleon." 

And  by  another  decree  Napoleon  adopted  all  the 
children  of  the  officers  and  men  who  fell  at  Austerlitz, 
undertook  to  find  places  for  their  sons  and  husbands  for 
their  daughters.  Independently  of  their  baptismal  names 
they  were  to  be  allowed  to  add  that  of  Napoleon. 

The  thirty-fourth  bulletin  contains  a  terrible  portrait  of 
the  Russian  soldiers,  who  were  slaughtered  by  the  peasants 
whenever  they  caught  them  alone  ;  nor  did  this  astonish 
the  Emperor,  seeing  the  atrocities  they  committed.  "  They 
illtreat  the  poor  as  well  as  the  rich.  For  them  three  hun- 
dred blows  of  a  stick  is  a  trifle.  They  plunder,  burn 
villages,  massacre ;  these  are  their  amusements.  They 
have  even  slaughtered  priests  at  the  altar.  .  .  .  The  battle 
of  Austerlitz  was  a  European  victory,  because  it  destroyed 
the  prestige  attached  to  the  name  of  these  barbarians. 
This  word,  however,  does  not  apply  to  the  court,  nor  to 
a  great  many  officers,  nor  to  the  inhabitants  of  towns,  who 
are,  on  the  contrary,  civilised  even  to  corruption." 

The  atrocities  perpetrated  by  the  Russians  were  greatly 
exaggerated,  but  what  Napoleon  desired  was  to  create  ill 
blood  between  the  Austrians  and  their  allies. 

To  THE  CARDINAL  ARCHBISHOP  OF  PARIS. 

"BRTJNN,  wth  December,  1805. 
"  My  Cousin, — We  have  taken  forty-five  flags  from  the 
enemy  :   on  the  anniversary  of  my  coronation,  that  day 
upon   which   the  Holy  Father,  the  cardinals,  and  all  the 


LETTER  TO  THE  KING  OF  PRUSSIA.      1 87 

clergy  of  France,  offered  up  prayers  in  the  sanctuary 
of  Notre  Dame  for  the  prosperity  of  our  reign.  We  have 
resolved  to  place  the  said  flags  in  the  church  of  Notre 
Dame,  metropolis  of  our  good  city  of  Paris.  .   .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

In  the  days  of  Louis  XIV.,  the  Due  de  Luxembourg 
sent  home  so  many  captured  standards  that  he  was  nick- 
named the  upholsterer  of  Notre  Dame,  but  his  votive 
offerings  could  not  be  compared  to  those  of  Napoleon. 

To  MARSHAL  DAVOUST. 

"  SCHCENBRUNN,  \zih  December,  1805. 
'  I  beg  you  will  send  me  a  detailed  account  of  what  you 
did  at  Austerlitz.     Tell    me   the   truth    concerning   what 
happened.     Let  me  know  if  Klein's  division  did  anything. 

"  Napoleon." 

to  the  king  of  prussia. 

"  SCHCENBRUNN,  i^th  December,  1805. 
"  Sir,  My  Brother, — I  have  seen  M.  de  Haugwitz.  I 
spoke  with  him  for  a  long  time  concerning  my  sentiments 
and  my  plans.  He  read  my  heart ;  he  saw  it  laid  bare. 
...  I  sincerely  hope  that  he  will  conceal  nothing  from  your 
Majesty,  and  if  you  have  anything  to  complain  of,  I  flatter 
myself  that  you  will  perceive  that,  had  I  been  dealing 
with  a  simple  political  personage,  my  heart  would  not 
have  been  so  deeply  affected.  M.  de  Haugwitz  is  the 
bearer  of  a  treaty  from  which  your  Majesty  will  judge  that 
I  have  not  forgotten  six  years  of  friendship,  and  above 
all  the  proof  of  intere.st  which  you  gave  me  in  being  the 
first  to  recognise  my  dynasty.  ...  One  of  the  greatest 
blessings  which  I  desire  to  owe  to  the  success  I  have 
obtained,,  is  to  remember  that  it  has  placed  me  above 
ordinary  prejudices,  and  in  a  position  to  consult  only 
my  heart  and  the  tender  friendship  which  I  have  long 
vowed  to  you.  ...  "  NAPOLEON." 


1 88     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Napoleon  had  used  the  most  violent  language  towards  the 
Prussian  ambassador,  and  had  threatened  war  unless  all  his 
conditions  were  at  once  accepted.  Before  driving  Austria 
to  extremities  and  attacking  Naples,  it  was  necessary  to 
have  some  assurance  that  the  Cabinet  of  Berlin  would  not 
suddenly  change  its  tone,  and  that  no  danger  was  to  be 
expected  from  that  quarter.  The  situation  might  at  any 
moment  become  overcast.  The  Russians  had  been  beaten, 
but  they  had  managed  to  effect  an  orderly  retreat, 
Napoleon  knew  not  in  what  direction.  The  Archduke 
Ferdinand,  before  hearing  of  the  armistice,  had  attacked 
the  Bavarians,  under  Wrede,  with  20,000  men,  and  had 
inflicted  a  sharp  defeat  upon  them  in  Bohemia.  Then  the 
Archduke  Charles,  deeply  mortified,  was  at  the  head  of  an 
army  80,000  strong.  Hence  the  wheedling  letter  to  the 
King  of  Prussia. 

To  MARSHAL  BERTHIER. 

"  SCHCENBRUNN,  i<)th  December,  1805. 
"  A  million    francs   in   paper    will  be   placed   at  your 
disposal. 

"  You  will  propose  a  plan  for  distributing  two  millions 
among  the  marshals,  generals,  and  colonels. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  PRINCE  JOSEPH. 

"  SCHCENBRUNN,  2oth  December,  1805. 
"  My  Brother,— I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  20th 
Frimaire.  .  .  .  Negotiations  continue ;  my  army  is  repos- 
ing. The  army  of  Prince  Charles  is  close  here.  It  is 
probable  that  if  peace  be  not  concluded  promptly,  there 
will  be,  in  a  month's  time,  an  afifair  after  which  the 
Austrian  empire  will  remain  without  the  shadow  of  a 
resource.  "  NAPOLEON." 

To  PRINCE  JOSEPH. 

"  SCHCENBRUNN,  li^th  Decetiiber,  1805. 
"  My  Brother, — I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  i6th 
Nivose.     I  am  very  angry  at  the  importance  which  you 


CLERICAL   ZEAL,  1 89 

have  given  to  the  news  of  the  arrival  of  the  Austrian 
plenipotentiaries,  and  that  you  have  the  weakness  to  pay 
attention  to  the  speeches  of  people  who  talk  of  nothing 
but  peace.  It  is  not  peace  which  is  important  but  the 
conditions  of  peace,  and  the  question  is  too  complicated 
for  the  comprehension  of  a  Paris  citizen.  I  am  not  accus- 
tomed to  shape  my  policy  after  the  discourses  of  Paris 
loungers.  My  people  will  always  be  satisfied  when  I  am. 
I  shall  always  execute  what  I  say,  or  perish  in  the  attempt. 
Those  who  clamour  for  peace  to-day,  will  blame  the  con- 
ditions to-morrow.  You  must  not  allow  public  opinion 
to  be  led  astray  by  the  newspapers ;  I  am  especially  dis- 
satisfied with  the  Journal  de  Paris.  None  but  fools  and 
intriguers  can  think  and  write  like  that.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  M.  FOUCH^. 

"  SCHCENBRUNN,  ^ltk  December,  1805. 
"...  I  see  difficulties  in  the  way  of  reading  bulletins  ; 
in  the  churches  I  do  not  consider  this  practice  becoming. 
Its  only  effect  would  be  to  give  priests  a  greater  import- 
ance than  they  have ;  for  it  would  give  them  the  right  of 
making  observations,  and  in  the  event  of  bad  news 
arriving  they  would  not  fail  to  make  comments.  You 
never  observe  strict  principles ;  sometimes  you  wish  to 
have  nothing  to  do  with  priests,  at  other  times  too  much ; 
you  must  let  all  this  alone.  M.  Portalis  did  wrong  to 
write  this  letter  without  knowing  my  intentions. 

"  Napoleon." 

It  was  rather  hard  to  doubt  the  zeal  of  the  clergy  at 
this  period  especially  if  we  are  to  believe  what  Madame 
de  Remusat  says  (vol.  ii.  204) : — "  From  the  opening  of 
the  campaign,  pastorals  had  been  published  in  every  See 
justifying  this  new  war,  and  calling  upon  the  conscripts  to 
join  their  corps.  The  bishops  recommenced  once  more 
(after  Ulm),  making  plentiful  quotations  from  the  Gospel 
to  prove  that  the  Emperor  was  protected  by  the  Lord 
of  Hosts." 


I  go     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

The  finances  were  in  a  very  bad  condition  in  France, 
and  a  good  deal  of  fraudulent  speculation  going  on  in  the 
absence  of  the  Emperor. 

To  PRINCE  JOSEPH. 

"  SCHCENBRUNN,  25^A  December,  1805. 
"  My  Brother, — I  send  you  a  letter  for  the  Minister  of 
the  Treasury  (M.  Barbe-Marbois).  You  will  read  it,  then 
seal  it  and  hand  it  to  him.  I  do  not  yet  know  whether  it  is 
incapacity  or  treason,  but  the  coalition  has  had  no  more 
useful  ally  than  this  minister.  I  shall  suspend  my  judg- 
ment until  my  approaching  arrival  in  Paris.  ...  I  think 
positively  that  this  man  has  betrayed  me.  Tell  him  that 
there  is  one  way  of  escaping  the  storm,  to  replace  the 
bonds  which  have  been  taken  out  of  the  treasury.  .  .  . 
Talk  this  over  with  the  Minister  of  Finance,  but  say 
nothing  to  Cambacer^s  ;  I  do  not  know  to  what  extent 
the  brothers  Michel  with  whom  he  is  connected,  are  mixed 

up  in  this  affair. 

"  Napoleon." 

On  his  return  to  Paris,  Napoleon  dismissed  Barb6 
Marbois  who  was  replaced  by  Mollien.  We  shall  hear 
more  of  this  matter. 

To  THE  EMPEROR  OF  AUSTRIA. 

"  SCHCENBRUNN,  2'iih  December,  180;. 
"Sir,  My  Brother, — I  thank  your  Majesty  for  the 
amiable  letter  you  have  written  to  me.  I  experienced  great 
pleasure  on  learning  this  morning  from  M.  Talleyrand  that 
all  difficulties  have  been  removed,  and  that  peace  has  been 
re-established  between  us.  Will  your  Majesty  allow  me 
to  rejoice  with  you  on  the  occasion  of  this  fortunate 
circumstance  ?  I  feel,  by  the  deep  sentiments  with  which 
you  inspired  me  when  I  had  the  honour  of  seeing  you, 
that  it  will  depend  only  upon  you  to  make  me  a  sincere 
friend,  and  for  the  remainder  of  my  life  to  be  spent  in 
being  agreeable  to  you.     Let  your  Majesty  never  doubt 


THE  ARCHDUKE  CHARLES.  I9I 

the  esteem  and  friendship  which  all  the  qualities  you 
possess  have  inspired,  and  which  one  cannot  resist  from 
the  moment  one  has  the  advantage  of  knowing  you.  I 
shall  be  charmed,  before  leaving  the  states  of  your 
Majesty,  to  have  an  opportunity  of  paying  you  my 
respects,  and  renewing  the  assurance  of  the  feelings 
which  animate  me. 

"  Napoleon." 


To  M.   TALLEYRAND. 

"  SCHCENBRUNN,  2Sik  December,  1805. 

"  I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  3rd  Nivose.  .  .  . 
The  Emperor  and  Prince  Charles  have  written  to  me. 
....  I  shall  have  an  interview  with  the  archduke  at 
three  leagues  from  Vienna.  ...  I  send  you  a  copy  of 
my  letter  to  the  Emperor,  who  has  written  to  me  in  the 
most  amiable  manner.  I  have  congratulated  the  Emperor 
on  the  conclusion  of  peace.  I  will  make  no  concessions. 
I  did  not  like  giving  Prince  Charles  rendes-vous  here, 
because  I  do  not  wish  to  talk  over  political  affairs  with 
him.  At  the  rendez-vous  I  have  selected,  we  shall  pass 
two  hours  together;  one  hour  will  be  employed  in  dining, 
the  other  in  talking  over  military  matters  and  in  reciprocal 
protestations.  Besides,  everything  here  has  been  sent 
away  or  sold,  with  the  exception  of  500  or  600  guns. 
....  If  you  cannot  sign  peace  at  once,  wait  and  sign 
it  on  the  advent  of  the  new  year ;  for  I  have  a  few  pre- 
judices, and  I  should  like  peace  to  date  from  the  renewal 
of  the  Gregorian  calendar,  which  presages,  I  hope,  as  much 
happiness  for  my  reign  as  the  old  one.  .  .  .  You  can 
assure  those  gentlemen  (the  Austrian  Commissioners) 
that  I  have  no  other  interest  beyond  causing  my  com- 
merce to  flourish,  re-organising  my  marine,  and,  after 
having  been  general  on  land,  of  becoming  an  admiral ; 
that  this  depends  upon  them.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 


192  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF   NAPOLEON. 

The  Republican  calendar  was  to  cease  on  the  1st 
January,   1806. 

In  the  thirty-seventh  bulletin,  the  position  of  the  army 
was  thus  set  forth  : — 

"  Marshal  Bernadotte  occupies  Bohemia ;  Mortier, 
Moravia ;  Davoust,  Presburg ;  Soult,  Vienna ;  Ney, 
Carinthia;  Marmont,  Styria;  Massena,  Carniola ;  Auge- 
reau  commands  the  reserve  in  Suabia ;  Prince  Eugene 
commands  the  troops  in  Italy ;  General  St.  Cyr  is 
marching  upon  Naples,  in  order  to  punish  the  treason  of 
the  queen,  and  to  hurl  from  the  throne  that  criminal 
woman,  who  in  such  a  shameless  manner  has  violated 
all  that  is  sacred  among  men. 

"  When  people  interceded  on  her  behalf,  the  Emperor 
replied — Should  hostilities  recommence,  and  the  nation 
have  to  support  a  war  of  thirty  years,  such  atrocious 
perfidy  cannot  be  pardoned.  The  Queen  of  Naples  has 
ceased  to  reign ;  this  last  crime  has  filled  the  measure  of 
her  destiny ;  let  her  go  to  London  to  augment  the  number 
of  intriguers.  .  .  .  M.  <f^  Talleyrand  is  at  Presburg,  where 
negotiations  are  being  carried  on." 

On  the  6th  Nivose,  year  XIV.  (27th  December,  1805) 
Napoleon  announced  in  letters  written  to  Prince  Joseph, 
Prince  Eugene,  the  kings  of  Bavaria  and  Wirtemberg,  the 
Elector  of  Baden,  and  in  a  proclamation  to  the  army  that 
peace  had  been  signed  that  morning  at  Pressburg,  the 
ancient  capital  of  Hungary.  On  this  same  date,  Napoleon 
wrote  no  less  than  sixteen  despatches,  one  of  which  alone 
occupies  six  printed  pages. 

On  the  31st  December  Napoleon  addressed  two  letters 
to  his  brother  Joseph.  The  first  appointed  him  lieutenant 
commanding-in-chief  the  army  of  Naples.  Joseph  was 
to  assume  the  uniform  of  a  general  of  division. 

The  second  letter  ran  thus  : — 

"  My  Brother,— I  have  demanded  the  hand  of  the  Prin- 
cess Augusta,  daughter  of  the  Elector  of  Bavaria,  who  is  a 


IMPERIAL   ALLIANCES.  1 93 

very  pretty  person,  for  Prince  Eugene.  The  marriage  is 
settled.  I  have  demanded  another  princess  for  Jerome. 
As  you  have  seen  him  lately,  let  me  know  if  I  can  count 
upon  this  young  man  to  do  what  I  wish.  I  have  also 
arranged  the  plan  for  a  marriage  between  your  eldest 
daughter  and  a  little  prince,  who  will  one  day  become  a 
great  prince.  ...  I  beg  you  will  inform  my  mother  of  the 
marriage  of  Prince  Eugene  with  the  Princess  Augusta. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  PRINCE  EUGENE. 

"Munich,  i\st December,  1805. 
"My  Cousin, — I  have  arrived  at  Munich.  I  have  ar- 
ranged your  marriage  with  the  Princess  Augusta.  The 
banns  have  been  published.  This  morning  the  princess 
paid  me  a  visit,  and  I  had  a  long  conversation  with  her. 
You  will  find  her  portrait  on  the  accompanying  cup  ;  but 
she  is  much  better.  «  NAPOLEON  " 

The  Bavarian  alliance  was  a  surprise  for  all  parties ; 
for  the  Princess  Augusta,  who  was  engaged  to  the  Prince 
of  Baden  ;  for  Prince  Eugene,  who  was  in  love  with  some- 
body else  ;  for  the  new  King  of  Bavaria,  who  did  not  dare 
to  refuse  his  daughter's  hand ;  and  for  the  Empress 
Josephine,  from  whom-  the  intention  had  been  kept 
secret.  However,  the  match  turned  out  well.  As  for 
Monsieur  Jerome,  he  was  to  marry  the  Princess  of  Wir- 
temberg,  contrary  to  canon  law.  The  third  matrimonial 
scheme  announced  by  the  Emperor  was  the  strangest  of  all. 
The  eldest  daughter  of  his  brother  Joseph,  Zenaide,  was  born 
in  1801,  and  was  consequently  only  four  years  of  age  ;  and 
the  little  prince  whom  she  was  to  wed,  and  who  was  to  be- 
come a  great  prince,  was  the  eldest  son  of  Louis  Bona- 
parte, who  was  born  in  1802,  to  whom  Napoleon  intended 
to  leave  his  crown.  The  popular  belief  was,  as  we  know, 
that  the  Emperor  himself  was  the  father  of  "the  little 
Napoleon,"  who  was  carried  off  by  croup  at  six  years  of 
age. 

VOL.  II.  O 


CHAPTER    III. 

THE   YEAR    1806, 

The  year  1806  found  Napoleon  at  the  zenith  of  his 
power,  and  elated  beyond  measure  by  the  success  of  his 
arms.  He  was  Emperor  of  France  and  King  of  Italy,  and 
he  proposed  to  have  himself  crowned  by  the  Pope  at  Rome, 
Emperor  of  the  West.  Pius  VII.  was  to  be  reduced  to  the 
condition  of  a  stipendiary,  and  was  to  be  as  subservient 
to  Napoleon  as  were  the  French  bishops.  The  House  of 
Hapsburg  had  been  humbled  to  the  dust,  the  Russians  had 
been  obliged  to  recross  their  frontier,  and  England  was 
left  without  any  available  ally.  Spain,  Portugal,  the 
larger  part  of  Germany,  Italy  and  Holland,  were  all  in  the 
grasp  of  the  Corsican  adventurer  who  was  intent  upon 
making  his  brothers  kings,  or  viceroys,  and  his  marshals — 

"  Those  pagod  things  of  sabre  sway, 
With  front  of  brass  and  feet  of  clay," 

princes    or    dukes,    with    enormous    revenues    torn    from 
captive  nations. . 

However,  there  were  some  matters  which  caused  un- 
easiness to  the  conqueror.  War  was  becoming  more  and 
more  unpopular  in  France,  for  the  people  were  getting  sick 
of  that  military  glory  which  is  so  splendid  in  the  pages  of 
history,  but  which  entails  so  much  misery  and  so  many 
sacrifices  at  the  time.  Then  the  Austrians  might  again 
take   the  field,  the    Russians  might   return,   and   Prussia 


PRUSSIAN    AFFAIRS.  1 95 

looked  formidable.  According  to  Madame  de  Remusat, 
Napoleon  admitted  to  Josephine  that  the  reputation  of  the 
Prussian  troops,  and  especially  the  excellence  of  the 
Prussian  cavalry,  as  compared  to  his  own,  caused  him 
great  anxiety.  In  spite  of  this.  Napoleon  was  determined 
to  punish  both  Prussia  and  Naples  for  their  manifold 
crimes. 

Matters  stood  thus  with  Prussia.  She  had  signed  a 
secret  treaty  with  France.  However,  on  the  3rd  October, 
the  French  under  Bernadotte,  while  surrounding  General 
Mack  at  Ulm,  had  marched  through  Anspach,  thus  violat- 
ing Prussian  territory.  This  led  to  an  angry  correspond- 
ence, as  we  have  seen.  A  fortnight  after  the  capitulation 
of  Ulm,  Prussia  signed  a  convention  at  Potsdam,  engaging 
herself  to  mediate  between  France  and  the  allies,  and  in 
the  event  of  Napoleon  rejecting  her  offers,  she  was  to  join 
the  coalition  on  receiving  a  subsidy  from  England.  Prussia 
at  once  began  to  prepare  for  war,  and  permitted  the 
Russian  troops  to  march  through  her  territory.  Three 
days  before  the  battle  of  Austerlitz,  Haugwitz  presented 
an  ultimatum  to  Napoleon  on  the  part  of  his  master,  but 
before  Napoleon  had  time  to  reply,  Austerlitz  was  fought 
and  won,  and  the  position  between  France  and  Prussia 
was  entirely  changed.  When  Haugwitz  next  saw  the 
French  Emperor,  it  was  in  fear  and  trembling,  for  Prussia 
had  lost  her  two  allies.  Austria  had  been  obliged  to 
make  peace,  and  Russia  had  been  disabled  for  the  moment. 
Prussia  had  only  England  to  rely  upon.  After  a  good 
deal  of  hectoring,  to  the  great  astonishment  of  Haugwitz, 
as  the  price  of  his  alliance.  Napoleon  offered  Hanover  to 
Prussia  in  exchange  for  Anspach  and  Neuchatel.  Haug- 
witz, who  had  expected  a  declaration  of  war,  was  en- 
chanted with  this  solution,  and  immediately  signed  the 
convention  on  his  own  behalf 

By  this  skilful  manoeuvre  Napoleon  placed  Prussia  in 
the  most  cruel  position.  To  refuse  to  ratify  the  treaty 
would  be  equivalent  to  a  declaration  of  war,  to    accept 

O  2 


196  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

Hanover  at  a  moment  when  she  was  expecting  subsidies 
from  England  would  be,  as  Fox  afterwards  described  the 
conduct  of  Prussia,  "  the  union  of  everything  contemp- 
tible in  servility  with  everything  that  was  odious  in 
rapacity." 

The  King  of  Prussia  however  made  up  his  mind  to 
sign  the  treaty  with  some  modifications.  He  insisted  that 
it  should  not  be  offensive  and  defensive,  that  he  should 
accept  Hanover  only  provisionally  and  after  having  re- 
ceived the  consent  of  England,  and  that  he  should  be 
allowed  to  annex  the  Hanse  towns  in  order  to  give 
satisfaction  to  his  subjects,  &c,,  &c.  M.  Laforest  accepted 
these  modifications,  which  were  forwarded  to  Paris,  where 
they  would  probably  have  been  accepted  by  Napoleon, 
but  for  the  death  of  Pitt,  and  the  advent  of  Fox,  upon 
whose  friendship  he  relied.  Instead  of  modifying  the 
treaty  of  Schoenbrunn,  Napoleon  rendered  it  more 
onerous.  Prussia  was  called  upon,  in  addition  to  the 
conditions  already  imposed,  to  renounce  Baireuth,  to 
recognise  all  the  changes  made  in  Italy,  and  to  close  the 
mouth  of  the  Elbe  and  the  Weser  to  British  commerce. 
Haugwitz  signed  this  new  treaty  with  a  groan,  and  for- 
warded it  to  Berlin,  where  it  was  ratified.  Napoleon  thus 
forced  the  soverei'gnty  of  Hanover  upon  Prussia,  but 
would  not  allow  her  to  exercise  sovereign  rights,  for  it  was 
in  spite  of  Prussia  that  she  was  forced  to  close  her  ports 
to  the  British  flag,  an  act  which  was  equivalent  to  a 
declaration  of  war  against  England.  In  addition  to  the 
above  hard  terms,  the  King  of  Prussia  was  called  upon 
to  dismiss  his  prime  minister  Hardenberg,  who  was 
accused  by  the  French  Emperor  of  having  "prostituted 
himself  to  the  eternal  enemies  of  the  Continent." 

The  Elbe  and  Weser  were  no  sooner  closed  to  England 
than  she  seized  upon  four  hundred  Prussian  and  German 
merchant  ships,  in  order  to  indemnify  herself,  just  as  she 
had  seized  the  galleons  from  Spain.  Prussia  is  said  to 
have  been  much  astonished  at  this  act  of  hostility,  which 


THE    BOOK-SELLER    PALMi  1 97 

was  part  of  the  price  which  she  had  to  pay  for  her  own 
weakness  or  perfidy.  Her  feeUngs  of  shame  and  anger 
may  be  easily  imagined,  when  she  learned  that  while 
Laforest  had  been  urging  the  Prussian  Government  to 
retain  Hanover,  Lucchesini  discovered  in  Paris  that 
Napoleon  was  offering  the  Electorate  to  England  as  a 
pledge  of  peace !  ^ 

Prussia,  too,  had  been  led  to  believe  that  she  would  be 
permitted  to  form  a  confederation  of  the  north,  but  when 
she  applied  for  the  Hanse  towns  she  was  informed  that 
France  had  too  much  deference  for  England  to  permit 
this,  nor  would  Napoleon's  regard  for  justice  and  respect 
for  the  law  of  nations  allow  him  to  see  any  compulsion 
used  towards  independent  princes  in  this  matter !  It  was 
much,  the  same  with  Hesse  Cassel  and  Saxony. 

The  cup  of  Prussia's  humiliation  was  being  gradually 
filled  to  overflowing.  When  the  Duchies  of  Berg  and 
Cleves  were  handed  over  to  Murat,  there  was  a  cry  of 
rage  all  through  Germany  at  this  investiture  of  a  foreigner, 
a  soldier  of  fortune,  the  brother-in-law  of  Bonaparte,  who 
entered  into  the  Germanic  system,  and  this  irritation  was 
increased  when  Napoleon  ordered  the  trial  and  execution 
of  the  unfortunate  bookseller.  Palm.  The  crime  attri- 
buted to  Palm  was  that  he  sold  patriotic  pamphlets,  and 
especially  one  written  by  Gentz,  entitled,  The  Profound 
Degradation  of  Germany.  The  fact  that  Palm  was  residing 
at  Nuremberg,  that  is  to  say  upon  neutral  territory,  no 
more  saved  him  than  it  saved  the  Due  d'Enghien  ;  he  was 
shot. 

One  is  permitted  to  doubt  the  sincerity  of  the  negotia- 
tions which  Napoleon  opened  up  at  this  time  with  Eng- 
land, through  the  medium  of  Lord  Yarmouth,  who  had 
been  detained  as  a  prisoner  on  the  rupture  of  the  treaty  of 

^  Napoleon  had  not  only  the  audacity  to  deny  this  fact  when  he 
knew  that  it  was  discovered,  but  he  instructed  M.  Laforest  to  swear  to 
the  King  of  Prussia  that  negotiations  with  England  had  been  broken 
off  simply  because  he  refused  to  cede  Hanover  to  her  ! 


igS     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Amiens.  The  basis  of  these  negotiations  was  the  uti 
possedetis.  Talleyrand,  too^  offered  to  restore  Hanover  to 
England,  and  to  leave  Sicily,  which  the  French  had  not 
been  able  to  take,  to  the  Bourbons.  But  M.  d'Oubril 
having  arrived  in  Paris  to  treat  for  peace  in  the  name  of 
the  Emperor  Alexander,  the  policy  of  Napoleon  under- 
went a  change.  England  was  told  that  she  must  be 
satisfied  with  Hanover,  Malta,  and  the  colonies  which  she 
had  conquered,  but  that  the  French  Emperor  could  not 
give  up  Sicily,  the  possession  of  which  his  brother  Joseph 
considered  as  indispensable.  Joseph  was  at  this  time 
King  of  Naples.  At  the  same  moment  Napoleon  offered,  in 
his  usual  manner,  to  indemnify  the  Bourbons  ;  in  place  of 
Sicily  he  offered  to  give  them  the  Hanse  towns  which  were 
to  be  taken  from  Germany !  When  Fox  refused  this 
bargain.  Napoleon  offered  next  Albania,  which  belonged 
to  the  Porte,  and  this  in  spite  of  some  splendid  presents 
just  forwarded  to  him  by  the  Sultan,  and  assurances  of 
good  will  on  his  part ;  then  Ragusa,  which  was  dependent 
upon  Austria,  and  finally  the  Balearic  Isles,  which  belonged 
to  his  faithful  ally  the  King  of  Spain.  These  proposals 
were  of  course  rejected,  one  after  the  other. 

At  this  moment  the  Czar  refused  to  ratify  the  treaty 
concluded  by  d'Oubril,  and  Fox  died.  War  now  became 
certain,  Sicily  being  the  bone  of  contention,^  and  in  this 
war  Prussia  was  broken  to  pieces  like  a  potter's  vessel. 
She  lost  the  battles  of  Jena  and  Auerstadt,  her  chief 
fortresses,  and  her  capital,  where  Napoleon  penned  his 
celebrated  "  Decree  of  Berlin,"  which  was  an  answer  to  the 
right  of  search  and  other  tyrannical  proceedings  on  the 
high  seas,  and  which  was  to  ruin   British  commerce. 

No  sooner  had  Napoleon  concluded  the  treaties  of  Press- 
burg  and  of  Schoenbrunn  than  he  declared  that  the  time 
had  come  to  chastise  cette  coquine,  as  he  called  the  Queen 

1  Napoleon  feared  that  with  both  Sicily  and  Malta  in  her  hands 
England  would  be  able  to  close  the  lower  end  of  the  Mediterranean, 
and  that  England  intended  to  keep  Sicily  he  had  no  doubt. 


THE    BATTLE    OF    MAIDA.  1 99 

of  Naples.  And  in  his  thirty-seventh  bulletin  to  the  Grand 
Army  he  announced  that  General  St.  Cyr  was  marching 
upon  Naples  "  to  punish  the  treason  and  to  hurl  from  the 
throne  this  criminal  woman,  who  has  so  shamelessly  vio- 
lated all  that  is  sacred  to  man."  And  Napoleon  declared 
that  should  he  be  obliged  to  wage  war  for  thirty  years 
such  atrocious  perfidy  could  not  be  pardoned.  As  Lanfrey 
points  out,  the  perfidy  began  on  the  side  of  Napoleon, 
who,  long  before  Naples  violated  her  neutrality,  had 
determined  upon  seizing  that  kingdom.  Nelson,  in  his 
will,  said  that  he  would  never  have  been  able  to  go  to 
Egypt  and  to  destroy  the  French  fleet  but  for  the  aid 
which  Lady  Hamilton  obtained  from  the  Queen  of  Naples, 
who  got  his  fleet  supplied.  It  was  probably  from  this 
date  that  Napoleon's  antipathy  for  the  Queen  of  Naples 
commenced.  Then  he  had  long  decided  that  the  Napoleons 
should  everywhere  supplant  the  Bourbons. 

The  French  armies  overran  Naples,  the  Bourbons  were 
driven  from  the  throne,  and  Joseph  Bonaparte  reigned  in 
their  stead.  On  the  6th  July  Sir  J.  Stuart  defeated  a 
superior  French  force  under  General  Regnier  at  Maida, 
and  thus  broke  the  spell  of  invincibility  which  the  French 
soldiers  had  hitherto  enjoyed.  At  Maida  they  were  com- 
pletely routed,  and  one  of  Napoleon's  pet  regiments  broke 
and  ran.  However,  the  French  soon  afterwards  made 
themselves  masters  of  the  whole  kingdom  of  Naples,  which 
England  found  it  impossible  to  defend. 

A  repetition  of  the  comedy  played  at  Milan,  when 
Napoleon  assumed  the  iron  crown,  was  performed  in  the 
month  of  June  in  Paris,  when  the  representatives  of  the 
Batavian  Republic  came  to  offer  the  crown  of  Holland 
to  Louis  Bonaparte,  who  shortly  afterwards  installed 
himself  at  the  Hague  and  commenced  his  ill-starred 
reign. 

As  Naples  for  a  time  had  escaped  the  wrath  of  Napoleon 
in  1805,  thanks  to  the  third  coalition,  so  did  the  war  with 
Prussia  for  a  time  save  Portugal.     England  had  sent  Lord 


200     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

St.  Vincent  to  the  Tagus  with  a  fleet,  and  a  land  force 
under  Lord  Rosslyn  to  protect  our  ally,  but  when  Napoleon 
marched  upon  Berlin  she  was  able  to  withdraw  her  army 
and  navy. 

The  close  of  1806  found  Napoleon  in  Poland,  where  he 
discovered  a  fifth  element — mud — and  where  he  met  with 
an  amount  of  resistance  which  should  have  sobered  him. 
He  was  about  to  enter  on  a  period  of  sanguinary  and 
undecided  battles  and  to  experience  appalling  losses. 

The  Emperor,  as  we  see  by  his  letters  at  the  beginning 
of  1806,  was  not  sorry  for  an  excuse  for  remaining  at 
Munich,  in  order  to  see  his  adopted  son.  Prince  Eugene, 
settled,  and  if  Austria  intended  to  execute  the  treaty  of 
Pressburg. 

To  M.  CAMBACiRfeS. 

"  Munich,  ^rd  January,  1806. 
"  I  thank  you  for  what  you  say  on  the  occasion  of  the 
new  year.    I  hope  that  you  will  write  twenty  similar  letters, 
but  above  all  without  making  use  of  ipecacuanha. 

"  Napoleon." 

to  marshal  berthier. 

"  Munich,  $th  January,  1806. 
"  My  Cousin, — Despatch  your  brother,  General  Berthier, 
with  the  decree  which  nominates  Prince  Joseph  com- 
mander-in-chief of  the  army  of  Naples.  He  must  remain 
with  the  head-quarters  of  that  army  and  keep  the  object  of 
his  mission  the  most  profound  secret,  because  I  am  not 
sure  that  Prince  Joseph  will  accept,  and  upon  that  account 
nothing  must  be  known. 

"  Napoleon." 

Joseph,  as  we  have  seen,  had  already  declined  the 
throne  of  Italy,  and  evidently  could  not  be  implicitly 
counted  upon. 


LETTER    TO    PIUS    VII.  20I 

On  the  7th  January  Napoleon  sent  a  message  to  the 
Senate  on  the  subject  of  the  marriage  of  Prince  Eugene 
with  the  daughter  of  the  King  of  Bavaria. 

To  THE  POPE. 

"  Munich,  ^th  January,  1806. 
"Most  Holy  Father, — I  have  received  the  letter 
of  your  Holiness  dated  the  i8th  November.  I  was  deeply 
grieved  that  when  all  the  Powers  in  the  pay  of  England 
were  coalesced  against  me  in  an  unjust  war,  your  Holiness 
should  have  given  ear  to  bad  advice  and  have  written  so 
inconsiderate  a  letter.  You  are  at  perfect  liberty  to  keep 
my  minister  at  Rome  or  to  send  him  away.  The  occupa- 
tion of  Ancona  is  the  necessary  consequence  of  the  bad 
military  organisation  of  the  Holy  See.  It  was  in  the 
interest  of  your  Holiness  that  this  fortress  should  fall  into 
my  hands  rather  than  into  those  of  the  English  or  the 
Turks.  Your  Holiness  complains  that  since  your  depar- 
ture from  Paris  you  have  done  nothing  but  suffer  ;  the 
reason  is  that  since  that  period  those  who  feared  my 
power,  and  assured  me  of  their  friendship,  have  changed 
their  opinions,  considering  themselves  justified  in  so  doing 
by  the  strength  of  the  coalition,  and  that  since  the  return 
of  your  Holiness  to  Rome  I  have  experienced  nothing 
but  refusals  on  your  part  even  in  matters  of  the  greatest 
importance  for  religion,  as,  for  example,  when  it  was  a 
question  of  preventing  Protestantism  from  raising  its  head 
in  France.^  I  consider  myself  the  protector  of  the  Holy 
See,  and  it  was  on  the  strength  of  this  title  that  I  occu- 
pied Ancona.  I  consider  myself,  like  my  predecessors 
of  the  second  and  third  race,  as  the  eldest  son  of  the 
Church,  and  as  alone  having  a  sword  to  protect  her 
from  being  defiled  by  Greeks  and  Mussulmans.  I  shall 
ever  protect  the  Holy  See,  in  spite  of  the  intrigues,  the 

^  When  Napoleon  thus  referred  to  Jerome's  marriage  with  Miss 
Paterson  he  was  bent  upon  marrying  him  to  a  Protestant  princess, 
and  Stephanie  de  Beauharnais  to  a  Protestant  prince  1 


202     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

ingratitude,  and  the  evil  designs  of  those  men  who  have 
unmasked  themselves  during  the  last  three  months.  They 
thought  I  was  ruined :  God  showed  by  the  success  with 
which  He  favoured  my  arms  the  interest  which  He  took 
in  my  cause.  I  shall  be  the  friend  of  your  Holiness 
whenever  you  consult  your  heart  and  the  true  principles 
of  religion,  &c. 

"  Napoleon." 


And  his  Majesty  threatened  to  withdraw  Cardinal  Fesch 
from  Rome  and  to  replace  him  by  a  layman. 

To  CARDINAL  FESCH. 

"Munich,  "jth  January,  1806. 
"  The  Pope  wrote  me  a  letter  on  the  1 8th  November 
both  ridiculous  and  insane :  those  fellows  believed  me  to 
be  dead.  I  occupied  Ancona  because,  in  spite  of  your 
representations,  nothing  was  done  for  its  defence.  .  .  .  Let 
it  be  known  that  1  will  not  tolerate  any  bantering ;  that 
I  will  not  have  Russian  and  Sardinian  ministers  at  Rome. 
My  intention  is  to  replace  you  by  a  secular  ambassador. 
Since  the  dotards  seem  to  care  nothing  about  a  Protestant 
occupying  the  throne  of  France  I  shall  send  them  a  Pro- 
testant ambassador.  Tell  Consalvi  that  if  he  loves  his 
country  he  should  leave  the  ministry  or  do  what  I  ask; 
that  I  am  religious,  but  not  a  bigot ;  that  Constantine 
separated  civil  from  military  affairs,  and  that  I  also  may 
appoint  a  senator  to  command  in  Rome  in  my  name.  It 
is  all  very  well  for  them  to  talk  about  religion  after 
admitting  the  Russians,  renouncing  Malta,  and  now  wish- 
ing to  dismiss  my  ambassador.  It  is  they  who  prostitute 
religion.  Is  there  another  example  of  an  apostolic  nuncio 
in  Russia  1  Tell  Consalvi — tell  even  the  Pope — that  since 
they  wish  to  drive  my  minister  from  Rome,  I  may  go 
there  to  reinstate  him.  Can  nothing  be  done  with  these 
men  except  by  force .'     They  allow  religion  to  perish  in 


THE    NEW   CHARLEMAGNE.  203 

Germany  through  not  concluding  the  concordat;  they 
allow  it  to  perish  in  Bavaria,  in  Italy ;  they  become  the 
laughing-stock  of  courts  and  of  people.  I  gave  them  advice 
to  which  they  would  never  listen.  They  believed  that 
the  Russians,  the  English,  and  the  Neapolitans  would 
respect  the  neutrality  of  the  Pope  !  For  the  Pope  I  am 
Charlemagne,  because,  like  Charlemagne,  I  have  united 
the  crown  of  France  with  that  of  Lombardy,  and  because 
my  empire  borders  the  East.  I  therefore  expect  to  be 
treated  from  this  point  of  view.  I  shall  change  nothing 
in  appearance  if  they  behave  well ;  otherwise  I  shall 
reduce  the  Pope  to  be  Bishop  of  Rome,  &c.  &c. 

"  Napoleon." 


To  PRINCE  JOSEPH. 

"Munich,  12th  January,  1806. 

"...  You  will  be  in  the  vicinity  of  Rome  on  the  15th. 
I  have  sent  you  the  General  Dumas.  Marshal  Massena 
ought  to  be  with  the  army.  I  count  that  after  a  few 
days'  repose  you  will  have  40,000  men,  with  whom  you 
can  form  three  corps  :  Marshal  Massena  will  command  the 
strongest ;  General  St.  Cyr  another  ;  and  General  Regnier 
the  smallest,  composed  of  6,000  good  troops  in  reserve. 
Make  friends  with  General  Regnier;  he  is  cold,  but  of  the 
three  the  most  capable  of  drawing  out  a  good  plan  of 
campaign  and  of  giving  you  good  advice.  In  your  position 
art  consists  in  making  each  of  the  three  believe  that  he 
enjoys  your  confidence.  .  .  .  Speak  seriously  to  Massena 
and  St.  Cyr,  and  tell  them  that  you  will  tolerate  no 
embezzlement.  Massena  plundered  a  great  deal  in  the 
Venetian  country. 

"  Napoleon." 

And  this  in  spite  of  the  douceur  he  received  at  the 
opening  of  the  campaign. 


204     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

To  M.  FOUCH^. 

"  Munich,  15M  January,  1806. 
"  I  read  in  the  Journal  de  F Empire  that  there  appears 
at  the  foot  of  a  comedy  written  by  Collin  d'Harleville — 
'  Seen  and  authorised  the  publication  and  sale  in  accord- 
ance with  a  decision  of  H.  E.  the  Minister  of  Police.  By 
order  of  H.  E.  the  Chief  of  the  Department  for  the  Liberty 
of  the  Press.'  I  am  astonished  at  these  new  forms,  which 
the  law  alone  could  authorise.  If  it  were  necessary  to 
establish  a  censure,  that  could  be  done  only  by  my  permis- 
sion. It  being  my  determination  that  the  censorship  shall 
not  exist,  I  was  much  surprised  to  see,  in  my  empire,  forms 
which  may  be  all  very  well  at  Berlin  and  Vienna.  I  have 
long  sought  to  re-establish  the  social  edifice ;  to-day  I  am 
obliged  to  keep  a  look- out  in  order  to  maintain  public 
liberty.  I  have  no  idea  of  Frenchmen  becoming  serfs. 
In  France  all  that  is  not  prohibited  is  allowed,  and  no- 
thing can  be  prohibited  except  by  laws,  by  the  tribunals, 
or  by  the  police,  when  it  is  a  question  of  morality  or 
public  order.^  I  say  once  more  that  I  will  have  no  cen- 
sorship, because  every  publisher  is  answerable  for  the 
works  he  issues  ;  because  I  will  not  be  responsible  for  the 
follies  that  are  printed  ;  because  I  will  not  suffer  a  clerk 
to  tyrannise  talent  and  to  mutilate  genius. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  PRINCE  EUGENE. 

"  Stuttgard,  if^th  January,  1806. 
"  My   Son, — I  arrived  here  yesterday  evening,  and  I 
shall  leave  to-morrow.     I  send  you  the  Moniteur,  in  which 
you  will  find  matters  concerning  yourself. 

"  Napoleon. 

"  P.S.  Two  kisses  for  the  Princess  Augusta — one  from 
me  and  the  other  from  the  Empress." 

1  This  maxim  appears  to  have  been  borrowed  from  Catherine  of 
Russia. 


M.    LEBRUN    LOSES    HIS    HEAD.  205 

To  PRINCE  JOSEPH. 

"  Stuttgard,  \<^th  January,  1806. 
"  It  is  my  intention  that  you  shall  enter  the  kingdom  of 
Naples  at  the  beginning  of  February,  and  that  I  shall  be 
informed  in  the  course  of  the  month  that  my  eagles  float 
over  that  capital.^  You  will  conclude  no  armistice  or 
capitulation.  My  intention  is  that  the  Bourbons  shall 
cease  to  reign  at  Naples  ;  and  I  wish  to  place  a  prince  of 
my  house  on  that  throne — you  first,  should  it  suit  you, 
another  should  it  not  suit  you."  [Fourteen  regiments  of 
infantry  and  twelve  of  cavalry  were  to  remain  in  Naples 
for  the  present.]  "  The  country  will  furnish  provisions, 
clothing,  &c.,  so  this  force  will  not  cost  me  a  farthing.  .  . 

,  "  Napoleon." 

To  M.  CAMBAC^RjfcS. 

"  StraSBURG,  2/^th  January,  1806. 
"My  Cousin, — I  send  you  a  bulletin  written  by  M. 
Lebrun.  Tell  me  confidentially  if  he  has  lost  his  head  : 
I  begin  to  believe  that  he  has.  Good  God,  how  stupid 
literary  men  are !  He  who  is  capable  of  translating  a 
poem  is  not  fit  to  command  fifteen  men.  Since  I  was 
born  nothing  has  astonished  me  more  than  the  conduct 
of  Lebrun  at  Genoa.  »  NAPOLEON  " 

Lebrun,  formerly  Third  Consul,  had  translated  Homer 
and  Tasso. 

To  MARSHAL  AUGEREAU. 

"  Strasburg,  24M  January,  1806. 
"  You  will  occupy  Frankfort  with  a  division  of  your 
army.  ...  At  first  you  will  levy  no  contribution  on  the 
city.  It  is  only  when  you  have  united  your  whole  army 
corps  that  you  will  demand  4,000,000  francs,  and  pay  the 
same  into  the  military  chest  of  the  Grand  Army.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

'  This  was  decreeing  victory  after  the  manner  of  the  Convention. 


206     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Very  few  cities  suffered  more  than  Frankfort  at  the 
hands  of  Napoleon  and  his  marshals. 

To  M.  LEBRUN. 

"  Paris,  2Tth  January,  1806. 
"  IVlY  Cousin, — I  manifested,  in  my  former  letter,  my 
dissatisfaction  with  the  bulletin  which  you  published  con- 
cerning the  insurrection  of  Placentia.  I  desire  in  this 
to  assure  you  that  I  am  highly  satisfied  with  the  measures 
taken  by  you  to  put  down  the  insurrection.  I  blamed 
your  words,  but  I  greatly  praise  your  zeal. 

"  I  have  deprived  Marbois  of  his  portfolio.  He  did 
things  impossible  to  conceive.  I  still  believe  him  to  be 
honest,  but  under  the  influence  of  scamps.^ 

"  Napoleon." 

We  shall  refer  to  the  Barb6-Marbois  affair  at  some  length 
presently. 

In  a  letter  to  Prince  Eugene  dated  the  27th  January 
Napoleon  said  :  "  A  thousand  amiable  things  to  the  prin- 
cess. I  long  to  hear  that  she  supported  her  journey  well, 
et  qv!eUe  se  trouve  bien  des  premiers  combats  de  Vhymen^e. 
Tell  her  how  much  I  love  her."  Writing  the  same  day  to 
his  brother  Joseph  he  said:  "Do  not  tolerate  any  robbers. 
I  hope  you  are  satisfied  with  Massena  ;  if  not,  send  him 
away.  .  .  .  Do  not  allow  Salicetti  to  rob.  The  Princess  Julie 
(Joseph's  wife)  and  the  children  are  coming  to  dine  with 
me.  I  think  that  I  told  you  it  was  my  intention  to 
bestow  the  kingdom  of  Naples  in  my  family.  It  will  form 
like  Italy,  Switzerland,  Holland,  and  the  three  kingdoms  of 
Germany,  part  of  my  Federative  States,  or  to  speak 
plainly,  the  French  Empire." 

What  greater  justification  of  the  third  coalition  could  be 
found  than  the  concluding  portion  of  this  letter } 

Three  days  afterwards  Napoleon  held  the  following 
language  to  Count  Miot  de  Melito  : — 

1   FzV«  letter  of  the  2Sth  December,  1805. 


COUNT    MIOT    DE    MELITO.  207 

"You  are  going  to  rejoin  my  brother.  You  will  tell 
him  that  I  have  made  him  King  of  Naples,  that  he  will 
continue  to  be  Grand  Elector,  and  that  nothing  will  be 
changed  as  regards  his  relations  with  France.  But  impress 
upon  him  that  the  least  hesitation,  the  slightest  wavering, 
will  ruin  him  entirely.  I  have  another  person  in  my  mind 
who  will  replace  him  should  he  refuse.  I  shall  call  him 
Napoleon,  and  he  shall  be  my  son.  It  was  the  conduct  of 
my  brother  at  the  coronation  and  his  refusal  to  accept  the 
crown  of  Italy  which  made  me  call  Eugene  my  son.  I  am 
determined  to  give  the  same  title  to  another  should  he 
oblige  me.  At  present  all  feelings  of  affection  yield  to 
state  reasons.  I  recognisfe  only  those  who  serve  me  as 
relations.  My  fortune  is  not  attached  to  the  name  of 
Bonaparte,  but  to  that  of  Napoleon.  It  is  with  my  fingers 
and  with  my  pen  that  I  make  children.  To-day  I  can  love 
only  those  whom  I  esteem.  Joseph  must  forget  all  our 
ties  of  childhood.  Let  him  make  himself  esteemed  !  Let 
him  acquire  glory  !  Let  him  have  a  leg  broken  in  battle  ! 
then  I  shall  esteem  him.  Let  him  give  up  his  old  ideas. 
Let  him  not  dread  fatigue.  Look  at  me ;  the  campaign  I 
have  just  terminated,  the  movement,  the  excitement,  have 
made  me  stout.  I  believe  that  if  all  the  kings  of  Europe 
were  to  coalesce  against  me  I  should  have  a  ridiculous 
paunch. 

"  I  offer  my  brother  a  fine  opportunity.  Let  him  govern 
his  new  states  wisely  and  firmly.  .  .  .  But  above  all  let 
him  prevent  Massena  from  robbing.  What  he  wrings  from 
the  people  of  Naples  must  go  to  the  troops  and  to  the 
State,  and  not  go  to  fatten  swindlers.  What  Massena  did 
in  Venice  was  fearful.  That  affair  is  not  over  yet.  ...  As 
for  Salicetti,  I  have  written  to  my  brother  not  to  allow  him 
to  rob  so  much.  ...  I  can  have  no  relations  in  obscurity. 
Those  who  do  not  rise  with  me  shall  no  longer  form  part 
of  my  family.  I  am  creating  a  family  of  kings,  or  rather 
of  viceroys,  for  the  King  of  Italy,  the  King  of  Naples,  and 
others  will  all  be  included  in  a  federative  system.     How- 


2o8     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

ever,  I  am  willing  to  forget  what  two  of  my  brothers  have 
done  against  me  ;  let  Lucien  abandon  his  wife,  and  I  will 
give  him  a  kingdom.  As  for  Jerome,  he  has  partially 
repaired  his  faults.  After  cruising  for  a  year  I  shall  marry 
him  to  a  princess.  But  I  shall  never  permit  the  wife  of 
Lucien  to  seat  herself  by  my  side." 

On  the  30th  of  January,  Napoleon  dictated  a  "note"  in 
which  he  said  : — 

"  I  do  not  desire  Prussia  to  acquire  any  considerable 
increase  of  territory.  Such  increase  would  render  her  more 
formidable  to  Russia,  but  also  more  formidable  to  France. 
.  .  .  Such  as  she  is  to-day  Prussia  is  a  great  Power,  and 
from  a  general  point  of  view  it'  would  be  a  great  mistake 
to  allow  her  to  augment  her  force.  But  if  special  consider- 
ations conspired  to  tolerate  this  augmentation,  the  remedy 
would  lie  in  creating  a  new  state  in  Germany  which  would 
by  family,  or  geographical  relations,  be  drawn  into  the 
French  system.  .  .  ." 

Although  the  Prussian  territory  was  so  straggling  that 
Voltaire  compared  it  to  a  lady's  garter  thrown  on  the  floor, 
yet  Prussia  was  formidable  as  a  nation  ;  she  was  not  a  mere 
conglomeration  of  divers  nationalities. 

To  CARDINAL  FESCH. 

"  Paris,  y:>th  January,  1806. 

"  My  Cousin, — I  have  found  your  reflections  upon 
Cardinal  Rufifo  very  mean  and  puerile.  You  behave  like  a 
woman  at  Rome.  You  did  wrong  to  advise  the  cardinal 
to  come  to  Paris.  You  meddle  with  things  which  you  do 
not  understand. 

"  Take  possession  of  the  Venetian  palace  at  Rome.  I 
have  written  to  Prince  Joseph  to  aid  you  vi  et  armis,  if 
necessary.  Listen  to  nothing  that  people  may  say.  This 
palace  belongs  to  the  states  of  Venice.  Take  possession 
of  it  in  the  name  of  the  King  of  Italy," 

"  Napoleon," 


VILLAGES    TO    BE    BURNED.  209 

To  MARSHAL  BERTHIER. 

"Paris,  30M  January,  1806. 
"  I  have    received    your  letters,  and   presume    that  you 
have  arrived  at  Munich.     As  M.   Haugwitz  has  not  yet 
made  his  appearance  see  that  my  army  remains  ready  for 
war,  and  to  act  with  the  rapidity  of  thought.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

And  the  army  did  remain  ready  until  it  was  wanted 
to  punish  Prussian  tergiversations  and  weakness,  and 
to  march  on  Berlin. 

To  THE  PRINCE  OF  THE  PEACE. 

"Paris,  ind February,  1806. 
"  Nothing  astonishes   me  on  the  part  of  the  Queen   of 
Naples ;  however,  I  shuddered  on  reading  your  letter. 

"  It  is  a  great  consolation  to  learn  that  their  majesties 
are  in  good  health.  Never  doubt  the  interest  I  bear  you, 
and  my  desire  to  give  you  proofs  of  my  protection  ;  nor 
my  esteem  and  friendship  for  the  king. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  general  junot. 

"  Paris,  4/^  February,  1806. 
"  .  .  .  .  I  can  understand  nothing  of  all  this.  Let  Prince 
Eugene  send  you  troops.  Burn  five  or  six  villages,  and 
shoot  some  sixty  persons  ;  make  very  severe  examples,  for 
the  consequences  of  what  is  passing  in  Parma  are  incal- 
culable for  the  security  of  Italy.  I  am  astonished  that 
General  Menou  has  given  no  signs  of  life  in  all  this. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  PRINCE  EUGENE. 

'^'2kXiS,,i^th  February,  lio^. 
"  My  Son, — I   am    surprised    that    you    have  told  me 
nothing  of  your  voyage,  nor  what  happened  in  the  Tyrol. 
Your  wife  was  more  amiable.     However,  I  wish  you  to 
VOL.  II.  ^ 


2IO     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

write  to  me  sufficiently  often  so  that  I  may  always  know 
where  you  are,  where  you  are  going,  and  what  you  are 
doing,  how  you  get  on  together,  and  what  amount  of 
esteem  you  have  for  your  wife. 

"  Napoleon." 

to  the  princess  augusta. 

"  Paris,  5M  February,  1806. 

"My  Daughter, — I  have  learned  with  pleasure  that 
you  have  arrived  in  Italy,  and  that  you  are  well  enough  to 
undertake  the  journey  to  Venice;  but  what  most  pleased 
me  was  to  read  in  your  letter  assurances  of  the  happiness 
you  enjoy.  Be  persuaded  that  I  take  a  great  interest  in 
your  life,  and  I  was  not  mistaken  in  supposing  that  you 
would  be  happy  with  Eugene.  Believe  me  that  if  such 
had  not  been  my  opinion,  I  should  have  sacrificed  my 
political  interests  to  your  tastes.  Your  letter,  my  good 
and  amiable  Augusta,  is  filled  with  those  delicate  senti- 
ments which  are  peculiar  to  you.  I  have  ordered  a  little 
library  to  be  arranged  for  you.  I  hope  that  the  Empress 
sends  you  the  fashions,  and  that  you  will  tell  me  what  I 
can  send  you.  .  .  . 

"I  conclude  by  recommending  to  you  my  people  and 
my  soldiers  ;  let  your  purse  be  always  open  to  the  wives 
and  children  of  the  latter;  nothing  will  touch  my  heart 
more  than  this. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  THE  minister  of  foreign  affairs. 

"  Paris,  dth  February^  1806. 
"  The  Emperor  sends  to  M.  de  Talleyrand  an  ex- 
tract from  the  Gazette  of  Baireuth.  We  are  threatened 
with  the  arrival  of  200,000  Prussians.  In  truth  the  Prus- 
sians are  mad.  Let  M.  de  Talleyrand  tell  M.  de  Haugwitz 
that  this  must  finish. 

"  Napoleon." 


OPERATIONS    IN    IRELAND.  21  I 

NOTE  FOR  M.   DE  LACEPEDE. 

"Paris,  bth  February,  1806. 

"  His  Majesty  sees  with  pleasure  that  the  Prince  of  the 
Peace  has  paid  the  subsidy  of  11,000,000  francs.  .  .  .  The 
Emperor  will  support  with  all  his  influence,  and  by  force 
of  arms,  if  necessary,  all  that  the  Prince  of  the  Peace 
wishes  to  do  with  regard  to  Portugal. 

"As  for  operations  in  Ireland,  all  that  interests  that 
important  portion  of  Catholicity  touches  the  heart  of 
his  Majesty,  but  you  must  not  allow  yourself  to  be  deceived 
by  adventurers.  However,  the  Emperor  is  about  to  direct 
his  attention  once  more  to  the  navy  and  the  flotilla,  and  to 
adopt  measures  for  subduing  England  if  she  does  not 
conclude  peace.  .,  Napoleon." 

To  M.  FOUCHE. 

"  Paris,  "jth  February,  1806. 

"  M.  Portalis  has  informed  me  of  the  existence  of  several 
ecclesiastical  journals,  and  of  the  inconveniences  which  may 
result  from  the  spirit  in  which  they  are  written,  and  above 
all  from  the  diversity  of  opinions  in  religious  matters.  My 
intention  is  consequently  that  the  religious  journals  shall 
cease  to  appear,  and  that  they  shall  be  united  into  one 
paper  which  shall  supply  all  the  subscribers.  This  journal 
being  specially  intended  for  the  instruction  of  the  clergy 
shall  be  called  the  Journal  des  Cures.  The  editors  shall  be 
nominated  by  the  Cardinal  Archbishop  of  Paris. 

"  Napoleon." 

In  a  long  letter  to  brother  Joseph,  who  was  marching  on 
Naples,  Napoleon  said— "Fox  is  Minister  of  Foreign 
Aff"airs,  Grenville  at  the  Home  Office,  Spencer  at  the 
Admiralty,  Addington  at  the  Exchequer,  Lord  Hawkes- 
bury  at  the  Treasury,  Windham  at  the  War  Office,  Sheridan, 
Paymaster-General. 

"  I  am  well  satisfied  with  the  turn  affairs  have  taken  here. 
I  had  a  great  deal  of  trouble  in  making  a  dozen  swindlers, 

p  2 


212     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

at  the  head  of  whom  was  Ouvrard,  disgorge.  Barb6  Mar- 
bois  was  duped  just  like  the  Cardinal  de  Rohan  in  the 
necklace  affair,  only  for  90,000,000  francs.  I  was  deter- 
mined to  have  them  shot  without  trial.  Thank  God  I  have 
been  repaid.  This  has  put  me  out  of  temper.  I  tell  you 
this  to  show  you  what  scamps  men  are.  As  you  are  at  the 
head  of  a  great  army,  you  require  to  know  this.  The 
misfortunes  of  France  have  been  always  due  to  such 
wretches. 

"  M.  de  Haugwitz  is  here.  We  have  not  yet  settled 
matters.  The  Prussian  court  is  very  false  and  very  stupid. 
....  Remember  that  the  house  of  Spain  is  the  same  as 
the  house  of  Naples,  and  say  nothing  to  offend  it. 

"  I  take  the  greatest  interest  in  your  prosperity,  and 
especially  in  your  glory,  which,  in  your  position,  is  of  the 
first  necessity  ;  without  it  life  can  have  no  charm.  I  hope 
that  Mathieu  Dumas  ^  has  joined  you.  ..." 

Napoleon  acted  in  his  usual  arbitrary  manner  in  the 
Ouvrard  affair.  Ouvrard  was  thrown  into  prison,  and 
forced  to  disgorge,  but,  as  one  of  the  Emperor's  advisers 
told  him,  no  court  would  have  convicted  the  banker. 
Ouvrard  and  Co.  were  engaged  in  a  complicated  busi- 
ness. They  advanced  money  to  the  State  upon  exchequer 
bills,  and  they  were  army  contractors  ;  at  the  same  time 
they  had  an  enormous  contract  with  Spain  for  the 
working  of  her  South  American  colonies.  Spain  being  at 
war  with  England,  and  having  lost  her  fleet,  could  draw  no 
more  piastres  from  Mexico.  Ouvrard  undertook  to  obtain 
them  through  some  houses  in  Amsterdam,  and  in  return 
he  was  to  perform  certain  engagements,  such  as  sending 
corn  to  Spain  and  paying  the  Spanish  subsidies  which 
were  owing  to  Napoleon.  However,  before  the  piastres, 
upon  which  Ouvrard  counted,  could  arrive,  he  ran  short  of 
money,  and  applied  to  Barb6  Marbois  for  aid  from  the 
Bank  of  France.  The  Minister  of  Finance  consented  to 
save  Ouvrard  ;  there  was  an  issue  of  paper,  the  notes  of 

^  General  Dumas,  the  military  historian. 


THE    OUVRARD    AFFAIR.  213 

the    bank  were    depreciated,   and    a    demi    suspension  of 
payment  followed. 

The  situation  was  terrible.  Fortunately  for  Napoleon  he 
won  the  battle  of  Austerlitz,  and  everything  was  saved. 
Had  the  coalition  held  out  a  few  weeks  longer,  France 
would  have  been  bankrupt  (Thiers,  viii.,  p.  97).  No  wonder 
that  Napoleon  was  alarmed  and  irritated  at  having  found 
himself  upon  the  verge  of  ruin.  Ouvrard,  however,  was 
not  to  blame,  but  the  .system  against  which  he  had  loudly 
and  vainly  protested. 

Ouvrard  may  have  been  too  grasping,  but  one  can  see 
from  his  memoirs  that  he  was  imbued  with  sound  princi- 
ples. He  says,  for  example,  that — "  Napoleon,  when  he 
ascended  the.  throne,  knew  no  other  means  of  filling  his 
treasury  than  those  he  employed  to  fill  the  chest  of  his 
army  when  he  was  general-in-chief — war  taxes,  the  spoils 
of  kings  and  people,  subsidies  imposed  upon  his  allies 
(often  as  ill  treated  as  his  enemies),  blockading,  ports  closed 
to  free  commerce  and  opened  to  licences.  .  .  .  While  Mr. 
Pitt  looked  upon  all  wealth  acquired  by  private  individuals 
as  better  in  their  hands  than  in  those  of  the  State,  the 
Emperor,  on  the  contrary,  considered  that  he  ought  to  be 
the  centre  of  all  riches  and  the  dispenser  of  all  fortune  ; 
these  were  the  reasons  which  made  Napoleon  act  as  a  bitter 
enemy  to  his  own  interests.  .  .  .  Napoleon  knew  no  other 
sources  of  revenue  but  fiscality  and  conquest.  Credit  was 
for  him  an  abstract  term,  in  which  he  saw  merely  the 
dreams  of  ideologists  and  the  empty  notions  of  economists." 
After  Ouvrard  had  been  in  prison  for  some  time.  Napoleon 
once  more  required  his  services,  sent  for  him,  and  asked 
him  to  undertake  the  general  supply  of  his  armies.  In 
reply,  Ouvrard  said — "  To  do  that,  sire,  it  will  be  necessary 
for  you  to  renounce  the  principle  that  war  must  support 
war.  Regular  armies,  in  our  days,  cannot  live  like  con- 
quering hordes  ;  in  order  to  reap  abundance  you  must  not 
sow  famine.  Establish  administrative  credit  instead  of 
the   requisitions    and    devastations    in    force  to-day.     Let 


214  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

the  local  authorities  of  the  conquered  countries  levy 
contributions  to  pay  for  everything  consumed  by  your 
armies,"  &c.,  &c. 

Just  before  Napoleon  left  Paris  to  open  the  Waterloo 
campaign,  he  said  to  Ouvrard— "  I  approve  of  your  plan  of 
levying  contributions  on  conquered  countries  ;  come  to  my 
head-quarters,  and  I  will  confide  this  operation  to  you." 
But  there  were  no  more  countries  to  be  conquered,  and  the 
conversion  of  Napoleon  came  too  late. 

DECISION. 

"Paris,  %th  February,  1806. 
"  The  Emperor  is  asked  if  the  statue  of  Peace,  executed 
in  plaster  by  Chaudet,  shall  be  cast  in  bronze  furnished  by 
the  guns  taken  from  the  enemy,  and  what  dimensions  it  is 
to  have  .■' 

"  If  this  be  the  statue  decreed  by  the  Senate,  it  ought 
to  be  of  a  size  to  be  placed  in  the  Emperor's  salon.  I 
think  the  intention  of  the  Senate  was  that  it  should  be 
cast  in  silver^" 

To  MARSHAL  BERTHIER. 

"  Paris,  qth  February,  1806. 
"  My  cousin,  the  Emperor  of  Austria,  has  asked  per- 
mission to  remove  the  arms  from  one  of  his  castles  in  the 
Tyrol.  I  hope  that  all  that  is  curious,  and  especially  the 
armour  of  Fran9ois  I.,  has  not  been  given  to  him.  I 
attach   great   importance  to  keeping  this  armour. 

"  Napoleon." 

Berthier  was  afterwards  ordered  to  bring  this  armour  to 
PariS)  where  the  Emperor  was  to  receive  it  in  state. 

To  CARDINAL  FESCH. 

"  Paris,  ()th  February,  1806. 
"  My  Cousin, — I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  31st 
January.     I  am  waiting  to  know  if  you   have   taken  pos- 
session of  the  Farnese  and  Venice  palaces  in  my  name. 
Let  me  know  what  I  can  do  with  them.    «  Napoleon  " 


LETTER    TO    THE    POPE.  215 

To  PRINCE  JOSEPH. 

"  Paris,  t^th  February,  1806. 

"  My  Brother, — If  there  be  a  Russian  minister  at  the 
Court  of  Sardinia,  or  a  Sardinian  minister  at  Rome,  drive 
them  away. 

"  On  arriving  at  Naples  the  first  thing  to  be  done  will  be 
to  let  every  one  remain  in  office  ;  then  disarm  the  country, 
establish  a  good  minister  of  police,  drive  all  the  foreigners 
out  of  Naples,  seize  all  the  English  merchandise  in  the 
kingdom,  have  three  or  four  Tuscans,  who  have  always 
been  agents  of  Acton,  arrested.  .  .  .  The  returns  showing 
the  situation  of  the  armies  are  for  me  the  most  agreeable 
books  in  my  library,  and  those  that  I  read  with  the 
greatest  pleasure  in  my  hours  of  recreation. 

"  I  see  already  by  those  that  you  have  sent  traces  of  that 
disorder  which  Massena  everywhere  creates. 

"  Napoleon." 

to  his  holiness  the  pope. 

"  Paris,  13M  February,  1806. 
"  Most  Holy  Father, — I  have  received  the  letter  of 
your  Holiness  of  the  29th  January.  I  share  all  your  pain, 
and  can  understand  your  embarrassment..  You  can  avoid 
all  this  by  walking  in  the  straight  path  and  not  entering 
into  the  maze  of  politics  and  '  considerations  '  for  Powers 
which,  in  a  religious  point  of  view,  are  heretics  and  beyond 
the  pale  of  the  Church,  and  in  a  political  point  of  view  are 
distant  from  your  States  and  are  incapable  of  protecting 
you  or  of  doing  you  any  harm.  All  Italy  will  be  subjected 
to  my  law.  I  shall  in  no  way  interfere  with  the  inde- 
pendence of  the  Holy  See  ;  I  shall  even  have  it  paid  all 
the  expenses  occasioned  by  my  army,  but  our  conditions 
must  be  that  your  Holiness  shall  have  the  same  respect 
for  me  in  temporal  matters  that  I  have  for  you  in 
spiritual  matters,  and  that  you  shall  cease  to  show  any 
useless  toleration  towards    heretics    and    enemies   of   the 


2l6     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Church.  Your  Holiness  is  sovereign  of  Rome,  but  I  am 
Emperor.  All  my  enemies  ought  to  be  your  enemies.  It 
is,  therefore,  not  proper  that  any  agent  of  the  King  of 
Sardinia,  any  Englishman,  Russian,  or  Swede,  should 
reside  in  Rome  or  in  your  States,  nor  that  any  vessels 
belonging  to  those  powers  should  enter  your  ports. 

"  As  the  head  of  our  religion  I  shall  always  have  a  filial 
deference  for  your  Holiness,  but  I  am  accountable  to  God, 
who  made  use  of  my  arms  to  re-establish  religion.  And 
how  can  I  see  it  compromised  by  the  dilatoriness  of  Rome 
without  groaning  ?  Nothing  is  done,  and  for  mundane 
interests,  for  the  vain  prerogatives  of  the  tiara,  souls  are 
allowed  to  perish.  Those  who  allow  Germany  to  remain 
in  a  state  of  anarchy  will  have  to  answer  for  this  before 
God  ;  those  who  delay  sending  bulls  to  my  bishops  and  who 
leave  my  dioceses  in  anarchy  will  have  to  answer  for  this 
before  God.  As  for  the  affairs  of  Italy,  I  have  done  every- 
thing for  the  bishops  ;  I  have  consolidated  the  interests  of 
the  Church ;  I  have  not  meddled  with  any  spiritual  affair. 
What  I  did  at  Milan  I  shall  do  at  Naples,  and  wherever 
my  power  extends.  I  do  not  refuse  to  accept  the  co- 
operation of  men  endowed  with  the  true  zeal  for  religion 
and  to  come  to  an  understanding  with  them,  but  if,  at 
Ro'me,  days  are  wasted  in  culpable  inertness,  I,  com- 
missioned by  God  to  watch  over  the  maintenance  of  re- 
ligion, shall  be  unable  to  remain  indifferent  to  what  may 
injure  the  welfare  and  the  salvation  of  my  people. 

"  Most  Holy  Father,  I  know  that  your  Holiness  desires  to 
do  right,  but  you  are  surrounded  by  men  who  will  not 
permit  you,  who  have  bad  principles,  and  who,  instead 
of  searching  to  remedy  evils,  search  to  aggravate  them. 
If  your  Holiness  had  remembered  what  I  said  to  you  in 
Paris  the  religion  of  Germany  would  have  been  organised, 
and  not  left  in  its  present  lamentable  condition.  In  this 
country,  as  in  Italy,  everything  would  have  been  done  in 
concert  with  your  Holiness.  But  I  cannot  allow  matters 
to  languish  for  a  year  which  should  be  terminated  in  a 


CARDINAI.    FESCH.  2  I  / 

fortnight.  It  was  not  by  going  to  sleep  that  I  raised  the 
state  of  the  clergy  so  high  and  reorganised  religion  in 
France,  so  that  now  there  is  no  country  in  which  it  does, 
so  much  good  and  where  it  is  more  respected.  Those 
who  hold  any  other  language  to  your  Holiness  deceive 
you  and  are  your  enemies  ;  they  will  draw  down  mis- 
fortunes which  will  be  fatal  to  them. 
"  Upon  which  I  pray  God,  &c.,  &c. 

"  Napoleon." 

Napoleon  from  an  early  age  had  a  peculiar  taste  for 
theological  controversies.  When  at  St.  Helena  he  said 
that  as  a  sub-lieutenant  he  had  so  thoroughly  studied  the 
disputes  between  the  Gallicans  and  the  Ultramontanes 
that  he  might  have  taken  out  his  degree  in  divinity. 

On  the  same  day  his  majesty  wrote  to  Uncle  Fesch, 
saying : — 

"  I  shall  protect  the  Papal  States  against  the  whole 
world.  Have  bulls  sent  for  my  bishops.  They  take  a 
month  to  do  the  work  of  twenty-four  hours.  That  is  not 
religion.  In  Germany  there  is  but  one  cry  against  the 
court  of  Rome.  Its  conduct  is  revolting.  I  have  ordered 
Joseph  to  aid  you.  I  hold  you  responsible  for  the  execu- 
tion of  these  two  points — 1st,  expulsion  of  the  English, 
Russians,  Swedes,  and  Sardinians  from  the  Roman  states  ; 
2nd,  prohibition  of  the  ships  of  those  Powers  from  entering 
the  Roman  ports.  Say  that  I  have  my  eyes  open,  that  I 
am  Charlemagne,  the  sword  of  the  Church,  their  Emperor; 
that  they  ought  not  to  know  if  an  empire  of  Russia 
exists.   .  .  ." 

To  THE  KING  OF  BAVARIA. 

"  Paris,  14M  February,  1806. 

"  Sir,  my  Brother  and  Cousin, — Marshal  Berthier 
will  acquaint  you  with  the  orders  which  I  have  given  for 
the  occupation  of  Anspach.  The  King  of  Prussia  was 
wrong  not  to  ratify  the  treaty  of  Vienna  unconditionally. 


2l8     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

I  have  not  accepted  the  alterations,  and  the  treaty  is  null. 
However,  the  Prussian  army  has  occupied  Hanover,  and 
consequently  I  have  ordered  the  occupation  of  Anspach. 
Prussia  wished  to  take  Hanover,  and  to  give  us  neither 
Cleves  nor  Anspach.  ...  I  greatly  desire  to  see  Prussia 
driven  north. 

"  Napoleon." 


In  a  letter  of  the  i6th  February  his  Majesty  approves 
of  the  conduct  of  Prince  Eugene  in  closing  the  ports  of 
Venice  and  Italy  to  English  goods.  In  the  same  letter  we 
see  that  the  inhabitants  of  Verona,  Padua,  Trieste,  &c., 
were  to  contribute  7,400,000  francs  towards  the  Grand 
Army,  as  Napoleon  was   greatly  in   need   of  money. 

NOTE  TO  THE  MINISTER  OF  THE  INTERIOR. 

"Paris,  i-jth  February,  1806. 

"  In  the  month  of  May  a  portion  of  the  army  will  be 
assembled  in  Paris. 

"  The  city  of  Paris  has  decided  on  offering  crowns  of 
gold   to  the   eagles  of  the  grand   army,  &c.,  &c. 

"The  city  of  Paris  will  be  compen.sated  for  these 
expenses,  the  increase  of  town  dues,  all  the  more  so  as 
the  officers  and  soldiers,  who  will  receive  extra  pay  on 
that  day,  will  spend  a  great   deal  of  money. 

"  Some  bull  fights  like  those  in  Spain,  or  fights  between 
wild  beasts,  are  amusements  which  would  be  pleasing  to 
warriors." 

The  theatres  were  to  remain  open  for  a  week  free  ;  there 
were  to  be  concerts  at  which  warlike  songs  were  to  be 
sung,  and  everything  was  to  be  done  to  arouse  enthusiasm 
and  an  esprit  militaire. 

As  a  matter  of  fact  the  army  did  not  return  to  Paris, 
but   marched  to  Berlin,   and  then   to  Warsaw. 


ST.    JANUARIUS.  219 

To  THE  PRINCESS  ELIZA. 

"  Paris,  ■2.2nd  February,  1806. 
"My  Sister,— I   beg  that   you  will  allow  your  Court 
to  wear  nothing  but  silks   and    cambric,   and    that    you 
will  exclude  all  cottons  and  muslins  in  order  to  favour 
French   industry. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  PRINCE  JOSEPH. 

"Paris,  25^/2  February,  1806. 
"My  Brother,— I  have   received    your  letter  of   the 
14th.     I  compliment  you  on  the  fall  of  Naples  and  other 
places.     I  have  ordered  that  all  the  Neapolitan  officers  in 
Paris  and  in  my  kingdom  of  Italy  shall  be  sent  to  you. 

"Napoleon." 

To  PRINCE  JOSEPH. 

"  Paris,  lith  February,  1806. 
"...  You  cannot  be  in  want  of  money  at  present. 
Disarm  Naples,  and  levy  a  contribution  of  10,000,000 
francs  on  the  city.  It  will  be  paid  easily.  You  have 
certain  resources  by  confiscating  English  merchandise.  I 
compliment  you  on  your  reconciliation  with  St.  Januarius, 
but  in  the  midst  of  all  that  I  suppose  you  have  occupied 
the  forts.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

The  first  thing  Joseph  did  after  entering  the  city  was  to 
throw  a  diamond  necklace  round  the  neck  of  the  favourite 
saint.  Championnet  had  acted  very  differently  before,  and 
Murat  acted  very  differently  afterwards. 

On  the  2nd  March  Napoleon  opened  the  session  with  a 
pompous  speech,  in  which  he  thus  referred  to  the  battle  of 
Trafalgar: — "The  tempest  caused  us  to  lose  some  vessels 
after  a  battle  imprudently  waged.  I  cannot  praise  too 
highly  the  high-mindedness  and  the  attachment  which  the 
King  of  Spain  showed   under  these  circumstances  in  the 


2  20     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

common  cause.  I  desire  peace  with  England,  and  I  shall 
always  be  ready  to  conclude  it  on  the  bases  of  the  treaty 
of  Amiens.  ..." 

It  required  a  good  deal  of  audacity  to  speak  of 
Trafalgar  as  a  battle  imprudently  waged  after  the 
positive  instructions  sent  to  poor  Villeneuve.  Napoleon 
attempted  a  similar  excuse  when  at  St.  Helena.  In  his 
Military  Correspondence  (vol.  x.,  p.  139),  he  wrote: — 
"  Tourville  attacked  eighty  English  vessels  with  forty  ;  the 
French  fleet  was  destroyed.  The  order  of  Louis  XIV. 
did  not  justify  this;  that  order  was  not  a  military  order 
which  exacted  implicit  obedience,  it  was  an  instruction. 
The  clause  understood  was — if  the  chances  of  success  are 
equal.  In  that  case  the  responsibility  of  the  admiral  was 
covered  by  the  order  of  the  prince.  But  when  defeat  was 
certain,  it  was  misunderstanding  the  spirit  of  the  order  to 
execute  it  to  the  letter.  If  on  approaching  Louis  XIV. 
the  admiral  had  said,  '  Sire,  if  I  had  attacked  the  English 
your  whole  fleet  would  have  been  lost ;  I  returned  to  port,' 
the  king  would  have  thanked  him  ; — de  facto,  the  royal 
order  would  have  been  executed." 

Louis  XIV.  threatened  to  supersede  Tourville  unless  he 
fought  Russell,  and  Napoleon  threatened  to  supersede 
Villeneuve   unless   he   fought  Nelson. 

To  PRINCE  JOSEPH. 

"  Paris,  Zth  March,  1806. 
"  My  Brother, — I  see  that  in  one  of  your  proclama- 
tions you  promise  not  to  levy  any  war  contributions,  and 
that  the  soldiers  are  not  to  exact  meals  from  their 
hosts.  It  is  not  by  cajoling  people  that  you  win  them, 
and  it  is  not  by  such  measures  that  you  will  be  able  to 
recompense  your  army.  Lay  a  contribution  of  thirty 
million  francs  on  the  kingdom  of  Naples,  remount  your 
cavalry  and  artillery,  &c.  It  would  be  too  ridiculous  if 
the  conquest  of  Naples  were  not  to  procure  the  well- 
being  and  comfort  of  my  army.  .  .  .  The    new   English 


PROPOSED    ASSASSINATION    OF    NAPOLEON.         22  1 

Government  appears  to  be  animated  by  better  principles 
than  the  last  one,  if  I  am  to  judge  by  a  letter  from  Mr. 
Fox,  warning  the  police  of  an  attempt  to  assassinate  me. 
He  names  the  individual,  gives  details,  and  says  that  he 
writes  by  the  express  order  of  the  king.  .  .  .  Massena 
should  be  settled  at  Naples,  with  the  title  of  prince  and  a 
large  revenue."  ^ 

As  M.  Lanfrey  says,  it  was  Napoleon  himself  who 
imagined  this  false  plot  for  his  own  assassination,  which, 
while  testing  the  friendship  of  Fox,  furnished  an  excuse 
for  reopening  negotiations,  and  attempting  to  obtain  from 
the  new  ministry  what  he  had  failed  to  obtain  from  Pitt. 

In  a  letter  of  the  13th  March  we  see  that  Hamburg, 
Amsterdam,  Frankfort,  and  Augsburg  were  to  contribute 
9,618,000  francs  towards  the  Grand  Army. 

To  M.  DE  TALLEYRAND. 

"Paris,  \\th  March,  1806. 

"  There  are  three  countries  which  I  should  like  to  have 
in  order  to  'round  off'  Prince^Murat.  First,  the  abbeys 
of  Essen  and  Werden,  the  county  of  Lamark,  and  the 
county  of  Witgenstein.  The  two  first  belong  to  Prussia ; 
I  don't  know  to  whom  the  third  belongs.  See  what  you 
can  offer  Prussia  in  exchange 

"  Make  me  a  report  upon  giving  Frankfort  to  Darmstadt, 
which  will  indemnify  Hesse  Cassel  and  Nassau  ;  these  will 

1  On  the  2nd  March  Napoleon  had  written  to  Joseph  that  Massena 
was  hated  by  the  army,  that  he  was  not  a  man  of  sufficient  elevation 
to  command  Frenchmen,  and  that  he  had  plundered  3,000,000  francs  ; 
and  on  the  12th  the  Emperor  wrote— "  Advise  Massena  to  give  back 
the  6,000,000  francs  he  has  taken.  The  only  way  he  has  of  saving 
himself  is  to  restore  them  quickly;  if  he  does  not  restore  them  I  shall 
appoint  a  military  commission,  to  sit  at  Padua,  to  make  an  inquiry, 
for  this  is  too  much  brigandage.  .  .  .  Have  St.  Cyr  watched.  The 
detail  of  their  embezzlements  is  unheard  of;  I  learned  it  from  the 
Austrians,  who  blushed  at  it," 


222     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

cede  the  country  contiguous  to  the  Duchy  of  Berg;  Hesse 
Cassel  will  cede  the  enclave  near  the  Rhine,  which  will  be 
given  to  Baden.  This  affair  must  be  promptly  terminated, 
and  ratified  in  less  than  twenty  days.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

The     territorial     arrangements     of    his    Majesty    were 
numerous,  complicated,  and  perplexing. 

To  M.  DE  TALLEYRAND. 

"Paris,  in^th  March,  1806. 
"I  saw  M.  Ver  Huell  this  evening.  I  reduced  the 
question  to  two  words.  Holland  has  no  executive,  and 
requires  one  ;  I  will  give  her  Prince  Louis.  A  compact  will 
be  made  by  which  the  religion  of  the  country  will  be 
respected ;  the  prince  will  keep  his  and  the  people  theirs. 
The  present  constitution  will  be  maintained  ;  there  will  be 
a  king  instead  of  a  grand  pensioner.  .  .  .  The  castle  of 
Loo  and  its  dependencies  must  be  given  to  the  prince, 
with  means  to  keep  up  the  splendour  of  his  rank.  .  .  . 
Before  twenty  days  Louis  must  make  his  entrance  into 
Amsterdam. 

"  Napoleon." 

And  this  was  the  way  in  which  the  liberties  of  Holland 
were  disposed  of.  It  may  at  once  be  stated  that  Louis 
was  afraid  to  refuse  the  proffered  throne  ;  he  preferred 
reigning  at  the  Hague  to  being  driven  into  exile  like 
Lucien.  In  1805  Louis  had  been  given  the  command  of 
an  army  corps,  and  after  Austerlitz  had  gone  to  Strasburg 
to  pay  his  respects  to  his  brother.  Napoleon  received 
him  very  coolly,  and  asked  him  why  he  had  left  Holland. 
Louis  gave  for  a  reason  that  rumours  had  been  spread 
of  a  monarchical  transformation.  "  These  rumours,"  he 
added,  "  are  disagreeable  to  a  free  and  estimable  nation, 
nor  do  they  please  me."     And  yet  he  accepted  the  throne. 


BERTHIER   AND    MADAME    VISCONTI.  223 

To  MARSHAL  BERTHIER. 

"  La  Malmaison,  1806. 

"I  send  you  the  Moniteur ;  you  will  see  what  I  have 
done  for  you.  I  exact  one  condition  only,  which  is  that 
you  get  married.  Your  passion  has  lasted  long  enough  ; 
it  has  become  ridiculous,  and  I  have  the  right  to  hope  that 
■the  man  whom  I  have  called  my  companion  in  arms,  who 
will  be  placed  alongside  of  me  by  posterity,  will  no  longer 
abandon  himself  to  a  weakness  without  example.  I  there- 
fore wish  you  to  get  married,  or  I  will  see  you  no  more. 
You  are  fifty  years  of  age,  but  you  belong  to  a  race  which 
lives  for  eighty,  and  these  thirty  years  are  those  during 
which  the  douceurs  of  marriage  are  most  necessary. 

"  When  circumstances  permit  you  will  go  to  Strasburg. 
From  thence  you  will  go  to  your  principality,  to  settle 
affairs.  It  brought  50,000  crowns  to  Prussia,  it  should 
bring  you  double  that  sum.  You  know  that  no  one  likes 
you  better  than  I  do,  but  you  also  know  that  the  first 
condition  of  my  friendship  is  that  it  must  be  made  sub- 
ordinate to  my  esteem.  You  have  deserved  it  up  to  the 
present.  Continue  to  render  yourself  worthy  of  it  by 
aiding  me  in  my  plans,  and  in  founding  a  good  and 
large  family. 

"  Napoleon." 

Berthier,  who  was  born  at  Versailles  in  1755,  joined  the 
royal  army  as  a  lad,  fought  under  Rochambeau  in  America, 
and  returned  to  France  a  colonel.  During  the  Revolution 
he  did  duty  in  the  National  Guard  of  his  native  town,  and 
helped  the  daughters  of  Louis  XV.  to  make  their  escape. 
He  next  served  against  the  Royalists  in  La  Vendee,  then 
joined  the  army  of  Custine,  afterwards  acted  as  aide-de- 
camp to  Kellermann,  and  in  1796  became  chief  of  the  staff 
to  Bonaparte.  When  at  Milan  Berthier  fell  desperately  in 
love  with  a  Madame  Visconti,  who  left  her  second  husband 


2  24    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

to  follow  the  fortunes  of  the  French  soldier.     Berthier  was 
still  passionately  attached  to  this  woman  when  he  received 
the  above  letter.     He  rushed  off  to  the  Empress,  who  had 
known   Madame  Visconti   in   Italy,  appealed  to  her,  and 
wept  like   a   child.     All  that  Josephine   could  do  was  to 
express  her  pity  for  his  grief  and  her  admiration  for  his 
constancy.     However,    there  were   to   be   no   more  public 
mistresses  among  the  dignitaries  of  the  empire.     Talley- 
rand had  been  obliged  to  condone  with  M.  Grand  and  to 
marry  Madame  Grand  ;   and  as  Berthier  was  too  good  a 
Catholic  to   marry  a  divorced  woman,  the  fiat  went  out 
that  he  must  marry  some  one  else,  and  raise  up  heirs  to 
his  princedom  of  Neufchatel.     For  two  years  he  managed 
to  elude  the  orders  of  his  chief;   but  one  day  the  Duke 
William  of  Birkenfeld  arrived  in  Paris  to  solicit  compen- 
sation for  territory  which  had  been  wrested  from  him,  and 
was  sent  for  by  Napoleon.     His  Majesty  said,  "I  intend 
to   give  your  daughter's  hand  to  Berthier."     Whereupon 
the  duke,  unaccustomed  to  such  abrupt  measures,  fainted 
away.     The  marriage  duly  took  place  in  1808,  and  three 
months  after  the  ceremony  Berthier  learned  the  death  of 
M.  de  Visconti.     Upon  this  he  took  up  his  pen  and  wrote 
to  Prince  Borghese — "  You  know  how  often  the  Emperor 
pressed  me  to  obtain  a  divorce  for  Madame  de  Visconti. 
But   a  divorce  was   always   repugnant  to  the  feelings  in 
which  I   was  educated,  and  therefore   I  waited.     To-day 
Madame  de  Visconti  is  free,  and  I   might  have  been  the 
happiest  of  men.     But   the    Emperor  forced   me   into  a 
marriage  which  hinders  me   from   uniting   myself  to  the 
only  woman  I  ever  loved.     Ah !  my  dear  prince,  all  that 
the  Emperor  has  done  and  may  yet  do  for  me,  will  be  no 
compensation  for  the  eternal  misfortune  to  which  he  has 
condemned  me."     Berthier's  share  of  the  Imperial  plunder 
was  60,000/.  a  year  and  the  castle  of  Chambord,  where 
he,  his  wife,  and  Madame  di  Visconti  lived  together  on 
the  best  terms.     It  will  be  seen  that  Berthier's  ideas  of 
morality  were  very  curious  and  confused. 


ANGLOMANIA. 


225 


To  MARSHAL  BERTHIER. 

"La  Malmaison,  loth  April,  1806. 
"  I  am  sorry  that  you  sent  your  brother  to  Paris.  I 
would  not  receive  him.  Tell  him  to  rejoin  immediately. 
He  has  made  2,000,000  francs  in  Hanover,  and  must  not 
give  himself  airs.  If  he  intends  to  neglect  his  duty 
because  he  is  rich,  he  will  find  out  his  mistake.  I  shall 
degrade  a  general  who  leaves  his  troops.  As  for  the 
confinement  of  his  wife,  I  cannot  enter  into  such  details 
as  that;  my  wife  might  have  died  at  Munich  or  at  Stras- 
burg,  and  that  would  not  have  disturbed  the  execution  of 
my  plans  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  All  the  soldiers  in 
Germany  wish  to  return  to  Paris.  .  .  .  Send  me  details 
concerning  the  embezzlements.  .  .  . 


"  Napoleon.' 


Made  ;^8o,ooo  in  Hanover  ! 


TO  VICE-ADMIRAL  D^CRES. 

"  La  Malmaison,  loth  April,  1806. 

"  I  have  read  with  attention  the  report  of  the  Prefect  of 
Martinique.  I  beg  that  you  will  show  this  document  to  M. 
Dubuc ;  it  is  entirely  favourable  to  the  English.  .  .  .  Let 
me  know  how  the  court  of  justice  can  be  composed  so  that 
the  great  majority  may  consist  of  men  arrived  from  France 
and  Enemies  of  the  English.  .  .  .  Write  to  General  Villaret 
that  I  have  read  this  song  with  indignation,  and  that  it 
is  not  proper  for  French  officers  to  hear  the  praises  of 
Anglomania. 

"  Napoleon." 


On  the  nth  April   Napoleon   addressed  Joseph  for  the 
first  time  as  King  of  Naples. 

VOL.  II.  Q 


226  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  PRINCE  EUGENE. 

"St.  Cloud,  14M  April,  1806. 
"  My  Son, — You  work  too  hard,  and  your  life  is  too 
monotonous.  This  is  good  for  you,  because  work  should 
be  a  recreation  for  you,  but  you  have  a  young  wife  who  is 
enceinte.  I  think  you  should  manage  to  pass  the  evening 
with  her  and  see  a  little  company.  Why  don't  you  go  to 
the  theatre  once  a  week  }  I  think  that  you  should  keep 
hounds  and  hunt  once  a  week  at  least.  I  would  willingly 
make  an  allowance  for  this  out  of  the  budget.  You  must 
make  your  house  more  gay ;  that  is  absolutely  necessary 
for  the  happiness  of  your  wife  and  for  your  health.  I  lead 
the  same  sort  of  life  as  you  do,  but  then  my  wife  is  old 
and  does  not  require  me  to  amuse  her;  I  work  harder 
than  you  do,  and  yet,  to  tell  the  truth,  I  divert  myself  a 
great  deal  more.  A  young  wife  requires  to  be  amused, 
especially  when  she  is  in  an  interesting  position.  You 
used  to  like  pleasure,  you  must  return  to  your  old  tastes. 
It  is  right  that  you  should  do  for  the  princess  what  you 
would  not  do  for  yourself.  I  am  going  to  settle  at  St. 
Cloud.  Stephanie  and  the  Prince  of  Baden  love  each  other 
pretty  well.  I  spent  two  days  with  Marshal  Bessieres; 
we  played  like  lads  of  fifteen.  You  used  to  get  up  early, 
you  should  resume  that  practice.  It  would  not  disturb 
the   princess    if    you    went    to    bed    with   her   at    eleven. 

o'clock.  .  .  .  "Napoleon." 

DECREE. 

"  St.  Cloud,  17M  April,  ^06. 

"Napoleon,  Emperor  of  the  French,  King  of 
Italy, — In  consequence  of  the  services  rendered  to  the 
country  by  the  Constable  Duguesclin  of  glorious  memory, 
we  have  ordered  and  order  as  follows  :  — 

"Art.  1st. — Madame  de  Gesvres  shall  be  recalled  from 
exile  and  released  from  all  supervision. 

"Art.  2nd. — She  is  granted  a  pension  of 6,000  francs  a 
year  for  life  out  of  our  imperial  treasury.    «  NapOLEON." 


THE    CATTARO    AFFAIR.  227 

It  is  hardly  probable  that  any  Englishman  of  the  nine- 
teenth century  would  feel  offended  at  a  descendant  of  the 
constable  receiving  a  pension,  considering  that  the  Princess 
of  Wales  gave  the  warrior  himself  30,000  florins  to  help 
him  to  pay  his  ransom  after  he  had  been  captured  by 
the  Black  Prince  ;  and  that  the  Black  Prince  released 
Duguesclin  "  because  he  esteemed  but  did  not  fear  him." 

On  the  20th  April  Napoleon  wrote  to  Prince  Eugene 
saying : — "  I  do  not  approve  of  the  sortie  of  the  Italian 
fleet.  What  would  you  have  two  frigates,  a  corvette,  and 
two  brigs  do  against  two  frigates  and  a  brig  .■'  The  forces 
were  equal.  If  they  had  been  only  Russians  you  might 
have  attempted  the  sortie.  You  must  avoid  fighting  with 
the  English  ;  defeat  was  certain  .  .   .  ." 

To  MARSHAL  BERTHIER. 

"St.  Cloud,  iind April,  1806. 
My  Cousin, — The  affairs  of  Cattaro  are  not  getting 
settled ;  however,  I  have  decided  to  remain  in  Germany 
until  I  know  how  matters  are   likely  to   turn  out.     Keep 
an  eye  on  the  movements  of  the  Austrians.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

By  the  treaty  of  Presburg  Cattaro  was  to  have  been 
handed  over  to  France  by  Austria,  but  the  Russians  seized 
on  the  place,  and  Napoleon  made  this  a  pretext  for 
keeping  his  armies  in  Germany  eating  up  the  country. 

To  THE  KING  OF  NAPLES. 

"St.  Cloud,  22nd April,  1806. 
"  My  Brother, — I  see  with  pleasure  that  you  have 
burned  an  insurgent  village.  I  suppose  that  you  allowed 
the  soldiers  to  pillage  it.  That  is  the  way  in  which 
villages  which  revolt  should  be  treated.  It  is  the  right  of 
war,  and  it  is  also  a  duty  prescribed  by  policy.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

Q  2 


228  THE   CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  M.  DE  TALLEYRAND. 

"St.  Cloud,  2S//z  April,  i8o6, 

"  I  forward  you  a  claim  made  by  the  Pi'incess  of  Lucca. 
It  is  absolutely  necessary  for  the  Queen  of  Etruria  to 
cede  those  territories  to  the  princess,  either  giving  her  an 
equivalent  out  of  the  territories  of  the  Pope,  who  on  the 
other  side  might  be  indemnified  out  of  the  King  of  Naples. 
or  by  paying  a  rent. 

"Napoleon." 

To  M.  DE  LAC:ic;PEDE. 

"St.  Cloud,  25//^  April,  1806. 

"  I  have  not  deemed  it  right  to  sign  the  decree  that  you 
sent  me  about  Chambord.  ...  In  the  meantime  send  me 
a  proposition  for  placing  at  your  disposal  a  sum  of  money 
to  repair  the  castle  so  that  it  may  be  ready  on  the  1st 
January,  1807,  to  receive  100  pupils. 

"  Napoleon." 

Chambord  was  shortly  afterwards  given  to  Marshal 
Berthier. 

To  PRINCE  EUGENE. 

"St.  Cloud,  yith  April,  1806. 

"  My  Son, — I  wrote  to  you  to  start  a  pack  of  hounds. 
It  is  important  that  gentlemen  in  Italy  should  be  ac- 
customed to  ride  ;  the  exercise  and  the  fatigue  of  hunting 
will  be  most  advantageous  to  them.  It  would  be  much 
better  for  them  to  take  to  this  pastime  than  to  remain 
always    with    their   wives.        For    you    the    recreation    is 

necessary. 

"  Napoleon." 

Some  Irish  officers  having  deposed  their  swords  because 
they  were  not  told  off  to  march  against  the  English  who 
had  disembarked  in    Italy,  General    Hartz    implored  the 


THE   ARC    DE    TRIOMPHE. 


229 


indulgence  of  the  Emperor,  and  his   Majesty   decided— 
"  I  never  find  it  ill  when  officers  wish  to  serve." 

Mdlle.  Contat  having  asked  permission  to  retire  from 
the  stage. 

DECISION. 

"  St.  Cloud,  9M  May,  1806. 
"  I  am   not  obliged  to  accord  a   benefit  to  an  actress. 
As  Mdlle.  Contat  is  still  fit  for  service  she  must  continue 
to  play. 

"  Napoleon." 

Mdlle.  Contat  had  made  \\.&x  dibutm   1776!  she  retired 
in  1808. 

To  M.  CHAMPIGNY. 

"  St.  Cloud,  f^th  May,  1806. 
"  After  all  the  difficulties  in  the  way  of  constructing  the 
Arc  de  Triomphe  on  the  site  of  the  Bastille,  I  consent  to 
its  being  constructed  at  the  gate  of  Chaillot,  at  I'Etoile 
[where  it  now  stands].  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  GENERAL  JUNOT. 

"  St.  Cloud,  13M  May,  1806. 
"  I  see  with  pleasure  the  energy  which  you  display  in 
governing.  The  forty-four  individuals  condemned  to  death 
and  to  the  galleys  is  a  salutary  measure,  which  will  serve 
as  an  example,  and  will  check  those  who  desire  to  indulge 
in  their  natural  inconstancy. 

"  Napoleon." 

NOTE. 

"St.  Cloud,  14/ A  May,  1806. 
'  The  triumphal  arches  would  be    labour    lost,  and  I 
should  never   have   consented    to    them  had  I  not   con- 
sidered them    a    means  for  encouraging  architecture.      I 


230     THE  CORRESrONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

desire  that  these  arches  shall  nourish  French  sculpture  for 
ten  years.  .  .  .  You  must  lose  no  opportunity  of  humiliat- 
ing the  Russians  and  the  English.  William  the  Conqueror 
and  Duguesclin  maybe  honoured  with  monuments. 

"  Napoleon." 

A  statue  was  set  up  to  William  the  Conqueror  at  his 
birthplace,  Falaise,  in  1851.  In  history  one  finds  that  this 
warrior  died  at  Rouen  in  1087,  deserted  by  all  his  friends, 
and  that  his  servants  plundered  even  the  bed  upon  which 
he  expired,  and  left  his  body  on  the  floor.  "  This, 
William,"  says  Bonnechose  in  his  History  of  France,  "con- 
queror of  a  great  kingdom  and  ravisher  of  immense 
domains  in  a  foi'cign  country,  obtained  only  by  pity  a 
grave  in  his  own  native  land  ;  the  persons  present  at  his 
burial  were  obliged  to  pay  down  the  funeral  expenses  on 
the  lid  of  his  coffin." 

Such  was  the  fate  of  the  soldier  whose  great  achievement 
Napoleon  wished  to  imitate. 

On  the  1 6th  May  violent  remonstrances  were  addressed 
to  the  court  of  Rome,  and  also  this  letter  : — 

To  CARDINAL  FESCH. 

"  St.  Cloud,  16/A  May,  1806. 
"  My  Cousin, — I  have  re-called  you  from  Rome  because 
it  is  not  in  accordance  with  my  dignity  that  you  should 
remain  at  so  ill-conducted  a  court  which  does  all  it  can 
to  annoy  me,  and  which  I  shall  be  constrained  to  punish 
sooner  or  later.  But  you  may  remain  at  Rome  as  long 
as  it  suits  you,  leaving  political  affairs  in  the  hands  of 
Alquier.  See  the  Pope  and  tell  him  that  the  note  of 
Cardinal  Consalvi  has  greatly  displeased  me,  that  this 
man,  by  folly  or  by  treason,  wishes  to  ruin  the  temporal 
power  of  the  Holy  See,  and  that  he  will  succeed.  I  have 
signed  a  treaty  with  the  archchancellor  elector,^  by  which 

^  Archchancellor  Dalberg,  who,  after  having  vainly  endeavoured  to 
persuade  the  Germans  to  proclaim  a  dictatorship  in  order  to  oppose 


ARCHCHANCELLOR    DALBERG.  23  I 

you  have  been  appointed  his  coadjutor.  This  is  still  a 
secret,  but  it  is  probable  that  before  a  month  the  affair  will 
be  arranged.  If  you  remain  at  Rome,  leave  all  the  odious 
work  to  Alguier  and  remain  neutral.  I  do  not  wish  to 
take  the  temporal  states  of  the  Pope,  but  I  must  have 
satisfaction  for  the  threat  made  to  me  at  Austerlitz  to  drive 
my  minister  from  Rome. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  THE  ARCHBISHOP  OF  RATISBONNE,  Elector  Arch- 
chancellor  of  the  Empire  of  Germany. 

"  St.  Cloud,  16//%  May,  1806. 
"  I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  17th  with  the  work 
which  accompanied  it.  I  thank  you  for  the  amiable 
things  you  say.  Going  some  evening  to  shoot  at  Ram- 
bouillet,  I  will  take  it  in  my  carriage  to  read  it.  I  shall 
find  in  it  the  good  taste  and  the  talent  which  render 
your  society  so  interesting,  and  which  have  inspired  so 
much  esteem. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  PRINCE  EUGENE. 

"  St.  Cloud,  idth  May,  1806. 
"  My    Son, — General    Lemarois    should    have    reached 
Ancona   by   this    time.     I  have  given   him  the  command 
of  the  troops  in  the  Papal  States. 

"  Napoleon." 

Lemarois  was  an  old  and  trusted  aide-de-camp  ;  he  was 
one  of  the  witnesses  of  that  strange  civil  marriage  per- 
formed between  Napoleon  and  Josephine,  in  the  town  hall 
of  the  second  ward,  at  ten  o'clock  at  night,  by  a  sleepy 
mayor. 

Napoleon,  went  over  to  the  Emperor  after  Austerlitz,  considering  all 
further  resistance  useless.  He  became  Primate  of  the  Confederation 
of  the  Rhine,  and  as  he  did  not  die  until  1817  Uncle  Fesch  never  had 
the  chance  of  succeeding  him. 


232  THE    CORRESPONDE^•CE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  THE  PRINCESS  ELIZA. 

"  St.  Cloud,  7.1  th  May,  1806. 
"  My  Sister, — I  have  received  your  letters.     Do  not 
exact  any  oath  from  the  priests  ;  it  leads   to   nothing  but 
difficulty.     Go  your  own  way  ;  suppress  the  convents. 

"  Napoleon." 

Napoleon  having  caused  the  Concordat  to  be  published 
at  Lucca,  and  the  Pope  having  interfered,  a  most  violent 
note  was  the  consequence.  His  Holiness  was  informed 
that  "the  principles  of  religion  are  immutable,  and  what 
can  procure  the  salvation  of  souls  at  Bologna  can  procure 
them  salvation  at  Lucca."  And  Talleyrand  was  directed 
to  ask  Pius  VIL — "Do  you  take  the  Emperor  for  a  weak 
and  ignorant  Prince  .''  It  is  not  the  morality  preached 
by  the  Gospel,  nor  the  example  left  by  Jesus  Christ,  to 
sow  disorder,  to  provoke  insurrection,  and  to  trouble  the 
tranquillity  of  states.  The  Emperor  declares  that  what 
has  been  done  at  Lucca  was  by  his  order,  and  that  he 
shall  regard  all  correspondence  with  his  Italian  states 
and  with  Lucca,  not  communicated  to  him,  as  an  ex- 
ample of  rebellion."  In  the  meantime  sister  Eliza  was  to 
sei^e  on  the  property  of  the  monks,  and  to  see  that  the 
Papal  brief  was  kept  a  secret. 

Letter  after  letter  was  written  to  Joseph,  urging  Jiim 
to  push  on  the  siege  of  Gaeta,  and  to  capture  Sicily. 
"  It  will  be  easy  for  you,"  wrote  Napoleon,  "  to  deceive 
Sidney  Smith.  I  often  laid  snares  for  him,  into  which  he 
invariably  fell.  When  he  has  tumbled  into  three  or  four 
more  he  will  get  disgusted." 

To  M,  DE  TALLEYRAND. 

"St.  Cloud,  zdth  May,  1806. 
"  The  court  of  Rome  is  trying  to  deceive  people  in  an 
underhand  way.    Write  to  Alquier  to  let  Cardinal  Consalvi 
know  that  none  of  these  matters  escape  me,  that  I  follow 


THE    FRENCH    JEWS.  233 

them  with  a  watchful  eye  ;  that  at  the  first  thing  he  does 
he  shall  answer  for  it  with  his  head  ;  that  I  shall  have  him 
arrested  in  the  centre  of  Rome. 

"  Napoleon." 

General  Tilly  (a  French  officer)  asked  the  permission  of 
the  Emperor  to  wear  the  order  of  the  Red  Eagle  given 
to  him  by  the  King  of  Prussia. 

DECISION. 

"  St.  Cloud,  26M  May,  1806. 
"  It    appears  to  me    extraordinary   that    the    King    of 
Prussia  should  give  orders  without  my  permission.     You 
must  make  known  my  dissatisfaction  at  Berlin. 

"  Napoleon." 

DECREE. 

"St.  Cloud,  -^oth  May,  1806. 
"  A  report  having  been  made  to  me  that  certain  Jews, 
exercising  the  profession  of  usurers  alone,  have,  by  the 
accumulation  of  immoderate  interest,  reduced  many  farmers 
to  great  disti-ess,  we  feel  it  our  duty  to  come  to  the  aid  of 
those  of  our  subjects  who  have  been  brought  to  deplorable 
extremities  by  unjust  avidity." 

The  consequence  was  that  a  convocation  of  Jews  from 
the  chief  cities  of  France  was  assembled  in  July  at  Paris 
to  consider  the  following  questions  : — 

1st.  Is  the  Jew  permitted  to  marry  more  than  one  wife  .' 
2nd.  Is  divorce  permitted  .■■  3rd.  Can  a  Jew  marry  a 
Christian  woman  or  a  Jewess  a  Christian  1  4th.  Are  the 
French  brothers  or  aliens  in  the  eyes  of  the  Jews  .''  5th 
What  connection  does  their  law  permit  with  Frenchmen  .' 
6th.  Do  Jews  born  in  France  and  treated  as  citizens  con- 
sider France  their  native  country .?  are  they  bound  to 
defend  her.?  are  they  obliged  to  obey  the  civil  code.? 
7th.  Who  are  the   rabbins.'     8th.    What  civil  jurisdiction 


2  34     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

do  the  rabbins  exercise  among  the  Jews  ?  what  power  of 
punishment  do  they  possess  ?  9th.  Are  the  mode  of 
choosing  rabbins,  and  the  system  of  punishment,  regulated 
by  the  Jewish  laws  ?  loth.  Are  the  Jews  forbidden  by 
their  laws  to  take  usury  from  their  brethren  ?  are  they 
permitted  or  are  they  forbidden  to  take  usury  from 
strangers  ?  i  ith.  Are  those  things  proclaimed  which  are 
forbidden  to  the  Jews  by  their  laws  ? 

These  questions  were  prompted  by  a  desire  on  the  part 
of  Napoleon  to  conclude  a  sort  of  concordat  with  the 
Jews,  and  ended,  after  satisfactory  explanations  had  been 
given,  by  the  French  Government  undertaking  to  pay  the 
rabbins. 

To  THE  KING  OF  NAPLES. 

"  St.  Cloud,  ■^otk  May,  1806. 
"  I  am  not  at   all  surprised  that  you  are  satisfied  with 
Marshal  Jourdan.     I  was  equally  satisfied  with  him  in  the 
administration   of    Italy ;    he   is    an    upright,   active,    and 
methodical  man. 

"  I  do  not  see  why  you  leave  Massena  at  Capua.  Send 
him  to  Gaeta,  and  order  him  to  carry  on  the  siege  of  that 
place  with  activity. 

"  Napoleon." 

Strange  to  say,  Jourdan  was  the  only  Marshal  who 
received  no  title  at  the  hands  of  the  Emperor. 

To  THE  KING  OF  NAPLES. 

"  St.  Cloud,  31^;^  May,  1806. 
" ....  I  have  already  told  you,  and  I  repeat  it,  that 
you  trust  the  Neapolitans  too  much  ;  I  tell  you  this  especi- 
ally as  regards  your  kitchen  and  the  protection  of  your 
person,  for  you  run  the  risk  of  being  poisoned  or  assassin- 
ated. I  firmly  desire  therefore  that  you  should  keep  your 
French  cooks^  and  always  have  a  French  guard.  You 
have  not  sufiiiciently  followed  my  private  life  to  know  to 


MASSENAS    PECULIARITIES.  235 

what  an  extent,  even  in  France,  I  have  relied  on  the  pro- 
tection of  my  most  faithful  and  oldest  soldiers No 

one  ought  to  enter  your  room  of  a  night  but  your  aide- 
de-camp,  who  should  sleep  in  the  room  preceding  your 
bedroom  ;  your  door  should  be  always  fastened  inside, 
and  you  should  never  open  to  your  aide-de-camp  until 
you  have  recognised  his  voice,  and  he  himself  should  not 
knock  at  the  door  until  he  has   shut  the  door  of  his  own 

room  to  make  sure  of  no   one  following  him The 

character  of  the  Neapolitans  has  been  known  for  centuries, 
and  you  have  to  deal  with  a  woman  who  is  the  personifica- 
tion of  crime 

"  Napoleon." 

King  Joseph  was  then  told  to  try  and  attach  Jourdan 
and  Regnier  to  his  person  ;  but  "  Massena  is  good  for 
nothing  in  the  matter  of  civil  government,  besides  he  is 
not  capable  of  affection.  He  is  a  good  soldier,  but 
entirely  addicted  to  the  love  of  money ;  this  is  the  main- 
spring of  his  conduct,  and  that  alone  will  make  him  act, 
even  under  my  eye.  He  began  by  small  sums  ;  to-day, 
milliards  would  not  suffice."  .  ..."  I  read  in  your  speech 
phrases  which  you  must  permit  me  to  object  to.  You 
compare  the  attachment  of  the  French  for  my  person  to 
that  of  the  Neapolitans  for  you.  What  love  can  you 
expect  a  people  to  have  for  you  when  you  have  done 
nothing  for  them,  whose  country  you  occupy  by  right  of 
conquest,  with  some  50,000  foreigners .'....  I  have 
erected  Beneventum  and  Ponte  Corvo  into  two  duchies, 
the  first  for  Talleyrand,  the  second  for  Bernadotte.  I 
know  that  they  are  not  rich,  but  I  will  supply  a  dota- 
tion. Talleyrand  is  wealthy  enough,  and  does  not  require 
any.  I  will  take  care  of  Bernadotte.  .  .  .  You  under- 
stand that  in  giving  the  title  of  duke  and  prince  to  Berna- 
dotte it  is  through  consideration  for  your  wife  (the  sister 
of  Madame  Bernadotte,  whom  Napoleon,  before  he  became 
famous,  wished  to  marry),  for  there  are  several  generals  in 


236     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

my  army  who  have  served  me  better,  and  who  are  more 
devoted  to  me,  than  he  is.  But  I  thought  it  suitable  that 
the  brother-in-law  of  the  Queen  of  Naples  (daughter  of 
the  soap  boiler  Clary),  should  hold  a  distinguished  rank. 
...  In  an  hour  I  shall  receive  the  Turkish  Ambassador. 
I  shall  proclaim  Prince  Louis  King  of  Holland,  and 
Cardinal  Fesch  coadjutor  of  the  Elector  Archchancellor. 
Send  two  squadrons  of  cavalry  and  some  infantry  to 
Beneventum  and  Ponte  Corvo,  that  will  hinder  meetings, 
petitions,  &c.,  &c." 

On  the  5th  June,  Napoleon  replied  to  the  Dutch,  who, 
under  considerable  pressure,  had  offered  the  crown  to  Prince 
Louis.  In  this  reply,  the  Batavian  people  were  told  that 
"the  offer  of  the  Crown  of  Holland  to  Prince  Louis  is  in 
conformity  with  the  true  interests  of  your  country  and  with 
mine,  and  is  calculated  to  assure  the  general  repose  of 
Europe.  ...  I  proclaim  Prince  Louis,  King  of  Holland." 
Then  turning  to  the  new  king,  Napoleon  said — "You, 
prince,  reign  over  these  people.  Their  fathers  won  their 
independence  through  the  constant  aid  of  France.  Since 
then,  Holland  became  the  ally  of  England.  She  was 
conquered.  She  again  owes  her  existence  to  France.  Let 
her  owe  you  a  king,  who  shall  protect  her  liberties,  her 
laws,  and  her  religion,  but  never  cease  to  be  a  Frenchman. 

"  The  dignity  of  constable  to  the  empire  shall  be  pos- 
sessed by  you  and  your  descendants.  It  will  remind  you  of 
the  duties  which  you  owe  towards  me,  and  the  importance 
which  I  attach  to  the  preservation  of  the  fortresses  which 
protect  the  north  of  my  States,  and  which  I  confide  to  you. 
Prince,  encourage  among  your  troops  that  esprit  which  I 
have  seen  them  exhibit  on  the  field  of  battle.  Encourage 
among  your  new  subjects  feelings  of  union  and  love 
towards  France.  Be  the  terror  of  the  wicked  and  the 
father  of  the  good  ;  that  is  the  character  of  great  kings." 
.  This  address  plainly  foreshadowed  all  the  difficulties 
with  which  poor  Louis  was  shortly  to  be  called  upon  to 
struggle. 


THE  KING  AND  QUEEN  OF  HOLLAND.     237 

In  announcing  this  matter  to  the  Senate  Napoleon  said  : 
— "  Prince  Louis  not  being  animated  by  any  personal 
ambition  has  given  us  a  great  proof  of  the  love  he  bears 
us  and  his  esteem  for  the  people  of  Holland  in  accepting  a 
throne  which  imposes  on  him  such  weighty  obligations." 

It  was  much  against  his  will  that  poor  Louis  accepted 
the  throne  thus  thrust  upon  him.  He  seemed  perfectly 
aware  of  the  state  of  bondage  in  store  for  him.  On  the 
morning  after  his  acceptance  there  was  a  family  party  at 
the  Tuileries,  and  after  breakfast,  relates  Madame  de 
Remusat,  the  Emperor  sent  for  "  the  little  Napoleon," 
and  made  him  recite  the  fable  of  "  the  frogs  asking  for  a 
king,"  and  greatly  enjoyed  the  embarrassment  caused  by 
the  allusions  it  contained.  The  reluctance  of  the  Queen 
Hortense  to  go  to  Holland  was  not  less  than  that  of  King 
Louis.  She  dreaded  the  climate,  the  gloomy  temper  of 
her  husband,  and  leaving  the  Tuileries.  Nor  had  she  been 
long  at  the  Hague  before  she  wished  now  to  bury  herself 
in  a  convent,  now  that  one  of  the  English  cruisers  which 
she  saw  from  her  windows  would  land  a  detachment  and 
carry  her  off. 

In  another  message  to  the  Senate  of  the  sth  June, 
Napoleon  said  in  reference  to  Beneventum  and  Porte 
Corvo  : — "  We  do  not  intend,  however,  to  infringe  the  rights 
of  the  King  of  Naples  or  of  the  Court  of  Rome  (which 
both  laid  claim  to  the  two  duchies)  our  intention  being  to 
indemnify  both.  By  this  measure  those  two  governments, 
without  experiencing  any  loss,  will  see  a  cause  of  conten- 
tion, which  has  several  times  threatened  the  tranquillity  of 
these  states,  disappear." 

It  was  the  boast  of  Napoleon  that  he  knew  the  exact 
tirant  d'eau  of  each  of  his  officers;  writing  to  brother 
Joseph  on  the  6th  June,  he  said  : 

"  Marshal  Jourdan  is  much  more  capable  of  commanding 
the  troops  in  the  interior  than  Marshal  Massena,  who,  in 
his  turn  is  more  capable  of  aiding  you  in  an  expedition  to 
Sicily.      General  Verdier    would  be  better  than  General 


238     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Regnier ;  if  you  do  not  employ  Massena,  employ  both  those 
generals.  In  the  trade  of  war  as  in  that  of  letters  each  one 
has  his  style.  Where  sharp  and  prolonged  attacks  requir- 
ing a  great  deal  of  audacity  are  required  Massena  would 
be  preferable  to  Regnier.  To  protect  your  kingdom  against 
an  invasion  Jourdan  is  preferable  to  Massena."  Then 
towards  the  close  of  a  very  long  letter,  Napoleon  added — 
"You  are  a  soldier  only  to  the  extent  that  a  king  should 
be.  If  you  take  upon  yourself  the  details  of  the  expedition 
you  will  expose  yourself  to  very  disagreeable  things  without 
any  necessity.  If  Sicily  were  nearer,  and  if  I  were  with 
the  advanced  guard,  I  would  cross  over  with  it ;  with 
my  experience  of  war  with  9,000  men  I  could  beat  30,000 
Englishmen." 

That  day  month  4,800  Englishmen  beat  7,000  French- 
men at  Maida. 

To  M.  DE  TALLEYRAND. 

"  St.  Cloud,  -jth  June,  1806. 
"  I  asked  you  for  a  note  on  the  forces  of  Prussia.     The 
information  contained  in  the  letters  of  Laforest  is  not  what 
I  want.     I   require  to   know  the  general  situation  of  the 
army  of  the  King  of  Prussia. 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  9th  June,  Napoleon  drew  up  instructions  for 
General  Sebastiani : — 

"  1st.  My  ambassador  at  Constantinople  must  do  all  in 
his  power  to  inspire  the  Porte  with  confidence  ;  to  make  it 
understand  that  I  want  nothing  from  Constantinople,  that 
I  wish  to  pacify  parties  and  to  reorganise  that  formidable 
Empire,  which  even  in  a  prostrate  condition  imposes  upon 
Russia  and  the  Continent. 

"2nd.  The  constant  object  of  my  policy  is  to  make  a 
triple  alliance,  myself,  the  Porte,  and  Persia,  aimed 
indirectly  at  Russia. 

"  3rd.  I  wish  to  be  treated  as  the  most  favoured  nation. 


SEBASTIANl  S    INSTRUCTIONS.  239 

But  I  wish  to  regain  the  influence  which  I  have  lost  by- 
skill,  insinuation,  and  confidence,  and  not  by  arrogance, 
force,  and  threats.  My  ambassador  should  please  and 
inspire  confidence,  and  I  shall  deem  that  he  had  carried 
out  his  instructions  each  time  that  the  Porte  informs  him 
of  the  demands  made  by  Russia  or  England. 

"  4th.  I  shall  support  no  rebel  to  the  Porte,  nor  any  of 
my  old  friends  of  Egypt  and  Syria,  nor  any  Greek.  My 
sole  and  simple  policy  is  to  be  closely  united  to  the 
Porte." 

And  Sebastiani  was  further  directed  to  do  all  in  his 
power  to  bring  the  Russians  into  disfavour,  to  depreciate 
their  military  forces  and  the  courage  of  their  troops,  the 
objects  of  these  negotiations  being  to  close  the  Bosphorus 
to  the  Russians. 

The  position  of  Turkey  at  this  moment  was  critical 
indeed.  "The  divan,"  as  Dr.  Lardner  says,  "was  distracted 
by  the  opposite  factions  of  France  and  England,  the 
ministers  of  which  countries  were  alternately  threatening 
to  take  their  leave  if  their  advice  were  not  adopted ; 
Egypt  was  in  a  state  of  anarchy,  Mecca,  Medina,  and 
Bagdad  had  revolted  ;  the  Janissaries,  discontented  with 
the  introduction  of  European  tactics  were  ripe  for  an  excuse 
to  conspire  against  the  government  ;  while  a  Russian  army 
on  the  Danube,  a  French  army  in  Dalmatia,  and  an 
English  fleet  within  sight  of  the  Dardanelles,  perplexed 
the  Sultan,  who,  whichever  way  he  decided  could  hardly 
fail  to  risk  the  safety  of  his  dominions."  In  the  end  Selim 
accepted  the  French  alliance,  and  the  British  ambassador 
had  to  fly  for  his  life.  How  Napoleon  kept  his  treaty  with 
the  Sultan  we  shall  see  hereafter.  It  was  certainly  fortu- 
nate for  the  French  Emperor  that  the  Russians  should 
have  thrown  a  force  of  60,000  men  into  Moldavia, 
Wallachia,  and  Bessarabia  instead  of  concentrating  all 
their  forces  on  the  Vistula. 

General  Menou  commanding  the  departments  beyond 
the  Alps  having  reported  that   the  cur6  of  Spinetta  had 


240     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

been  arrested  as  a  receiver  of  stolen  goods  to  the  brigand 
Maine ;  that  a  canon,  brother  of  the  cure,  was  accused  of 
complicity;  that  a  third  ecclesiastic  had  assaulted  and 
robbed  three  gendarmes !  asked  for  instructions. 

DECISION. 

"  St.  Cloud,  i2.th  June,  1806. 
"  Send  to  the  Minister  of  Police   to   conduct  the  pro- 
ceedings with  rapidity  and  severity.   .  .   ." 

"  Napoleon." 

To  M.  DE  TALLEYRAND. 

"  St.  Cloud,  19M  June,  1806. 
"Inform  M.  Alquier  that  I  regard  the  Pope  from  a  temporal 
and  from  a  spiritual  point  of  view.  As  a  temporal  prince 
he  forms  part  of  my  confederation,  whether  he  likes  it  or 
no.  If  he  makes  arrangements  with  me  I  shall  leave  him 
his  present  states  ;  if  not  I  shall  seize  on  all  his  coasts. 
As  for  the  spiritual  portion  he  must  be  informed  that  if 
the  difficulties  which  exist  in  my  kingdom  of  Italy  are  not 
settled,  that  I  shall  establish  in  that  kingdom  the  French 
Concordat  ;  that  our  religion  being  true  and  not  con- 
ventional, all  that  saves  in  France  will  save  in  Italy.  .  .  ." 

"  Napoleon." 

In  another  letter  to  Talleyrand  that  minister  was  in- 
structed to  assure  Ali  Pasha  that  Napoleon  was  the  true 
friend-  of  the  Sublime  Porte,  and  that  the  Sultan  should 
tame  the  Servians  and  the  Greeks,  who  were  the  real 
allies  of  Russia.  M.  de  Talleyrand  was  'then  to  express 
his  regret  that  Napoleon  could  not  send  a  fleet  to  Corfu, 
as  he  had  sent  some  of  his  naval  forces  to  India,  and  as 
he  required  the  rest  for  the  invasion  of  England  ! 

Doctor  Jenner  having  asked  that  two  of  his  friends 
detained  as  prisoners  of  war  might  return  to  England. 


LORD   YARMOUTH.      .  24 1 

DECISION. 

"St.  Cloud,  19M  June,  1806. 
"  Granted,  and  returned  to  the  minister  of  war. 

"Napoleon." 

On  the  demand  of  the  historical  section  of  the  Insti- 
tute, Alexander  Hamilton  (the  Oriental  scholar)  was  also 
allowed  to  return  home,  while  Lord  Shaftesbury,  a  friend 
of  Mr.  Fox,  was  allowed  to  change  his  residence  from 
Lyons  to  Paris.  Mr.  Fox,  in  fact,  procured  the  release 
of  several  of  his  countrymen,  and  among  them  Lord 
Yarmouth,  who  opened  negotiations  for  peace. 

To  THE  KING  OF  NAPLES. 

"  St.  Cloud,  i\st  June,  1806. 
"  Lord  Yarmouth  has  arrived,  with  full  powers  from  the 
King  of  England  to  sign  peace.  We  should  be  tolerably 
well  agreed  but  for  Sicily.  The  English  will  recognise  you 
as  King  of  Naples,  but,  as  you  have  not  taken  Sicily,  they 
cannot  recognise  you  there.  It  does  not  suit  me  to  con- 
clude anything  until  you  are  in  possession  of  both  portions 

of  your  kingdom. 

"  Napoleon." 

to  the  king  of  naples. 

"St.  Cloud,  22nd  June,  1806. 
"The  Court  of  Rome  has  gone  mad.  It  refuses  to 
recognise  you,  and  I  know  not  what  kind  of  treaty  it 
wishes  to  conclude  with  me.  It  believes  that  I  cannot 
at  the  same  time  respect  the  spiritual  authority  of  the 
Pope  and  repress  his  temporal  pretensions.  It  forgets  that 
St.  Louis,  whose  piety  was  well  known,  was  almost  always 
at  war  with  the  Pope,  and  that  Charles  V.,  who  was  a 
very  Christian  prince,  besieged  and  took  Rome. 

"  Napoleon." 

VOL.  II.  ^^ 


242  THE   CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  PRINCE  EUGENE. 

"  St.  Cloud,  2^tk  June,  i8o5. 
"  My  Son — Continue   to   send   me   the   letters   of  the 
Archbishop  of  Seleucia,  forwarded  from  Rome  to  Dresden. 
They  have  discovered  the  cipher  here,  so  that  they  are 
easily  read. 

"  NAPOLEON." 

To  THE  KING  OF  NAPLES. 

"  St.  Cloud,  29M  Jime,  1806. 

"M.  Celerier  debauche'^  the  actors  and  actresses  of 
Paris  for  Naples.  Already  one  or  two  artists  of  the  opera 
have  said  that  they  wish  to  go  to  Naples.  You  must  feel 
how  ridiculous  this  is.  If  you  wish  for  actors  of  the  opera 
(sic)  pardieu  I  will  send  you  as  many  as  you  want,  but  it 
is  not  right  to  d^baucher  them.  It  is  thus  that  they  acted 
in  Russia,  and  I  was  so  shocked  at  the  time  at  this 
conduct  that  I  wrote  to  the  Emperor  of  Russia  that  I 
would  send  him  all  the  ballet  girls  of  the  opera  if  he  liked, 
with  the  exception,  however,  of  Madame  Gardel. 

"  I  should  have  had  Celerier  arrested  had  I  not  known 
that  he  was  attached  to  you  as  architect. 

"  Napoleon." 

A  few  days  later  Napoleon  decided  upon  sending  two 
French  companies  to  play  for  three  years  through  the 
chief  towns  of  Italy. 

To  THE  KING  OF  HOLLAND. 

"St.  Cloud,  ythjune,  1806. 

"  I   see  with  pleasure  that   you    are    satisfied  with  the 

Dutch.     The  pretensions  of  your  finance  minister  are  out 

of  the  question.     My  expenses  are  heavy,  and  I  cannot 

aid  you  as  I  should  like.     As  long  as  the  war  lasts  I  shall 

'  The  word  used  twice  in  this  letter  is  ddbaucher  instead  of 
embaucher  which  means  to  bribe. 


FORGED    NOTES.  243 

be  obliged  to  keep  up  my  army.  ...  I  think  it  will  be 
well  to  levy  an  income  tax;  there  would  be  no  incon- 
venience in  imitating  England. 

"  Napoleon." 

In  what  condition  did  Louis  find  the  finances  of  Holland 
when  he  arrived  ?  The  expenditure  78,000,000  florins 
and  the  revenue  35,000,000!  And,  in  addition  to  this, 
commerce  was  at  a  standstill. 

To  THE  KING  OF  HOLLAND. 

"St.  Cloud,  ii/,^  yufy,  1806. 
".  .  .  .  Flushing  does  not  belong  to  Holland  ;  it  is  a 
separate  possession,  as  results  from  the  treaty  of  the 
Hague.  If  General  Monnet  takes  10  per  cent,  you  must 
bring  him  before  a  court-martial.  You  must  not  act  in 
this  matter  as  King  of  Holland,  but  as  commander-in- 
chief;  however,  you  must  act  with  caution.  General 
Monnet  has  rendered  services  and  he  is  well  acquainted 
with  the  isle  of  Walcheren.  ... 

"Napoleon." 

To  M.  FOUCHfi. 

"  St.  Cloud,  12M  yufy,  1806. 

"I  learn  that  the  Emperor  of  Austria  has  sent  agents 

into   Italy  and  the   interior  of  France  under   pretext  of 

discovering  the  manufacturers  of  false  notes  on  the  Bank 

of  Vienna.      I  can    only  express   my    surprise    that    you 

should  have  allowed  my  territory  to  be  violated,  and  that 

you  did  not  arrest  these  agents.  .  .  . 

"Napoleon." 

Prince  Metternich,  in  his  Memoirs  (vol.  ii.  p.  35  S),  gives 
a  curious  account  of  an  interview  which  he  had  with 
Napoleon  after  his  marriage  with  Marie  Louise.  The 
Emperor  then  told  him  that  he  had  intended  by  means  of 
false   notes   to  have  rendered  Austria  bankrupt,  and  he 

R  2 


244     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

chuckled  over  the  idea  with  great  glee.  Napoleon 
promised  to  have  these  notes  and  the  plates  destroyed, 
but,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  Austrian  ambassador  could 
obtain  neither.  Some  of  these  false  notes,  to  the  amount 
of  200,000  florins,  afterwards  got  into  circulation,  and  led 
to  several  arrests  in  Paris. 

To  THE  PRINCESS  STEPHANIE  OF  BADEN. 

"  St.  Cloud,  13M  7«/;/,  1806. 
"  I  see  with  pleasure  that  you  are  well.  Love  your 
husband,  who  deserves  it  for  his  attachment  to  you.  .  .  . 
Treat  your  people  well,  for  sovereigns  are  made  only  for 
their  welfare.  Accustom  yourself  to  the  country,  and  find 
everything  good,  for  nothing  is  more  impertinent  than  to 
talk  always  of  Paris.  .  .  .  "  NAPOLEON  " 

The  Princess  Stephanie  had  been  forced  to  wed  much 
against  her  inclination,  and  it  was  all  that  Napoleon  could 
do  to  force  her  to  live  with  her  husband.  However,  after 
several  years  of  estrangement,  a  mutual  affection  sprang 
up  between  the  Grand  Duke  and  his  wife. 

To  THE  KING  OF  NAPLES. 

"  St.  Cloud,  \Gth  July,  1806. 
"  Have  those  people  who  assassinated  the  blind  men 
coming  from  Egypt  been  tried  and  punished  as  they 
deserve .-"  Let  the  proceedings  be  striking,  for  I  shall  give 
them  great  publicity.  All  the  world — Russians,  Austrians, 
English — know  the  atrocity  of  the  Queen  of  Naples,  and 
that  she  could  not  return,  to  Naple-s,  as  she  would  have 
to  navigate  in  a  sea  of  blood.  ...  «  NAPOLEON." 

To  THE  KING  OF  NAPLES. 

"  St.  Cloud,  2\st  July,  1806. 
"We  have  no  news  from  General  Regnier.  .  .  .  The  art 
of  war  about  which   every  one  speaks  is   a  difficult   art; 
you  have  not  a  man  in  your  council  who  understands  the 


GENERAL  Stuart's  humanity.  245 

first  notions  of  it.  I  have  concluded  peace  with  Russia 
(treaty  not  ratified).  .  .  .  Negotiations  are  going  on  with 
England.  Sicily  is  always  the  difficulty.  But,  by  God ! 
with  36,000  men  do  not  allow  one  of  your  divisions  to  be 
crushed.  Since  you  have  no  news  of  Regnier,  his  com- 
munications must  be  intercepted,  and  the  country  have 
risen.  I  regret  that  I  am  detained  in  Paris.  If  I  were  in 
Naples  not  an  Englishman  would  have  disembarked,  or  if 
they  had  disembarked,  they  would  have  been  surrounded 
before  four  days  by  double  their  number,  and  pursued  by 
columns  of  cavalry  ;  not  one  would  have  escaped.  .  .  . 

"Napoleon." 

After  Regnier  and  his  division  had  been  crushed  at 
Maida  on  the  6th,  the  whole  country  round  had  risen 
against  the  French,  and  had  massacred  all  the  stragglers. 
M.  Thiers  (vol.  vii.,  p.  15,  History  of  the  Empire)  highly 
praises  the  humanity  of  Genferal  Stuart,  who,  shocked  at 
the  cruelty  of  the  Calabrians,  offered  ten  ducats  for  each 
French  soldier,  and  fifteen  for  each  French  officer  brought 
to  him  alive. 

Td  THE  KING  OF  HOLLAND. 

"  St.  Cloud,  iist  July,  1806. 

"You  write  to  me  every  day  about  your  distress.     I  am 

not  charged  to  pay  the   debts   of  Holland,  and  if  I  were' 

charged,  I  have  not  the  means.     If  Holland  gives  up  her 

colonies  she  might  disarm  all  her  vessels  ;  but  that  is  out 

of  the   question.     Holland  is  no  doubt  pressed,  but  she 

has   resources.      A   few   years   of  peace  will   re-establish 

you.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

When  this  letter  was  written  Holland  was  of  course  at 
war  with  England,  and  instead  of  enjoying  a  few  years  of 
peace,  she  found  herself  in  the  following  October  lugged 
into  the  war  with  Russia  and  Prussia.  The  consequences 
were  that  Louis  had  to  assemble  the  States  at  the  Hague, 


246     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

and  to  ask  for  a  year's  taxes  in  advance.  As  Madame  de 
R6musat  says  :  "  As  a  recompense  for  the  sacrifice  of  her 
liberties  Holland  was  menaced  with  war,  and  had  to 
submit  to  double  taxation,  the  continental  blockade,  and 
to  see  her  commerce  ruined."  "  On  giving  Holland  to 
Louis,"  writes  Lanfrey,  "  Napoleon  had  sworn  that  her 
colonies  should  be  restored,  and  at  the  moment  he  made 
this  promise  he  was  offering  them  to  England."^ 

To  M.  PORTALIS. 

"  St.  Cloud,  26/;%  July,  1806. 
"  It  is  my  intention  to  organise  nine  metropolitan 
seminaries  without  delay.  Present  me  a  report  on  the 
number  of  priests  necessary.  .  .  .  Draw  attention  to  the 
necessity  of  having  priests  well  educated  and  attached, 
and  to  the  evil  produced  by  bad  theology  and  the  disputes 
arising  therefrom.  Insist  upon  the  necessity  of  a  sound 
and  uniform  education.  You  will  found  your  arguments 
on  the  principles  of  the  Gallican  Church.  It  is  also  my 
intention  that  the  catechism  should  appear  without 
delay. 

"  Napoleon." 

This  is  a  specimen  of  the  catechism  which  had  been 
introduced  into  France  by  Napoleon,  who  looked  upon 
eluding  the  conscription   as  the  eighth  deadly  sin  : — 

Q.  What  are  your  duties  towards  Napoleon  I.,  our 
Emperor .' 

A.  We  owe  him  specially  love,  respect,  obedience, 
military  service,  tribute  ordered  for  the  defence  of  the 
Emperor  and  of  his  throne,  fervent  prayers  for  his  safety, 
and  for  the  prosperity  of  the  state. 

Q.  Why  are  we  bound  to  fulfil  these  duties  towards 
our  Emperor .' 

A.  Because  God  in  overwhelming  our  Emperor  with 
gifts  for  peace  as  for  war,  has  established  him  as  our 
1  History  of  Napoleo7i,  vol.  iii.  p.  440. 


IMPERIAL    CATECHISM.  247 

sovereign,  and  has  given  him  His  image  upon  earth.  To 
honour  and  to  serve  our  Emperor  is  therefore  to  honour 
and  to  serve  God  Himself. 

Q.  Are  there  not  particular  motives  which  should  attach 
you  to  our  Emperor  ? 

A.  Yes  ;  for  it  is  he  whom  God  resuscitated  to  re- 
establish the  holy  religion  of  our  fathers,  and  to  be  its 
protector.  He  has  restored  and  preserved  public  tran- 
quillity by  his  profound  wisdom  ;  he  defends  the  State 
with  his  powerful  arm  ;  he  has  become  the  anointed  of 
the  Lord  by  the  consecration  which  he  received  from  the 
sovereign  pontiff,  head  of  the  Universal  Church. 

Q.  What  will  be  thought  of  those  who  fail  in  these 
duties  towards  our  Emperor  ? 

A.  According  to  the  Apostle  St.  Paul  they  will  resist 
the  order  of  God  Himself,  and  deserve  eternal  dam- 
nation. 

To  THE  KING  OF  HOLLAND. 

"St,  Cloud,  29//^  7t'fy,  1806. 

"  I    read  in   the  papers  that  you  have    suspended  the 

penalty  of  death  in   your  kingdom.     If  this  be   the  case, 

you   have   committed    a   great   fault.     It    is    a    misplaced 

mania  of  humanity.     The   first   duty  of  a  king  is  justice. 

"  Napoleon." 


A  letter  to  the  King  of  Naples,  dated  30th  July, 
shows  that  Napoleon  had  received  the  news  of  Maida  by 
that  date.  He  v/rote  :  "  You  have  quite  as  good  generals 
as  any  in  France.  St.  Cyr  is  very  prudent.  It  is  true 
that  Regnier  has  committed  blunders  of  all  kinds,  which  I 
did  not  expect."  His  Majesty  also  wrote  :  "  The  kingdom 
of  Italy  brings  me  in  140,000,000  francs,  and  the  kingdoms 
of  Naples  and  Sicily  must  bring  me  in  as  much.  ...  Do 
not  employ  too  many  Neapolitan  troops,  who  would 
abandon  me  if  I   were  to  be  beaten  in  Italy.  .  .  .  Show 


248     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

no  mercy.  Have  at  least  600  insurgents  executed.  They 
have  massacred  a  great  number  of  soldiers  [after  Maida]. 
Burn  down  the  houses  of  thirty  chiefs  of  villages,  and 
distribute  their  property  to  the  army.  Disarm  all  the 
inhabitants,  and  have  six  of  the  worst  behaved  villages 
plundered.  .  .  .  Since  you  compare  the  Neapolitans  to 
the  Corsicans,  remember  that  when  Niolo  was  entered 
forty  rebels  were  hung,  and  that  the  terror  was  so  great 
that  no  one  moved  afterwards.  .  .  .  You  see  the  terror 
inspired  by  the  Queen,  I  do  not  ask  you  to  follow  her 
example  ;  but  it  is  not  the  less  true  that  it  is  a  power.  .  .  . 
If  you  play  the  roi  faineant,  if  you  do  not  hold  the  reins 
with  a  firm  and  decided  hand,  if  you  listen  to  the  opinion 
of  the  people  who  do  not  know  what  they  want,  &c.,  &c., 
instead  of  being  of  use  you  will  be  of  harm  to  me." 

To  M.  DE  TALLEYRAND. 

"St.  Cloud,  ^nd August,  1806. 
"I  send  you  the  letters  of  the  Duke  of  Cleves  [Murat]. 
I  wish  you  to  despatch  a  special  courier  to  M.  Laforest  at 
Berlin,  to  inform  him  confidentially  of  what  is  passing.  I 
have  sent  positive  orders  to  the  Duke  of  Cleves  not  to 
commit  any  act  of  hostility  towards  Prussia.  The  object 
of  your  despatch  to  M.  Laforest  will  be  to  tell  him,  that, 
if  the  Prussian  Cabinet  learns  anything  serious  has  hap- 
pened, he  is  to  declare  that  having  refused  to  make  peace 
with  England  so  as  not  to  deprive  Prussia  of  Hanover, 
I  can  have  no  designs  upon  Prussia.  .  .  .  Reiterate  that 
I  desire,  at  no  matter  what  price,  to  remain  upon  good 
terms  with  Prussia,  and,  if  necessary,  allow  Laforest  to 
remain  under  the  conviction  that  I  really  will  not  make 
peace  with  England  on  account  of  Hanover. 

"Napoleon." 

,   It  was  not   unusual  for  Napoleon  to  deceive  his  own 
ambassadors  as  Laforest  was  to  be  deceived. 


EXECUTION    OF    PALM. 


249 


To  M.  DE  TALLEYRAND. 

"St.  Cloud,  t,th  August,  1806. 
"All  the   libels    spread  through   Germany  come   from 
Nuremberg.      Tell  the  Senate  of  that  town  that  if   the 
booksellers  are  not  arrested  and  the  libels  burned,  I  shall 
punish  the  town  before  leaving  Germany. 

"  Napoleon." 

.  On    the    same    day   his    Majesty   wrote    to    Berthier, 
saying  : — 

"  I  suppose  that  you  have  arrested  the  booksellers  of 
Augsburg  and  Nuremberg.  Let  them  be  brought  before  a 
court-martial  and  shot  within  twenty-four  hours.  It  is  no 
ordinary  crime  to  spread  libels  in  places  occupied  by  the 
French  armies  in  order  to  excite  the  inhabitants  against 
them.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

Palm,  the  Nuremberg  bookseller,  alone  was  executed, 
the  others  managing  to  make  good  their  escape.  Palm 
died  with  a  fortitude  which  excited  general  admiration. 

On  the  same  day  Napoleon  announced  to  Joseph  the 
arrival  of  Lords  Yarmouth  and  Lauderdale  to  negotiate  on 
the  part  of  the  King  of  England.     He  added — 

"You  must  not  forget  that  force  and  severe  justice  {sic) 
are  the  kindness  of  kings.  I  am  waiting  to  know  how 
much  property  you  have  confiscated  in  Calabria,  and  the 
number  of  insurgents  to  whom  you  have  meted  out  good 
justice.  Have  three  persons  shot  per  village.  Have  no 
more  compassion  for  priests  than  for  other  people." 

In  the  draft  of  the  treaty  then  drawn  up,  one  sees  by 
Art.  7  that  Hanover  was  to  be  ceded  to  England,  and 
when  the  English  negotiators  remarked  that  there  was  no 
engagement  taken  by  the  Emperor  to  compel  Prussia  to 
evacuate  Hanover,  nor  any  time  fixed  for  such  evacuation, 


250     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

MM.  Talleyrand  and  Clarke  replied  that  the  good  faith 
of  the  Emperor  was  a  sufficient  guarantee,  but  that  such 
an  article  might  be  introduced. 

To  PRINCE  EUGENE. 

"St.  Cloud,  -jth  August,  1806. 
"  My  Son, — I  send  you  a  copy  of  the  catechism,  which 
has  been  adopted  for  France  ;  it  would  be  a  good  thing  if 
it  could  be  adopted  for  Italy  without  inconvenience.  But 
it  is  a  delicate  matter,  and  you  must  be  very  circumspect. 
Consult  the  minister  of  worship.  It  might  be  well  for  some 
bishop  to  publish  it  in  his  diocese  as  a  diocesan  catechism. 
You  must  act  with  great  prudence  and  secrecy. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  M.  DE  TALLEYRAND. 

"  St.  Cloud,  Zth  August,  1806. 
"  I  send  you  a  letter,  which  will  make  you  thoroughly 
acquainted  with  that  scamp  Lucchesini.  My  opinion  was 
formed  long  ago  with  respect  to  that  wretch.  He  has  con- 
tinually deceived  you,  because  I  have  long  perceived  that 
nothing  is  more  easy.  It  will  be  necessary  to  send  a 
courier  to  Laforest,  confiding  the  despatch  to  him,  so  that 
he  may  be  able  to  enlighten  the  Prussian  cabinet.  He 
must  also  inform  M.  d'Haugwitz  that  Lucchesini  sees  very 
bad  company,  and  that  the  information  he  acquires  is 
ridiculous.  I  think  it  would  be  difficult  to  give  a  greater 
proof  of  the  imbecility  of  this  pantaloon  ;  because  he  is 
false  and  base,  there  is  no  falsehood  or  baseness  of  which 
he  does  not  believe  me  capable.  ...  It  is  enough  to  have 
a  minister  confined  in  a  madhouse.  .  .  . 

"Napoleon." 

All  this  because  Lucchesini  had  informed  his  court  of 
what  was  passing  on  the  subject  of  Hanover.  It  must  be 
remembered  that  both  d'Haugwitz  and  Lucchesini  belonged 
to  the  French  party,  and  Prince  Metternich,  in  his  Memoirs, 


GENERAL    BLUCHER.  25  I 

speaks  in  the  severest  terms  of  the  marquis  as  one  of  the 
creatures  of  Napoleon. 

In  a  letter  several  pages  long,  addressed  to  brother 
Joseph,  is  to  be  found  this  curious  paragraph — "When 
you  talk  about  the  50,000  enemies  of  the  Queen  you  make 
me  laugh.  .  .  .  You  exaggerate  the  degree  of  hatred  which 
the  Queen  has  left  behind  at  Naples  :  you  do  not  know- 
mankind.  There  are  not  twenty  persons  who  hate  her  as 
you  suppose,  and  there  are  not  twenty  persons  who  would 
not  surrender  to  one  of  her  smiles.  The  strongest  feeling 
of  hatred  on  the  part  of  a  nation  is  that  inspired  by 
another  nation.  Your  50,000  men  are  the  enemies  of  the 
French." 

There  was  certainly  no  clap-trap  about  Napoleon. 

To  PRINCE  JOACHIM  (MURAT). 

"  St.  Cloud,  wth  Augtist,  1806. 
"  I  cannot  believe  that  your  territory  has  been  invaded 
by  Prussian  hussars.  Send  a  complaint  to  M.  Laforest, 
with  the  names  of  the  officers  and  the  King  of  Prussia  will 
no  doubt  cashier  them.  As  for  the  propos  attributed  to 
General  Blucher,  I  do  not  attach  any  faith  to  them.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 
to  the  king  of  holland. 

"St.  Cloud,  \ith  August,  1806. 
"I  have  seen  what  you  say  about  Prussia  in  your 
letter  of  the  8th.  I  have  carefully  followed  the  move- 
ments of  that  court,,  and  am  well  acquainted  with  what 
passes.  I  nevertheless  thank  you  for  the  details  you 
have  sent  me.  You  must  keep  your  German  frontier  in 
a  good  state,  and  have  an  army  corps  to  defend  it.  You 
are  loved  in  Holland,  but  that  is  not  sufficient ;  the  nation 
must  play  as  important  a  part  in  the  affairs  of  Europe  as 

Bavaria.  ... 

"  NAPOLEON." 


252  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  PRINCE  EUGENE. 

"  St.  Cloud,  14M  August,  1806. 
"  My  Son, — I  thank  you  for  what  you  say  about  my 
fete  day.  Affairs  are  getting  settled.  I  will  soon  send  you 
instructions  for  your  voyage  to  Paris.  I  know  that  you 
wish  to  come  here.  You  will  see  the  Queen  of  Holland. 
We  will  keep  the  princess  until  after  her  confinement. 

"  Napoleon." 

Prince  Eugene  had  been  sent  to  Italy  by  his  step- 
father in  a  fit  of  jealousy,  and  when  his  Majesty  was 
paying  his  addresses  to  Madame  Duchatel.  There  was 
no  danger  in  now  allowing  the  viceroy  to  return,  as  he 
was  sincerely  attached  to  his  wife. 

In  a  letter  of  the  17th  August,  Napoleon  wrote  thus  to 
his  brother  Joseph — "  I  should  much  like  to  see  a  revolt  on 
the  part  of  the  canaille  of  Naples.  Until  you  have  made 
an  example  you  will  not  be  master  of  the  country.  A 
revolt  is  necessary  for  all  conquered  people,  and  I  should 
look  upon  a  revolt  at  Naples  as  the  father  of  a  family  sees 
his  children  catch  small-pox,  provided  the  invalid  is  not 
weakened  too  much.  It  is  a  necessary  crisis.  .  .  .  Lord 
Yarmouth  has  been  recalled,  and  Lord  Lauderdale  remains 
charged  with  the  negotiation.  ...  I  would  not  listen  to 
any  mezzo  termine.  Peace  or  war,  you  shall  have  Naples 
and  Sicily." 

To  THE  PRINCESS  AUGUSTA. 

"St.  Cloud,  30/^  August,  1806. 
"My  Daughter, — I  have  read  with  pleasure  your 
letter  of  the  loth.  You  are  right  to  rely  upon  my  affec- 
tion. Take  care  of  yourself  in  your  present  condition, 
and  try  and  not  give  us  a  daughter.  I  would  give  you 
a  recipe  for  that,  but  you  would  not  believe  in  it.     It  is  to 

drinlc  some  wine  pure  every  day.  ... 

"  Napoleon." 


RUSSIAN    TREATY    NOT    RATIFIED. 


253 


To  MARSHAL  BERTHIER. 

"St.  Cloud,  yd  September,  1806. 
"  I  was  just  going  to  send  you  orders  for  the  return  of 
the  army,  when  I  learned  that  the  Emperor  of  Russia  had 
refused  to  ratify  the  treaty.  I  must  wait  therefore  for 
some  days  to  see  what  will  happen.  Send  some  Polish 
officers  to  the  Russian  frontier  to  see  what  is  going 
on.  ... 

"  Napoleon." 

-  The  following  letter  contrasts  strangely  with  one 
addressed  to  Berthier  on  the  subject  of  his  brother 
Csesar  : — 

To  MARSHAL  BERTHIER. 

"St;  Cloud,  \th  September,  1806. 

"I  see  no  inconvenience  in  granting  Marshal  Ney  leave 
for  twenty  days  to  be  present  at  the  confinement  of  his 
wife.  .  .  .  You  can  also  give  a  similar  leave  on  the  same 
conditions,  and  under  the  same  pretext,  to  Marshal 
Davoust,  should  he  wish  to  take  advantage  of  it.  ,  .  .  In 
a  few  days  I  will  grant  you  leave  also,  as  I  know  you  wish 
to  return  to  Paris  [probably  to  see  Madame  Visconti].  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 


On  the  Sth  September,  Napoleon  gave  Marshal  Berthier 
a  series  of  instructions  for  the  concentration  of  the  army 
corps  of  Soult,  Ney  and  Angereau,  at  a  point  ten  days' 
march  from  Berlin.  He  also  requested  information  with 
regard  to  several  rivers,  and  fortified  towns  in  Prussia, 
not,  as  he  said,  that  he  had  any  designs  upon  Berlin,  but 
it  was  well  to  be  furnished  with  these  details  beforehand  in 
case  of  necessity. 


2  54  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF   NAPOLEON. 

To  THE  KING  OF  NAPLES. 

"  St.  Cloud,  Zth  September,  1806. 
"  I  see  with  surprise  that  the  chief  of  the  staff  dares  to 
correspond  with  the  enemy  without  your  permission. 
General  Caesar  Berthier  is  then  ignorant  of  his  duty  !  The 
reply  of  Sidney  Smith  is  impertinent,  as  is  everything 
which  emanates  from  that  officer.  You  should  have 
placed  General  Berthier  under  arrest  for  a  week.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  loth  September,  Napoleon  wrote  to  Berthier, 
saying — "  The  movements  of  Prussia  continue  to  be  very 
extraordinary.  They  wish  to  receive  a  lesson.  I  am  send- 
ing my  horses  on  to-morrow,  and  my  guard  will  march  in 
a  few  days.  .  .  .  Tell  the  King  of  Bavaria  secretly  that 
if  I  quarrel  with  the  King  of  Prussia,  which  is  improbable, 
he  will  get  Baireuth.  ...  I  have  ordered  the  King  of 
Holland  to  form  a  camp  at  Utrecht."  And  on  the  same 
day  to  Grand  Equerry  Caulaincourt — "You  must  send  on 
sixty  horses  from  my  stables  to-morrow,  and  among  them 
eight  saddle-horses.  Do  this  with  as  much  mystery  as 
possible.  Try  and  make  people  believe  that  I  am  going 
to  hunt  at  Compiegne."  His  mules,  his  cantines,  a  solid 
tent,  an  iron  bedstead,  and  some  thick  carpets,  were  also 
to  be  despatched  towards  the  eastern  frontier. 

To  THE  KING  OF  HOLLAND. 

"  St.  Cloud,  loth  September,  1806. 

"  You  have  heard  of  the  armaments  made  by  Prussia, 

and  the  non-ratification  of  Russia.     My  negotiations  with 

'    England  are  not  broken  off,  but  they  put  forward  the  most 

extraordinary  pretensions.     They  wish  to  have  Surinam, 

Berbice,   and   all   your   colonies.  .  .  .     Form  a   camp   at 

Utrecht   without  delay    on  the  pretext  of  preparing  for 

war  with  England.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 


POSITION   OF    SAXONY.  255 

In  a  long  note  addressed  by  General  Clarke  to  Lords 
Yarmouth  and  Lauderdale  on  the  8th  August,  he  said — 
"  Let  Hanover  become  a  French  province,  &c.,  &c.,  and 
let  Great  Britain  keep  as  compensation,  the  Cape, 
Surinam,  Malta  and  Pondicherry.  France  will  consent 
to  it." 

On  the  1 2th  September,  Napoleon  wrote  a  long  letter 
to  the  King  of  Prussia,  assuring  him  of  his  pacific 
intentions,  and  declaring  that  certain  information  he  had 
received  was  false,  that  he  looked  upon  war  as  a  sacrilege, 
and  that  if  he  had  made  preparations  for  war  it  was  owing 
to  the  formidable  preparations  made  by  Prussia.  On  the 
same  day,  M.  Laforest  was  instructed  to  leave  Berlin 
should  the  Prussians  insist  upon  occupying  Saxony  ;  and 
a  note  was  sent  to  the  French  minister  at  Dresden  saying 
that  Napoleon  would  not  allow  the  territory  of  Saxony  to 
be  violated,  and  hinting  that  Saxony  might  declare  herself 
independent,  or  join  the  Confederation  of  the  Rhine. 

Originally,  Saxony  was  to  have  belonged  to  the  Con- 
federation of  the  North,  but  Napoleon,  while  encouraging 
this  idea  at  Berlin,  had  at  the  same  time  encouraged 
Saxony  to  resist. 

In  a  letter  to  the  King  of  Naples,  Napoleon  wrote  on 
the  13th:  "Negotiations  with  England  continue,  but  peace 
or  war  will  be  decided  upon  in  a  few  days.  Fox  is  past 
work,  struck  down  by  an  illness  which  will  probably  carry 
him  to  his  grave.  Jerome  has  disembarked ;  I  have  settled 
his  marriage  with  Catherine,  daughter  of  the  King  of 
Wirtemberg  ;  I  have  recognised  him  as  a  prince,  and  have 
given  him  the  grand  cordon  of  the  Legion  of  Honour. 
As  I  shall  be  obliged  to  consult  the  people  with  regard  to 
his  right  of  succession  to  the  throne,  I  hope  that  Lucien 
will  not  allow  this  opportunity  to  escape.  Do  not  be 
uneasy  with  regard  to  politics.  If  I  must  strike  again, 
all  my  measures  are  taken,  and  Europe  will  learn  my 
departure  from  Paris  by  the  entire  ruin  of  my  enemies." 

We  shall  have  more  to  say  on  the  subject  of  Jerome's 


256    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

marriage  which  had  very  important  political  consequences 
He  repudiated  his  wife,  but  Lucien  was  of  a  sterner  stuff, 
and  preferred  exile  to  a  throne  coupled  with  the  condi- 
tion that  he  should  put  away  a  woman  who  had  been  true 
to  him,  and  had  borne  him  several  children. 

To  THE  KING  OF  NAPLES. 

"St.  Cloud,  \ith  September,  1806. 
"  Mr.  Fox  is  dying.     Lord  Yarmouth  has  been  received 
in  London  in  triumph  because  he  was  known  to  belong 
to  the  peace  party.      The    illness  of  Mr.  Fox  has  filled 
the  nation  with  consternation.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

And  a  few  days  later.  Napoleon  wrote — "  I  have  just 
received  the  news  of  the  death  of  Mr.  Fox.  Under 
present  circumstances  he  is  a  man  who  dies  regretted  by 
two  nations." 

A  series  of  despatches  here  follo,w  on  the  subject  of 
the  coming  war — despatches  to  the  various  military  com- 
manders respecting  the  march  and  concentration  of  their 
army  corps,  and  to  the  members  of  the  Confederation  of 
the  Rhine  respecting  the  contingents  they  were  to  furnish. 

To  MARSHAL  BERTHIER. 

"Mayence,  T-Zth  Septemher,  1806. 

"  I  reached  Mayence  this  morning.     All  my  foot  guards 

have   arrived  ;   they   travelled   by  post ;   the  cavalry  and 

artillery   of  the  guard   will   not  be  here   for  five   or  six 

days.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  30th,  his  Majesty,  being  still  at  Mayence,  wrote 
to  the  Prince  Primate  of  the  Confederation  of  the  Rhine — 
"  The  movements  of  the  Prussians  oblige  me  to  accelerate 
mine.  ...  I  can  give  you  no  news  of  negotiations  with 
Prussia   as  a  Prussian  courier  crossed  mine  on  the  road.  .  . 


OVERTURES    TO    AUSTRIA.  25 

Do  not  doubt  my  firm  determination  to  protect  the. 
Confederation.  ..." 

On  the  5th  October,  Napoleon  informed  Talleyrand  that 
all  his  columns  were  in  motion,  and  that  he  was  just  start- 
ing for  Bamberg.  On  the  same  day  he  gave  orders  to 
General  Dejean  to  make  arrangements  for  the  transport 
of  6,000  men  by  post  from  Paris  to  Montreuil  in  the  event 
of  the  English  attacking  Boulogne. 

At  this  moment,  apprehensive  of  the  consequences  of  a 
check,  Napoleon  conceived  the  bold  idea  of  making  over- 
tures to  Austria)  for  he  was  without  a  single  ally  in  Europe. 
He  therefore  wrote  from  Wurtzburg  on  the  3rd  October  to 
M.  de  Larochefoucauld,  his  ambassador  at  Vienna,  in  these 
terms — "  I  am  determined  no  longer  to  remain  the  ally  of 
a  Power  so  versatile  and  despicable  as  that  of  Prussia.  I 
shall  preserve  peace  with  her,  no  doubt,  because  I  have 
not  the  right  to  shed  the  blood  of  my  people  for  vain  pre- 
texts. However,  the  necessity  of  turning  my  attention  to 
my  navy,  rendeirs  it  necessary  for  me  to  have  an  ally  on 
the  continent — Russia,  Prussia,  or  Austria.  In  no  case 
can  Prussia  be  trusted.  There  remain  Russia  and  Austria. 
...  I  have  conceived  a  great  esteem  for  the  Emperor  of 
Austria.  I  believe  him  to  be  true  to  his  word ;  you  should 
enter  into  explanations  in  that  sense,  without,  however, 
exhibiting  any  undue  anxiety  in  the  matter."  Although 
Austria  would  have  dearly  liked  to  have  recovered  Silesia, 
torn  from  her  by  the  rapacity  of  Frederick  the  Great,  and 
to  have  punished  Prussia  for  not  jpining  the  third  coalition, 
the  overtures  of  Napoleon  were  not  listened  to. 

PROCLAMATION. 

"  Bamberg,  Uh  October,  1 806. 
"  Soldiers !  —  Orders  for  your  return  to  France  had 
been  issued.  Triumphal  fetes  awaited  you  in  the  capital. 
But  new  plots  were  hatched  under  the  mask  of  friendship 
and  alliance.  War  cries  were  heard  at  Berlin.  For  the 
last  two  months  we  have  been  provoked  every  day.  .  •  ." 
VOL.  II.  ^ 


258  THE   CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

In  a  message  to  the  Senate  the  Emperor  announced 
on  the  7th  October  that  he  was  in  the  midst  of  his  army 
of  the  Rhine,  and  then  proceeded  to  indulge  in  the  usual 
amount  of  bombast  customary  on  similar  occasions.  On 
the  same  day  Napoleon  wrote  to  M.  de  Talleyrand  that 
he  had  received  a  letter  from  the  King  of  Prussia,  which 
he  had  skimmed  over.  He  said  it  was  an  ill-natured  libel; 
and  he  added  that  he  had  entered  Baireuth  on  the  7th,  and 
had  received  the  Prussian  ultimatum  on  the  8th,  which 
was  a  good  joke. 

What  Prussia  complained,  was,  that  "French  politics  had 
been  the  scourge  of  humanity  for  the  last  fifteen  years"; 
that  "  an  insatiable  ambition,  was  still  the  ruling  passion  of 
France";  that  "the  treaty  of  Amiens  had  hardly  been 
signed  when  the  Dutch  and  Swiss  territories  were  violated." 
The  Enghien  affair  was  raked  up,  also  the  fact  that  while 
the  treaty  of  Luneville  guaranteed  the  independence  of 
Italy,  Napoleon  had  assumed  the  Iron  Crown  and  had 
incorporated  Genoa.  Then  Sir  G.  Rumbold  had  been 
arrested  on  German  territory,  the  Hans  towns  laid  under 
contribution,  Anspach,  Cleves,  &c.,  annexed  to  France,  the 
rights  of  the  Prince  of  Orange,  who  a  week  before  had 
received  a  letter  from  Napoleon  congratulating  him  upon 
taking  undisturbed  possession  of  his  states,  and  condoling 
with  him  on  the  death  of  his  father,  had  been  trampled 
upon.  Then  there  was  that  perfidious  Hanover  business, 
and  altogether  such  a  list  of  crimes  that  the  wonder  is 
how  Prussia  could  so  long  have  remained  the  ally  of 
France  and  have  held  aloof  from  the  third  coahtion.  She 
was  about  to  reap  her  reward. 

On  the  7th  October  Napoleon  wrote  to  Prince  Eugene  : 
"  Having  marched  into  Baireuth,  hostilities  opened  to-day. 
It  will  be  useless  to  mention  this  and  to  alarm  the  public. 

.  .  My  information  is  that  Austria  will  not  move  ;  on  the 
contrary,  she  is  sending  troops  in  the  direction  of  Gallicia 
and  Silesia." 

And  on  the  same  date  to  King  Joseph  :     "  I  see  with 


FRA   DIAVOLO,  259 

pleasure  that  you  have  got  rid  of  that  wretch  Fra  Diavolo." 
It  was  General  Hugo,  the  father  of  Victor  Hugo,  who 
captured  the  celebrated  brigand  and  hung  him. 

On  the  8th  October  Napoleon  issued  his  first  bulletin  to 
the  Grand  Army,  and  explained  the  causes  of  the  new  war. 
The  peace  concluded  with  Russia  and  the  negotiations 
opened  with  England  had  alarmed  Prussia,  he  said.  The 
Cabinet  of  Berlin  suspected  that  a  treaty  had  been  con-' 
eluded  by  which  Russia  was  to  have  Poland,  Austria 
Silesia,  and  England  Hanover.  She  was  persuaded  that 
those  three  powers  were  in  league  with  France. 

His  Majesty  then  declared  that  the  wrongs  of  Prussia 
towards  France  dated  from  "  very  distant  epochs."  "  The 
first,  she  armed  to  profit  by  our  internal  dissension.  She 
afterwards  rushed  to  arms  when  the  Duke  of  York  invaded 
Holland,  arid  during  the  late  war,  although  she  had  no 
motive  for  discontent  with  France,  she:  armed  again  and 
signed  that  famous  treaty  of  Potsdam,  which  a  month 
later  was  replaced  by  the  treaty  of  Vienna."  After  men- 
tioning the  letter  written  by  the  King  of  Prussia  and  the 
Prussian  ultimatum,  the  bulletin  said  that  the  Queen  of 
Prussia  was  with  the  army  wearing  the  uniform  of  her 
regiment  of  dragoons,  writing  twenty  letters  a  day  in  order 
to  kindle  the  flames  of  war  in  all  directions,  and  that  she 
appeared  like  Armida  in  her  distraction  setting  fire  to  her 
own  palace. 

In  the  second  bulletin,  dated  from  Anna,  12th  October, 
an  account  was  given  of  the  first  engagement  with  the 
enemy,  in  which  Prince  Louis  of  Prussia  fell :  "  Neither 
Dresden  nor  Berlin  are  covered,"  went  on  the  bulletin. 
"  Turned  on  its  left,  caught  in  flagrante  delicto  while  in- 
dulging in  hazardous  Combinations,  the  Prussian  army  at 
the  onset  finds  itself  in  a  critical  position." 

On  the  same  date  Napoleon  addressed  a  long  letter  to 
the  King  of  Prussia,  in  which  he  protested  his  desire  to 
come  to  terms.     He  said  :  "  Sire,  I  have  been  your  friend 

s  2 


26o     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

for  six  years.  ...  If  you  had  asked  me,  in  your  note,  for 
anything  possible  I  would  have  granted  it,  but  you  asked 
me  for  my  dishonour,  and  you  must  have  been  certain  what 
the  reply  would  be.  There  is  therefore  war  between  us,  and 
the  alliance  has  been  broken  for  ever.  But  why  allow  our 
subjects  to  be  slaughtered  ?  I  shall  not  enjoy  a  victory 
purchased  by  the  lives  of  a  large  number  of  my  children. 
If  I  were  at  the  dibiit  of  my  military  career,  and  if  I  feared 
the  chances  of  war,  this  language  would  be  out  of  place. 
Sire,  your  Majesty  will  be  conquered,  you  will  compromise 
your  own  repose  and  the  existence  of  your  subjects  with- 
out the  shadow  of  a  pretext.  Prussia  is  to-day  intact,  and 
can  treat  with  me  in  a  manner  suitable  to  her  dignity  ;  in 
a  month's  time  she  will  be  in  a  different  position.  .  .  ." 

The  Prussian  ultimatum  which  so  irritated  Napoleon 
consisted  of  three  points.  The  Emperor  was  asked  to 
evacuate  Germany,  to  restore  Wesel,  and  to  place  no 
obstacle  in  the  way  of  the  formation  of  the  Confederation 
of  the  North. 

What  were  the  forces  with  which  Prussia  was  attacked  .' 
Napoleon  boasted  that  he  could  march  upon  Dresden 
with  a  square  of  200,000  men.  He  left  50,000  men 
behind  him  to  keep  up  his  communication  with  the  Con- 
federation of  the  Rhine  ;  at  Wesel  he  had  30,000  men 
under  King  Louis  ;  a  corps  of  20,000  men  under  the  orders 
of  Mortier  protected  Mayence ;  and  on  the  northern  and 
eastern  frontiers  were  12,000  national  guards  and  30,000 
conscripts.  In  order  to  prevent  interference  Marshal 
Brune  was  charged  to  protect  the  coasts  ;  Marmont  had 
20,000  in  Illyria  ;  Prince  Eugene  had  a  force  of  40,000 
men  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Venice,  and  in  case  of  neces- 
sity could  borrow  30,000  men  from  King  Joseph.  This 
was  the  formidable  machine  set  in  motion  to  annihilate 
Prussia,  whose  generals  were  old  and  worn  out,  and  in 
whose  councils  were  nothing  but  division  and  dire 
confusion. 


JENA.  261 

To  THE  EMPRESS. 

"  GerA,  \lth  October,  1806. 
"My    Good    Friend, — My    affairs    are    going    on    as 
well  as  I  hoped.     With  the  aid  of  God  they  will,  I  think, 
have   assumed  a  terrible  character  for  the  poor  King  of 
Prussia,  whom  I   pity  personally,  for  he   is   a  good   man. 
The  queen  is  at  Erfurt  with  the  king.     If  she  wishes  to 
see  a  battle  she  will  have  that  cruel  pleasure.     I  am  quite 
well,  and  have  grown  stouter  since  I  left  Paris.     However, 
I  get  over  from  twenty  to  twenty-five  leagues  a  day  on 
horseback,  in  a  carriage,  and  all  sorts   of  ways.     I  go  to 
bed  at  eight  and  get   up  at  midnight  ;  I  sometimes  think 
that  you  have  not  gone  to  bed. 

"  Ever  yours, 

"  Napoleon." 

To  THF  EMPRESS. 

"Jena,  15//%  October,  1806. 

"My  Friend, — I  have  manoeuvred  finely  against  the 
Prussians.  Yesterday  I  gained  a  great  victory.  They 
had  150,000  men.  I  took  30,000  prisoners,  lOO  guns  and 
standards.  I  was  in  presence  and  close  to  the  King  of 
Prussia ;  I  nearly  captured  him  and  the  queen.  I  have 
been  bivouacking  for  two  days.  Adieu,  my  dear  friend  ; 
enjoy  good  health  and  love  me. 

"  If  Hortense  is  at  Mayence  give  her  a  kiss  for  me,  also 

to  Napoleon  and  the  little  one. 

"  Napoleon." 

The  little  one  was  Napoleon  Louis,  the  second  son  of 
Louis  and  Hortense,  who  died  at  ForH  in  1832,  leaving  his 
next  brother,  Louis  Napoleon,  to  inherit  the  purple. 

In  the  fifth  bulletin,  dated  Jena,  iSth  October,  the 
Grand  Army  was  informed  that  the  battle  of  Jena  had 
wiped  out  the  disgrace  of  Rosbach,  and  had  calmed  the 
warlike  frenzy  of  the  Prussians.     "  The  Emperor,"  it  said, 


262     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

"passed  along  the  lines  at  daybreak,  and  recommended 
his  troops  to  beware  of  the  Prussian  cavalry,  said  to  be 
very  formidable."  He  reminded  them  that  just  a  year  ago 
they  had  captured  Ulm  ;  that  the  Prussian  army,  like  the 
Austrian  army,  was  to-day  surrounded,  having  lost  its  line 
of  operations  and  its  magazines — that  it  would  fight,  not 
for  glory,  but  in  order  to  secure  its  retreat.  ...  "  The 
hussars  and  the  chasseurs  exhibited  an  audacity  beyond 
all  praise.  The  Prussian  cavalry  could  not  resist  them.  .  .  . 
We  shall  not  speak  of  the  infantry,  which  has  long  been 
acknowledged  the  first  in  the  world."  The  Emperor  de- 
clared that  the  French  cavalry,  after  two  campaigns  and 
the  last  battle  had  no  equal. 

It  has  been  remarked  that  Napoleon  in  his  bulletins  did 
very  scanty  justice  to  Davoust,  who  was  perhaps  the 
soundest  of  all  his  lieutenants,  and  certainly  the  most 
ungainly.  But  what  was  the  state  of  the  case  .-'  Davoust 
had  to  struggle  against  the  great  bulk  of  the  Prussian 
army  at  Auerstadt,  while  Napoleon  at  Jena  had  to  deal 
with  a  force  only  half  as  strong  as  his  own.  All  this  he 
set  right  in  his  fifth  bulletin,  by  representing  that  whereas 
he  had  80,000  Prussians  opposed  to  him,  Davoust  had 
only  50,000.  In  this  way  the  fault  of  having  left  the 
corps  of  Davoust  en  I'air  was  rectified. 

A  decree,  also  dated  the  isth  October,  showed  the 
money  value  of  the  victory  of  Jena.  The  states  of  the 
King  of  Prussia  this  side  the  Vistula  were  to  pay 
100,000,000  francs  ;  the  states  of  the  Elector  of  Saxony, 
25,375,000  ;  those  of  the  Elector  of  Hesse  Cassel,  6,000,000; 
those  of  the  Duke  of  Brunswick,  5,625,000;  and  from 
Hanover,  9,100,000,  &c.  &c. ;  in  all,  159,425,000  francs. 
Ost  Frise  was  to  be  given  to  Holland,  and  all  the  English 
merchandise  found  in  the  towns  of  the  north  was  to 
belong  to  the  army,  &c.  &c. 

The  sixth  bulletin  announced  that  6,000  Saxons  and  over 
300  officers  had  been  taken  prisoners  ;  that  the  Emperor 
had  assembled  the   officers   and    told   them  that  he  was 


THE    FIELD    OF    ROSBACH.  263 

sorry  to  see  their  army  fighting  against  him ;  that  he  had 
taken  up  arms  only  to  insure  the  independence  of  the 
Saxon  nation,  and  to  oppose  its  being  incorporated  with 
Prussia  ;  that  their  sovereign,  whose  quaHties  he  recog- 
nised, had  shown  extreme  weakness  in  yielding  to  the 
threats  of  Prussia ;  that  the  Saxons  ought  to  enter  the 
Confederation  of  the  Rhine  and  place  themselves  under 
the  protection  of  France ;  that  the  Continent  needed 
repose,  &c.     All  the  Saxon  prisoners  were  released. 

To  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"Weimar,  ly/y^  Ocfofer,  1806. 
"  The  enemy  has  spread  the  report  that  I  have  granted 
an  armistice  of  six  weeks.     Contradict  this,  and  write  to 
the  Prince  de  Berg  (Murat)   and   to   Marshal   Ney  that 
it  is  false.  "NAPOLEON." 

The  King  of  Prussia  asked  for  this  armistice,  but  it 
was  refused. 

In  the  eleventh  bulletin  (Merseberg,  19th  October)  it 
is  stated  that  —  "The  Prussian  general,  Blucher,  with 
5,000  men,  passed  through  General  Klein's  division  of 
dragoons,  which  had  cut  him  off.  Having  declared  to 
General  Klein  that  an  armistice  of  six  weeks  had  been 
signed,  that  general  had  the  simplicity  to  believe  him.  .  .  . 
The  Prussian  generals  aped,  as  well  as  they  could,  the 
manners  of  the  Great  Frederick.  Although  we  were  in 
their  country,  they  appeared  quite  ignorant  of  our  move- 
ments. .  .  .  The  Emperor  visited  the  field  of  Rosbach, 
and  ordered  the  column  which  had  been  erected  there  to 
be  sent  to  Paris." 

To  M.  DE  TALLEYRAND. 

"  Dessau,  i^nd  October,  1806. 
"...  Immediately  after  the  battle  of  Jena  the  King  of 
Prussia  sent  me   an  aide-de-camp  with  a  letter.     To-day 
he  sends  me  the  Marquis  de  Lucchesini.    I  have  ordered 


264     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

him  to  remain  at  the  outposts,  and  I  have  sent  Duroc  to 
know  what  he  wants.  The  king-  seems  indined'to  come 
to  terms,  but  that  will  not  prevent  me  from  going  to 
Berlin. 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  23rd  October  a  proclamation  was  issued,  in- 
forming the  inhabitants  of  Hesse  Cassel  that  France  had 
taken  possession  of  their  country  in  order  to  spare  it  from 
the  horrors  of  war.  "Besides,  your  sovereign  and  his 
son,  holding  rank  in  the  Prussian  army,  are  bound  to  obey 
the  order  of  the  Prussian  commander-in-chief." 

The  Hessians  so  little  appreciated  this  proceeding  that 
they  soon  revolted  against  the  French. 

The  fifteenth  bulletin  (Wittenberg,  23rd  October)  pointed 
out  that  nearly  all  the  authors  of  the  war  had  been  killed 
or  wounded— Prince  Louis  and  Generals  Schmittau  and 
Ruchel  killed,  and  the  Duke  of  Brunswick  seriously 
wounded.  And — "  All  the  blame  of  the  war  rests  with  the 
Duke  of  Brunswick,  who  ill-conceived  and  ill-directed  the 
movements  of  the  army  ;  he  thought  that  the  Emperor 
was  in  Paris  when  he  was  already  on  his  flank  ;  he  thought 
that  he  had  the  initiative  when  he  was  already  turned. 
....  Lord  Morpeth,  sent  by  the  court  of  London  to 
deal  in  Prussian  blood,  mission  unworthy  of  a  man  like 
him,  reached  Weimar  on  the  nth  with  seductive  offers 
and  offers  of  large  subsidies.  The  horizon  was  already 
dark.  The  cabinet  would  not  see  him,  told  him  there 
was  little  safety  for  his  person,  and  advised  him  to  re- 
turn to  Hamburg  and  to  await  events.  What  would  the 
Duchess  of  Devonshire  have  said  could  she  have  seen 
her  son-in-law  breathing  flame  and  war,  coming  to  offer 
poisoned  gold,  and  obliged  to  retrace  his  steps  sadly  and 
hurriedly  ?  One  is  indignant  at  seeing  England  com- 
promise herself  by  playing  so  odious  a  part." 

It  was  also  stated  that  60,000,000  francs'  worth  of 
English  goods  had  been  seized  at  Leipsic. 


SANS    SOUCI.  265 

The  seventeenth  bulletin  announced  the  arrival  of 
Napoleon  at  Potsdam,  He  found  Sans  Souci  to  his  taste, 
and  remained  for  some  time  in  the  room  of  Frederick 
the  Great. 

"It  was  remarked,"  continued  the  bulletin,  "that  the 
Emperor  alighted  at  Potsdam  the  same  day  as  the 
Emperor  of  Russia  had  the  year  before.  It  was  from  that 
moment  that  the  queen  ga,ve  up  the  car^  of  her  domestic 
concerns  and  the  serious  occupation  of  the  toilette  to 
meddle  with  state  affairs,  .  .  ,  The  result  of  the  celebrated 
oath  taken  on  the  tomb  of  the  Great  Frederick,  on  the 
4th  November,  1805,  was  the  battle  of  Austerlitz,  and  the 
evacuation  of  Germany  by  the  Russian  army.  Forty-eight 
hours  afterwards  an  engraving  was  to  be  seen  in  all  the 
shop  windows  which  excited  the  laughter  even  of  the 
peasants.  The  handsome  Emperor  of  Russia  was  seen  in 
it  with  the  queen  close  to  him,  and  on  the  other  side  was 
the  king  with  his  hand  raised  over  the  tomb  ;  the  queen 
herself  was  draped  in  a  shawl  like  those  in  which  Lady 
Hamilton  is  represented  in  London,  pressing  her  hand  on 
her  heart,  and  looking  at  the  Emperor  of  Russia.  One 
cannot  conceive  how  the  police  of  Berlin  could  permit 
such  a  pitiful  satire.  However,  the  shade  of  the  Great 
Frederick  must  have  been  indignant  at  this  scandalous 
scene," 

This  manner  of  treating  an  unfortunate  queen  who  has 
been  compared  by  some  French  writers  to  Maria  Theresa 
was  as  unjust  as  it  was  ungenerous,  and  filled  everyone 
with  scorn  and  contempt.  But  Napoleon  was  no  respecter 
of  the  weaker  sex,  as  was  proved  by  his  conduct  to  the 
queens  of  Naples  and  of  Etruria,  and  to  numbers  of  French- 
women of  rank  or  talent. 

To  THE  KING  OF  NAPLES. 

"Potsdam,  25M  October,  1806. 
"...  I  have   crushed   the  Prussian   monarchy  ;  I  shall 
crush  the  Russians  if  they  arrive.     I  no  longer  fear  the 


2  66     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Austrians.  I  shall  not  ask  you  for  any  troops ;  I  have  no 
need  of  them.  If,  however,  you  could  send  me  sOme 
cavalry,  do  so.  .  .  ." 

"  Napoleon." 


We  have  two  letters  written  from  Potsdam  on  the  subject 
of  the  theatre.  The  first,  to  Fouch6,  ran  thus :  "I  send 
you  my  approval  relative  to  the  expense  of  the  scenery  for 
the  ballet  of  the  Return  of  Ulysses.  Have  a  detailed 
report  made  of  this  ballet,  and  see  the  first  representation, 
so  as  to  make  sure  that  there  is  nothing  bad  in  it ;  you 
understand  in  what  sense.  The  subject  appears  to  me 
fine  ;  it  was  I  who  gave  it  to  Gardel." 

The  second  was  to  Cambac6r^s,  as  follows  :  "  I  send 
you  a  piece  which  is  '  of  the  other  world.'  If  the  authors 
be  not  madmen  they  must  be  wretches  who  should  be 
severely  punished.     I  beg  you  will  follow  up  this  affair." 

One  can  imagine  a  malicious  author  making  allusions 
to  Penelope's  admirers  of  such  a  nature  as  to  be  highly 
disagreeable  to  the  modern  Ulysses  and  his  spouse. 

PROCLAMATION  TO  THE  ARMY. 

"Potsdam,  liith  October,  1806. 
" .  .  .  .  You  are  the  worthy  defenders  of  my  crown  and 
of  the  glory  of  this  grand  nation.  .  .  .  Here  are  the  results 
of  our  labours.  One  of  the  first  military  Powers  of  Europe, 
which  dared  lately  to  propose  to  us  a  shameful  capitulation, 
has  been  annihilated.  The  posts  and  the  defiles  of  Fran- 
conia,  the  Saal,  the  Elbe,  which  our  fathers  would  have 
crossed  in  seven  years,  we  have  crossed  in  seven  days,  and 
in  the  interval  we  have  delivered  four  combats  and  one 
great  battle.  .  .  .  We  have  made  60,000  prisoners,  taken 
sixty-five  standards,  600  guns,  three  fortresses,  and  over 
twenty  generals.  .  .  Soldiers,  the  Russians  boast  that  they 
are  coming  ;  we  shall  march  to  meet  them  and  spare  them 
half  the  road.     We  shall  not  lay  down  our  arms  until  we 


THE   QUEEN    OF    PRUSSIA   AND    THE   CZAR,        267 

have  obliged  the  English,  those  eternal  enemies  of  our 
nation,  to  renounce  their  plan  of  troubling  the  Continent, 
and  their  tyranny  of  the  seas  ..." 

On  the  same  day  appeared  the  eighteenth  bulletin,  which 
gives  an  account  of  the  visit  of  Napoleon  to  the  tomb  of 
the  Great  Frederick,  and  how,  "the  Emperor  made  a 
present  to  the  Hotel  des  Invalides  at  Paris  (where  his 
own  ashes  now  repose)  of  the  sword  of  Frederick,  of  his 
ribbon  of  the  Black  Eagle,  of  his  general's  sash,  and  of 
the  flags  carried  by  his  guard  during  the  seven  years'  war." 
And — "  Lord  Morpeth,  the  English  envoy  to  the  Prussian 
court,  during  Jena,  was  at  six  leagues  from  the  field 
of  battle  ;  he  heard  the  cannon.  A  courier  told  him  that 
the  battle  was  lost,  and  in  a  moment  he  was  surrounded  by 
fugitives.  He  fled,  crying — '  I  must  not  be  taken.'  He 
offered  sixty  guineas  for  a  horse,  obtained  one,  and 
escaped." 

On  the  27th  October  came  the  nineteenth  bulletin,  in 
which  the  French  army  was  told  that  the  whole  Prussian 
nation  was  indignant  with  the  authors  of  the  war,  and  with 
that  wretched  scribe  Gentz,  a  man  without  honour,  who  sold 
his  pen  for  gold  ;  and  that — "  The  portrait  of  the  Emperor 
of  Russia  was  found  in  the  apartment  of  the  queen  at 
Potsdam.  At  Carlottenberg  was  found  her  correspondence 
with  the  Emperor  during  three  years,  and  memoranda 
drawn  up  by  English  writers  to  prove  that  no  account 
should  be  taken  of  treaties  concluded  with  Napoleon.  .  ,  . 
The  notes,  reports,  and  State  papers  were  redolent  of 
musk,  and  were  mixed  up  with  chiffons  and  other  objects 
of  the  queen's  toilette.  .  .  ." 

On  the  28th  October  appeared  the  twenty-first  bulletin, 
giving  an  account  of  the  entry  of  Napoleon  into  Berlin, 
and  how  he  received  the  ministers  of  Bavaria,  of  Spain, 
of  Portugal,  and  of  Turkey.  Then  the  Protestant 
and  Calvinist  clergy.  "  There  are,"  added  the  bulletin, 
"  12,000  French  refugees  at  Berlin,  owing  to  the  revoca- 


268     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

tion  of  the  Edict  of  Nantes.  The  Emperor  spoke  with 
the  chief  among  them  ;  he  said  that  they  had  good  right 
to  protection,  and  that  their  privileges  and  worship  should 
be  respected.  He  recommended  them  to  attend  to  their 
business,  to  remain  quiet,  and  to  accord  their  respect  and 
obedience  to  Csesar." 

M.  Weiss,  in  his  Histoire  des  R^fugies  protestants  de  France 
depuis  la.  Revocation  de  I'Edit  de  Nantes  jtisqu  a.  nos  Jours, 
has  given  an  interesting  account  of  those  persons  expelled 
from  France  for  their  religious  opinions.  To  take  merely 
the  mihtary  men  who  fled  to  Prussia,  one  finds  the  Comte 
de  Beauvau,  Henri  de  Briquemault,  de  Beaucourt, 
d'Hallard,  Pierre  de  la  Cave,  du  Plessis,  the  Counts  of 
Montgomery,  de  Comminges,  de  Cadal,  de  Gressy,  with 
a  Fouquet,_a  Beaufort,  a  la  Salle,  a  Montfort  (!)  &c.,  &c. 
Numbers  of  the  French  officers  distinguished  themselves 
in  the  Prussian  service;  and  their  descendants  fought 
gallantly  through  the  Seven  Years'  War — La  Mothe 
Fouquet,  du  Moulin,  Forcade,  Bonin,  &c.  And  after  the 
Franco-German  war,  a  French  editor,  turning  over  the 
Prussian  army  list,  related  sorrowfully  how  he  had  found 
such  names  as  the  following  among  the  invaders  :  Aber- 
corn,  d'Albaing,  de  Narbonne-Pelet,  de  Janson,  d' Alton, 
Baron  de  Collas,  de  Colomb,  de  la  Corbiere,  de  Cordier, 
du  Bois,  de  Gransilliers,  de  Lattre,  de  Longchamps- 
B^rier,  de  Longueville,  Comte  Clairon  d'Haussonville,  de 
Lucadon,  de  Maries,  de  Mars,  de  la  Chevallerie,  de  Chap- 
puis,  de  Grain,  de  Grais,  Baron  de  la  Motte-Fouqu6,  de 
Frangois,  de  Dufay,  de  Durant,  Durrieu,  de  la  Croix,  de 
Coudray,  d'Asse  de  la  Barre,  de  Bauld  de  Nans,  Bronsart, 
La  Baume,  Beaumont,  de  Donat,  du  Faur,  du  Fais,  Le 
GouUon,  de  Gabain,  de  Clerc,  Chevalier,  Chasles  de 
Beaulieu,  de  Bouge,  de  Borries,  Baron  de  Le  Fort,  de 
Cuvry,  du  Cornu,  d'Arrest,  Artois,  de  Balle,  des  Barres, 
Le  Batteur,  de  Beaulieu-Marconnay,  Beauvais,  Boie,  de 
Bra,  Chaion,  Coumont,  Destine,  de  Lome,  'Malbranc,  du 
Verdy,  du  Vermois,  &c. 


PROTESTANT  REFUGEES.  269 

No  wonder  that  the  French  were  beaten  at  Blenheim, 
Ramilies,  Turin,  Oudenarde,  and  Malplaquet,  as  the  his- 
torian Michelet  says — "  It  was  no  longer  France  which 
fought,  but  eternal  justice." 

As  for  Napoleon's  interview  with  the  refugees  or  their 
descendants,  little  good  carne  of  it,  for,  according  to  M. 
Weiss  (vol.  i.  p.  222),  "  The  humiliating  defeat  of  Jena  and 
the  cruel  treaty  of  Tilsit  broke  the  last  sympathies  of 
Prussia  for  the  tongue  still  spoken  by  families  of  French 
origin."  And  their  pastors  from  that  time  began  to  preach 
in  German  instead  of  in  French.  However,  as  far  as  reli- 
gion was  concerned,  Protestants  certainly  owed  something 
to  Napoleon. 

To  THE  PRINCESS  FERDINAND  OF  PRUSSIA. 

"BERLIN)  iZth  October,  1806. 
"  I  have  received  the  letter  of  your  Royal  Highness.  I 
was  much  touched  by  the  position  of  Madame  de  Hatzfeld. 
I  convinced  her  that  her  husband  was  guilty,  and  that, 
according  to  the  laws  of  war,  he  ought  to  be  executed. 
However,  I  spared  him  even  the  disagreeableness  of 
a  trial.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  THE  EMPRESS. 

"  Berlin,  dih  November,  1806. 
■  "  I  have  received  your  letter.  You  seem  annoyed  at  the 
ill  I  said  about  women.  It  is  true  that  I  dislike  intriguing 
women  above  everything.  I  am  accustomed  to  good- 
hearted,  gentle,  and  conciliating  women ;  those  are  the 
women  I  love.  If  they  have  spoiled  me,  it  is  not  my 
fault,  but  yours.  Besides,  you  will  see  that  I  have  been  " 
kind  to  one  who  showed  herself  sensitive  and  good, 
Madame  de  Hatzfeld.  When  I  showed  her  the  letter  of 
her  husband,  she  said  to  me  while  sobbing,  with  the  deepest 
sensitiveness  and  simplicity,  '  Ah,  it  is  indeed  his  writing.' 


270     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

When  she  read  the  letter,  her  accent  went  to  my  heart.  I 
said  to  her,  '  Well,  Madame,  throw  this  letter  into  the  fire, 
and  I  shall  no  longer  have  the  power  to  punish  your  hus- 
band.' She  burned  the  letter,  and  appeared  very  happy. 
You  see  that  I  love  good-natured,  simple,  and  gentle 
women ;  that  it  is  because  they  alone  resemble  you. 
"Adieu,  my  friend.     I  am  in  good  health. 

"  Napoleon." 


This  was  an  extraordinary  piece  of  clemencjy  on  the 
part  of  Napoleon,  who  was  so  fond  of  striking  terror  into 
the  hearts  of  conquered  nations.  According  to  Lanfrey, 
who  appears  to  have  seen  a  copy  of  the  incriminated  letter, 
it  was  quite  insignificant ;  that  was  why  the  Prince  de 
Hatzfeld  confided  it  to  the  post-office,  and  probably  that 
was  the  reason  why  the  Emperor  told  the  Princess  to 
throw  it  into  the  fire.  The  court,  composed  of  seven 
colonels,  which  was  to  try  the  Prince  de  Hatzfeld  as  a 
traitor  arid  a  spy,  reminded  one,  continues  Lanfrey,  of  the 
lugubrious  affairs  of  the  Due  d'Erighien  and  of  Palm  ;  and 
the  most  familiar  friends  of  Napoleon — Berthier,  Rapp, 
and  Duroc — were  indignant  at  the  idea  of  seeing  the  blood 
of  a  man,  who  was  both  honoured  and  esteemed,  shed  for 
fidelity  to  his  sovereign.  They  implored  Napoleon  not  to 
sully  his  own  glory,  and  to  make  his  comrades  execu- 
tiorlers.  The  Emperor  remained  inflexible,  and  if  the 
Prince  had  not  been  concealed  for  a  time  by  Savage  and 
Caulaincourt,  he  would  certainly  have  been  shot.  It  seems, 
however,  that  the  impression  of  horror  was  so  general 
when  the  fate  which  awaited  the  Prince  became  known', 
that  Napoleon  recoiled  before  the  effect  of  the  atrocity  he 
had  contemplated,  and  arranged  the  little  clemency  scene 
which  he  related  so  prettily  to  Josephine.  According  to 
Madame  de  Remusat  this  act  of  generosity  on  the  part  of 
the  Emperor  created  more  impression  in  Paris  than  his 
victdi'ies. 


THE    PRINCE    OF    ORANGE.  2Jl 

To  THE  PRINCE  OF  ORANGE. 

"BERLIN,  8M  November,  i8o6. 
"  My  Cousin,— I  am  not  a  judge  of  the  conduct  of 
your  Highness.  It  does  not  suit  me  to  weigh  the  nature 
of  your  obhgations.  Your  Highness  says  in  your  letter 
that  you  were  obliged  to  wage  war  against  me  ;  you 
will  not  find  it  ill  therefore  that  I  should  wish  to  have 
at  Fulde  a  prince  who  is  master  to  remain  at  peace 
with  me.  "NAPOLEON." 

The  twenty-ninth  bulletin  (dated  Berlin,  gth  November) 
gives  an  account  of  the  capitulation  of  the  last  debris  of 
the  Prussian  army  under  Blucher,  adding — "Thus  the 
Prussian  generals,  who  in  their  delirium  and  their  vanity 
indulged  in  so  many  sarcasms  against  the  Austrian 
generals,  renewed  four  times  the  catastrophe  of  Ulm  ;  the 
first  by  the  capitulation  of  Erfurt,  the  second  by  that  of 
Prince  Hohenlohe,  the  third  by  that  of  Stettin,  the  fourth 
by  that  of  Schwartau,"  where  Blucher  was  at  last  brought 
to  bay. 

In  a  letter  of  the  14th  November,  addressed  to  MoUien, 
we  see  that  Napoleon  was  rather  anxious  about  the  pay  of 
the  army.  The  letter  concluded  thus  :  "  However,  here, 
master  of  Prussia  and  of  all  Westphalia,  money  will  begin 
to  come  in  so  that  there  is  no  reason  to  be  uneasy." 

To  THE  EMPRESS. 

"Berlin,  ■16th  November,  1806. 
"I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  nth,  and  see  with 
satisfaction  that  niy  sentiments  afford  you  pleasure.  You 
are  wrong  to  think  that  I  flatter  you.  ...  I  am  sorry  to 
think  that  you  do  not  anluse  yourself  at  Mayence.  '  If  the 
voyage  were  not  so  long  you  might  come  here,  for  there 
are  no  more  enemies  this  side  of  the  Vistula.  I  shall  wait 
to  know  what  you  think  of  it.  I  should  also  be  very  glad 
to  see  Monsieur  Napoleon.  «  NAPOLEON." 


2/2  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

The  thirty-third  bulletin,  dated  Berlin,  17th  November, 
announced  the  signature  of  a  suspension  of  arms  between 
France  and  Prussia. 

On  the  2 1st  November  was  signed  the  famous  Decree  of 
Berlin,  which  declared  the  blockade  of  the  British  Isles, 
and  copies  of  this  decree  were  sent  to  Hamburg,  Holland, 
Madrid,  Tuscany,  and  Naples. 

"  The  Continental  blockade,"  says  Duruy,  in  his  History 
of  France,  "  was  a  gigantic  war  machine,  which  would 
certainly  kill  one  of  the  adversaries.  It  was  Napoleon 
that  it  killed."  Madame  de  Remusat  says  that  this  was  a 
struggle  between  despotism  and  constitutional  rights,  and 
that,  "  despotism  sudcumbed,  and,  no  matter  how  much  it 
costs  us  to  say  so.  Providence  must  be  thanked  for  the 
salvation  of  nations  and  the  lesson  given  to  posterity." 
She  also  shows  us  Talleyrand,  saying  with  more  warmth 
than  he  was  accustomed  to  exhibit,  "  Tremble,  madmen 
that  you  are,  at  the  successes  gained  by  the  Emperor  over 
the  English !  For,  if  the  English  constitution  be  de- 
stroyed, the  civilisation  of  the  world  will  be  shaken  to 
its  very  foundations."  And  such  was  the  opinion  of  many 
enlightened  Frenchmen,  both  civil  and  military. 

To  THE  EMPRESS. 

"  KuSTRiN,  2iik  November,  1806. 
"  I  am  at  Kustrin  in  order  to  make  some  reconnaissances. 
I  shall  see,  in  two  days,  if  you  can  come.  Hold  yourself 
in  readiness.  I  hope  that  the  Queen  of  Holland  will  be 
of  the  party.  It  is  two  o'clock  in  the  morning.  I  have 
just  risen  ;  this  is  the  custom  of  war.  .  .  . 

"NAPOLEON." 

To  THE  Empress. 

"  MeseritZ,  27/A  November,  1806, 
"  I  am  going  to  take  a  town  in  Poland.     This  is  the 
first  town.     This  evening  I  shall  be  at  Posen.     After  that 
I  will  call  you  to  Berlin,  so  that  we  may  arrive  there  on 


POLISH    ENTHUSIASM.  273 

the  same  day.  My  health  is  good.  The  weather  is  rather 
bad ;  it  has  been  raining  for  three  days.  My  affairs  are 
going  on  well.     The  Russians  are  retreating. 

"Adieu,  my  friend.  A  thousand  amiable  things  to 
Hortense,  Stephanie,  and  the  little'  Napoleon. 

"  Napoleon." 

We  see  by  letters  to  Talleyrand  and  to  Soult  of  the  27th, 
that  the  King  of  Prussia,  having  thrown  himself  into  the 
arms  of  the  Russians,  could  not  ratify  the  suspension 
of  arms. 

To  M.  CAMBACERES. 

"POSEN,  \st  December,  1806. 
"You  will  see  by  to-day's  bulletin  that  my  troops  have 
entered  Warsaw.  The  whole  of  Poland  is  up  in  arms. 
It  is  difficult  to  form  an  idea  of  the  national  movement  of 
this  country.  Regiments  are  raised  by  force  (!)  The 
most  enthusiastic  are  the  most  rich.  Priests,  nobles, 
peasants  are  unanimous.  Poland  will  soon  have  60,000 
men  under  arms.  The  great  nobles  of  the  country  all 
have  from  4,000/.  to  20,000/.  a  year.  They  pay  the 
expenses  of  their  army.  In  the  midst  of  the  movements 
of  so  large  an  army,  and  the  excesses  which  naturally 
result,  we  have  festivities,  and  to-morrow  I  am  going  to 
a  ball  given  by  the  nobility  of  the  city.  The  ladies  have 
been  presented  to  me  ;  they  have  all  left  their  country 
seats;  this  is  the  first  time  since  the  destruction  of 
Poland  that  they  have  shown  themselves.  All  the  people 
in  easy  circumstances  speak  French,  and  the  peasants 
love  France. 

"  Napoleon." 

This  enthusiasm  was,  as  Napoleon  admitted  the  next 
day  in  a  letter  to  Murat,  somewhat  circumspect.  Murat 
thought. that  he  was  going  to  reign  at  Warsaw,  and  so  did 
Prince  Jerome,  but  it  was  not  the  intention  of  Napoleon 
for  the  moment  to  break  with  Austria. 

VOL.  II.  T 


2  74  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  M.  GAUDIN. 

"  PoSEN,  1st  December,  1806. 

"  Have  a  circular  written,   and  take   measures  so  that, 

throughout  the   extent  of  the  empire,  all  letters  coming 

from  England,  or  written  in   English  and  by  Englishmen, 

be  seized.     This    is   most    important,    as   it  is  absolutely 

necessary  to  isolate  England. 

"  Napoleon." 

A  similar  letter  was  written  to  Prince  Eugene  with 
regard  to  "  my  kingdom  of  Italy." 

To  SULTAN  SELIM. 

"PoSEN,  \st  December,  1806. 

"  Prussia,  which  had  formed  a  league  with  Russia,  has 
disappeared.  I  have  destroyed  her  armies,  and  am  master 
of  her  strong  places. 

"  My  armies  are  upon  the  Vistula,  and  Warsaw  is  in  my 
power. 

"Prussian  and  Russian  Poland  are  rising,  and  are 
forming  armies  to  reconquer  their  independence.  This 
is  the  moment  for  you  to  reconquer  yours. 

"  Drive  out  the  rebel  Hospodars  whom  you  were  forced 
to  re-establish  by  the  most  unjust  violence,  and  in  spite 
of  your  firman  declaring  them  to  be  traitors. 

"  Do  not  grant  to  the  Servians  the  concessions  which 
they  demand  sword  in  hand. 

"  March  upon  Choczim  ;  you  have  nothing  to  fear  from 
Russia. 

"  I  have  directed  my  ambassador  (Sebastiani)  to  con- 
tract the  necessary  engagements  with  you.  If  you  have 
been  too  prudent  up  to  the  present,  a  longer  condescend- 
ence towards  Russia  would  be  a  weakness  which  would 
ruin  your  empire. 

"  Napoleon." 


PRINCE    PONIATOWSKI.  275 

In  a  letter  to  Talleyrand  of  the  same  date  the  Emperor 
declared  that  he  desired  to  remain  at  peace  with  Austria, 
and  that  he  would  have  nothing  to  say  to  an  insurrection 
in  Austrian  Poland.  He  however  expressed  his  readiness 
to  indemnify  Austria  for  her  share  of  Poland  by  a  portion 
of  Silesia,  should  that  arrangement  suit  the  Court  of 
Vienna. 

The  thirty-sixth  bulletin  drew  a  flattering  description 
of  the  enthusiasm  awakened  in  Poland  by  the  French. 
Even  the  stragglers,  it  was  said,  who  committed  excesses 
in  other  countries,  had  been  touched  by  the  reception  of 
this  good  people,  and  had  been  obliged  to  make  an  effort 
to  behave  well. 

The  next  day,  however,  the  Emperor  wrote  to  Murat, 
who  was  acting  as  Governor  of  Warsaw, — 

"The  Poles,  who  show  so  much  circumspection,  and 
ask  for  so  many  guarantees  before  declaring  themselves, 
are  egoists  who  are  not  inilamed  by  love  of  country.  I 
am  old  in  my  knowledge  of  men.  My  greatness  does  not 
repose  on  the  aid  of  a  few  thousand  Poles.  It  is  for  them 
to  take  advantage  with  enthusiasm  of  present  circum- 
stances ;  it  is  not  for  me  to  take  the  first  step.  Let  them 
show  a  firm  resolution  to  be  independent ;  let  them  pledge 
themselves  to  support  the  king  which  will  be  given  to 
them,  and  then  I  shall  see  what  is  to  be  done.  ...  I 
know  Poniatowski  better  than  you  do,  for  I  have  followed 
the  affairs  of  Poland  for  the  last  ten  years.  He  is  more 
frivolous  and  scatter-brained  than  most  of  the  Poles,  and 
that  is  saying  a  good  deal.  He  enjoys  very  little  con- 
fidence in  Warsaw.  .  .  .  Let  it  be  well  understood  that 
I  have  not  come  to  beg  for  a  throne  for  one  of  my 
relations;  there  are  not  wanting  thrones  which  I  can 
give  to  my  family.   ..." 

On  the  and  December^  the  construction  of  the  Madeleine 
was  ordered  "  in  our  good  city  of  Paris."     On  the  frontis- 

1  On  the  and  December,  and  also  on  the  3rd,  Napoleon  wrote 
seventeen  letters  or  despatches,  some  of  them  of  great  length. 

T   2 


276     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

piece  was  to  be  written,  "  The  Emperor  Napoleon  to  the 
soldiers  of  the  grand  army."  The  names  of  the  men 
present  at  Ulm,  Austerlitz,  and  Jena  were  to  be  engraved 
upon  marble  tables,  and  the  names  of  those  who  fell  on 
tables  of  massive  gold.  Every  year  on  the  anniversaries 
of  Austerlitz  and  Jena  the  "monument"  was  to  be 
illuminated,  and  a  concert  given  preceded  by  a  speech 
on  the  virtues  necessary  for  a  soldier,  and  in  praise  of 
those  who  perish  on  the  field  of  battle  on  memorable 
days. 

The  original  building  called  the  Madeleine  was  built  in 
the  days  of  Charles  VIII.,  and  consequently  dates  back 
from  the  fifteenth  century.  In  the  days  of  Louis  XV.  it 
was  little  but  a  ruin,  and  its  reconstruction  was  therefore 
decided  upon.  The  first  stone  of  the  new  edifice  was  laid 
in  1764,  and  it  was  still  unfinished  when  Napoleon  deter- 
mined to  turn  it  into  a  "  temple  of  glory."  The  temple 
was  far  from  complete  when  the  Empire  passed  away,  and 
in  1 8 16  appeared  a  Royal  ordinance  directing  that  the 
building  should  be  terminated,  and  that  in  it  should  be 
placed  expiatory  monuments  to  Louis  XVI.,  Marie 
Antoinette,  Louis  XVII,  and  the  Princesse  Elizabeth. 
However,  when  Louis  Philippe  came  to  the  throne  the 
Madeleine  without  roof,  and  its  columns  without  capitals, 
resembled  the  ruin  of  some  temple  of  antiquity,  and  it  was 
not  until  1842  that  it  was  finished  and  handed  over  to  the 
ecclesiastical  authorities. 

To  THE  EMPRESS. 

"PoSEN,  ind  December,  1806. 
"  To-day  is  the  anniversary  of  Austerlitz.  I  went  to 
a  ball  given  by  the  town.  It  rains.  My  health  is  good. 
I  love  you  and  long  for  you.  My  troops  are  at  Warsaw. 
It  has  not  been  cold  yet.  All  the  Polish  women  are 
French  women.  For  me  there  is  only  one  woman.  Do 
you  know  her .'  I  would  give  you  her  portrait,  but  it 
would  be  necessary  to  flatter  it  so  much  that  you  would 


LOVE    LETTERS.  277 

not  recognise  it.  However,  to  tell  the  truth,  my  heart 
has  only  loving  things  to  say  to  you.  The  nights  are 
long,  all  alone. 

"  Ever  yours, 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  3rd  December  Napoleon  wrote  three  letters  to 
the  King  of  Holland,  in  which  poor  Louis  was  ordered  to 
"  be  down  on  the  Dutch,  be  down  on  the  Dutch,"  who 
were  the  richest  people  in  Europe.  "You  attach  too 
great  a  price  to  popularity,"  said  Napoleon.  "Before 
being  good,  you  must  be  master." 

To  THE  EMPRESS. 

"POSEN,  i^th  December,  1806. 
"  My  Friend, — I  am  starting  for  Warsaw.  I  shall  be 
back  in  a  fortnight,  when  I  hope  I  shall  be  able  to  send 
for  you.  However,  I  should  see  you  return  to  Paris, 
where  you  are  desired,  with  pleasure.  You  know  that  I 
depend  upon  events.  All  my  affairs  are  going  on 
well.  .  .  .  Adieu,  my  friend.  I  have  made  peace  with 
Saxony.  .  .  .  "NAPOLEON." 

To  THE  EMPRESS. 

"  GoLYMiN,  2gtk  December,  1806. 

"  I  write  a   line  only,  my  friend.     I   am  in  a  wretched 

barn.      I   have   beaten   the   Russians.      I   have   captured 

thirty  guns,  their  baggage,  and  6,000  men.     The  weather 

is  fearful ;  it  rains,  and  we  have  mud  up  to  the  knee.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  THE  EMPRESS. 

"  PULTUSK,  31^-^  December,  1806. 
"  I  laughed  heartily  on  receiving  your  last  letter.     You 
have  formed  an  idea  of  the  belles  of  Poland  which  they 
do  not  deserve.  ...  I  received  your  letter  in  a  wretched 


278     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

barn,  having  mud,  wind,  and  straw  for  my  bed  {sic). 
To-morrow  I  shall  be  at  Warsaw.  I  think  that  every- 
thing is  finished  for  this  year.  The  army  is  going  into 
winter  quarters. 

"  I  shrug  my  shoulders  at  the  nonsense  of  Madame 
de  L — — .  However,  you  ought  to  be  angry,  and  advise 
her  not  to  be  so  foolish.  .  .  .  As  for  me,  I  despise 
ingratitude  as  one  of  the  worst  defects  of  the  heart.  I 
know  that  instead  of  consoling  you  they  grieved  you.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

We  shall  see  that  poor  Josephine  had  some  reason  for 
her  jealousy,  and  that  her  faithless  lord  did  protest 
too  much. 


CHAPTER   IV. 

THE    YEAR     1807. 

The  principal  events  of  the  year  1807  were  the  battles  of 
Eylau  and  Friedland,  which  were  followed  by  the  treaty 
of  Tilsit,  the  invasion  of  Portugal,  and  preparations  for 
the  invasion  of  Spain  ;  the  war  with  Sweden,  which  lost 
Finland ;  and  the  bombardment  of  Copenhagen,  and 
seizure  of  the  Danish  fleet  which  was  about  to  be  handed 
over  to  Napoleon.  Two  new  kingdoms  were  created,  those 
of  Saxony  and  Westphalia,  the  latter  being  given  to 
Jerome  Bonaparte. 

The  fighting  in  Poland  was  of  the  most  desperate  and 
sanguinary  character.  The  campaign  opened  with  the 
affairs  of  Pultusk  and  Golymin,  in  which  both  French  and 
Russians  sustained  heavy  losses.  Napoleon  in  his  bulletins 
claimed  both  days,  but  when  we  consult  Jomini  we  find 
that  the  Russians  held  Golymin  till  nightfall,  which  was 
more  unfortunate  than  the  non-success  of  Pultusk.  Ney 
had  a  very  narrow  escape  of  being  cut  off,  and  Bernadotte 
was  driven  back  from  his  lines  to  the  small  town  of 
Strasburg.  Both  French  and  Russians  claimed  the  victory 
at  Eylau,  where  the  slaughter  on  both  sides  was  appalling. 
The  Russians  however  were  beaten  at  Ostralenka,  and 
then  at  the  celebrated  battle  of  Friedland,  which,  although 
Tolstoy  afterwards  beat  Massena  and  Massena  beat 
Tolstoy,  may  be  said  to  have  finished  the  campaign. 


2  8o     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

The  fate  of  Napoleon,  especially  after  Eylau,  hung  on 
a  thread,  and  nothing  saved  him  but  his  wonderful  activity 
and  the  confidence  with  which  he  inspired  his  soldiers. 
Had  Austria  joined  the  coalition  at  that  moment,  in- 
stead of  offering  to  mediate,  had  Russia  not  made  war 
with  Turkey,  and  sent  60,000  men  into  the  principalities, 
and  had  England  furnished  in  time  the  subsidies  which 
she  had  promised  to  Prussia,  to  Sweden,  and  to  Russia, 
the  career  of  Napoleon  would  have  been  cut  short,  and 
Europe  would  have  been  spared  years  of  bloodshed,  ruin 
and  misery. 

Prussia  alone,  as  if  to  make  amends  for  the  past,  acted 
through  this  campaign  with  courage  and  good  faith.  She 
refused  to  listen  to  the  overtures  of  Napoleon,  and  the 
debris  of  the  army,  under  the  command  of  General 
Lestocq,  greatly  distinguished  itself  at  Eylau  and  |else- 
where.  Although  no  Prussian  town  or  fortress  defended 
itself  with  the  courage  and  desperation  of  Saragossa,  the 
Prussian  troops  in  the  open  field  fought  as  they  fought 
under  the  great  Frederick. 

The  harsh  manner  in  which  Prussia  was  treated  at 
Tilsit  was  universally  blamed  as  cruel  and  impolitic. 
We  find  Napoleon  declaring  to  the  Legislative  Body  on 
the  1 6th  August  that  none  of  his  determinations  were 
influenced  by  resentment,  and  justifying  his  policy ;  and 
at  the  same  time  Prince  Metternich  writing  thus  from 
Paris  to  Count  Stadion — "  The  Emperor  sacrifices  to  his 
resentment  a  power  which  he  should  protect  to  serve  as 
a  counterpoise  to  Russia."  As  far  as  resentment  went, 
Napoleon,  all  through  his  career,  showed  that  he  was  not 
a  Corsican  for  nothing,  and  the  events  of  1807,  as  more 
than  one  historian  has  remarked,  were  stamped  with  hatred 
to  England,  and  the  fixed  determination  to  ruin  her  by 
means  of  the  continental  blockade. 

After  Austerlitz  Napoleon  returned  to  Paris,  determined 
to  punish  Prussia  for  having  resented  the  violation  of 
Anspach,   and    Naples   for   having   joined   the   coalition. 


DECREES    AGAINST    ENGLAND.  28 1 

After  Friedland  he  returned  home,  determined  to  seize 
upon  Portugal,  to  punish  Spain  and  Austria,  and  according 
to  Prince  Metternich  to  partition  Turlcey  and  to  march 
upon  India.  Some  of  these  matters  he  had  talked  over 
with  the  Czar  at  Tilsit. 

Not  long  after  his  return  to  Paris  Napoleon  paid  a  visit 
to  Italy,  and  from  Milan  issued  a  decree  against  British 
commerce,  which  was  at  once  an  aggravation  of  the  decree 
of  Berlin,  and  an  answer  to  the  Orders  in  Council  which 
put  an  end  to  the  immunity  which  had  been  enjoyed  by 
the  vessels  of  neutral  powers  which  though  not  at  war 
with  England  had  embraced  the  continental  system.  As 
the  British  Government  very  rightly  insisted,  the  powers 
in  question,  in  submitting  quietly  to  the  orders  of  Napoleon, 
became  his  accomplices — the  accomplices  of  an  act  which 
Napoleon's  own  brother  declared  was  as  unjust  as  it  was 
impolitic.  "Article  six,"  he  said,  "  is  barbarous,  Article  eight 
is  worse,  and  the  decree  is  more  likely  to  ruin  France  than 
England."  And  it  was  to  enforce  his  decrees  of  Berlin  and 
of  Milan  that  fire  and  sword  were  carried  through  Europe- 
Some  idea  may  be  formed  of  the  restless  activity  of 
Napoleon  by  the  fact  that  during  the  first  three  months  of 
1807,  while  in  Poland,  he  wrote  1,715  letters  or  despatches 
(at  least  that  number  has  been  collected  and  published). 
At  the  same  period,  if  we  are  to  believe  a  bulletin,  his 
Majesty  was  in  the  habit  of  riding  forty  leagues  a  day ! 
He  was  constantly  calling  upon  his  marshals  for  fuller 
details,  and  he  wrote  to  his  librarian  in  Paris  to  forward 
him  two  or  three  volumes  a  day. 

Napoleon  opened  the  new  year  with  a  very  friendly 
letter  to  his  "  very  great  and  faithful  friend,"  the  Sultan 
Selim,  whose  noble  resolutions  had  filled  his  heart  with 
joy.  After  giving  a  glowing  account  of  his  victories  of  the 
Russians,  his  Majesty  added — 

"  The  moment  has  arrived  for  the  Ottoman  Empire  to 
resume  its  ancient  splendour.     There  is  not  an  instant  to 


282     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

be  lost.  Your  frontiers  are  invaded.  Call  upon  your 
faithful  subjects  to  defend  what  is  most  dear  to  them.  The 
Russians  wish  to  destroy  your  cities,  your  mosques,  and 
the  very  name  of  Mussulman.  ...  I  pray  God  to  bless 
your  arms.  .  .  . 

"  Your  very  dear  and  perfect  friend, 

"  Napoleon. 

"Written  at  our  Imperial  Castle  of  Warsaw,  ist  January, 
1807." 

As  early  as  June,  1806,  and  while  negotiating  a  treaty 
of  peace  with  Russia,  Napoleon  had  pressed  the  Sultan 
to  replace  the  Hospodars  of  Wallachia  and  Moldavia  on 
his  own  authority.  This  would  be  equivalent  to  a  declara- 
tion of  war,  as  according  to  treaty  the  Hospodars  were 
appointed  in  concert  with  the  Czar.  Sebastiani  was  sent 
to  Constantinople  to  bring  about  this  matter,  and  what 
between  promises  and  threats  the  feeble-minded  Selim  was 
induced  to  dismiss  the  two  Hospodars,  and  to  close  the 
Bosphorus  to  Russian  vessels.  England  remonstrated,  and 
a  Russian  army,  under  General  Michelson,  at  once  entered 
the  Principalities.  Napoleon  was  delighted  with  the  suc- 
cess of  his  scheme.  On  the  nth  November  he  wrote  to 
Sehm,  saying — "  Recover  confidence.  The  fates  have 
promised  the  duration  of  your  empire.  I  have  a  mission 
to  save  it.  .  .  ."  And  in  December,  Sebastiani  was  ordered 
to  sign  a  treaty  with  Turkey,  guaranteeing  the  integrity 
of  Moldavia,  Wallachia  and  Servia,  and  binding  France 
not  to  make  peace  except  in  concert  with  the  Porte.  This 
was  the  state  of  affairs  at  the  beginning  of  1807. 

To  THE  KING  OF  HOLLAND. 

"Warsaw,  2nd  January,  1807. 
"...  I    think   that   you    have    done   wrong   to  create 
marshals,  which  has  the  inconvenience  of  costing  money, 
and  of  giving  men  who  have  done  little  great  pretensions. 


THE    COUNTESS   OF   WALEWSKA,  283 

Do  you  think  that  a  French  General  of  Division  would  be 
commanded  by  a  Dutch  marshal  ?  You  ape  the  organisa- 
tion of  France,  whereas  circumstances  are  very  different- 
Begin  by  establishing  the  conscription.      «  NAPOLEON  " 

To  THE  EMPRESS,  AT  Mayence. 

"Warsaw,  -ind  Jannary,  1807. 
"  I  have  received  your  letter,  my  friend.  Your  grief 
affects  me,  but  you  must  submit  to  events.  The  distance 
between  Warsaw  and  Mayence  is  too  great.  Events  must 
allow  me  to  go  to  Berlin  before  I  can  write  to  you  to  join 
me  there.  However,  the  beaten  enemy  is  retreating ;  but 
I  have  a  great  many  affairs  to  settle  here.  I  wish  you 
would  return  to  Paris,  where  your  presence  is  necessary. 
.  .  .  My  health  is  good  ;  the  weather  is  bad.  I  love  you 
with  my  heart.  «  Napoleon." 

These  short  and  tender  epistles  to  Josephine  were 
written  to  allay  her  jealousy.  She  was  well  aware  of  what 
was  going  on  at  Warsaw,  and  that  her  faithless  lord  had 
formed  a  liaison  with  the  young  and  lovely  Countess  of 
Walewska,  who  had  been  selected  by  Murat  for  his 
imperial  brother-in-law.  The  fruit  of  this  liaison  was  the 
Count  Alexander  Florian  Joseph  Colonna  Walewska,  who 
filled  several  high  posts  under  the  second  empire,  and 
who  succeeded  the  Due  de  Morny,  the  illegitimate  son  of 
the  mother  of  Napoleon  III.,  as  President  of  the  Corps 
Ldgislatif. 

To  MARSHAL  BERTHIER. 

"Warsaw,  \th  January,  1807. 

"  My  Cousin, — I  beg  that  you  will  spare  the  states  of 
Mecklenberg  Strelitz.  There  is  a  grandmother  of  the 
Princesse  Eugene  there.  She  is  an  old  woman  ;  see  if 
she  wants  anything,  and  inform  her  that  you  have  been 
ordered  to  treat  her  with  particular  attention. 

"  Napoleon." 


284  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  M.  RISSAULT,  Librarian. 

"Warsaw,  '^^th  January,  1807. 
"  The  Emperor  complains  that  he  receives  nothing  new 
from  Paris.     It  would  be  easy  for  you  to  forward  two  or 
three  volumes   every  day  by  the  courier  which  leaves  at 
8  A.M.  .  .  . 

"  Meneval,  by  order  of  the  Emperor." 

To  THE  EMPRESS,  AT  Mayence. 

"  Warsaw,  Zth  January,  1807. 
"  My  Good  Friend, — I  have  received  your  letter  of 
the  27th,  as  well  as  those  of  M.  Napoleon  and  of  Hortense. 
I  begged  you  to  go  back  to  Paris.  The  weather  is  too 
bad,  and  the  roads  dangerous  and  detestable,  and  the 
distance  too  great  to  permit  of  you  coming  here.  .  .  . 
Mayence  is  too  dull.  Paris  claims  you  ;  go  there,  this  is 
my  wish.  I  am  more  annoyed  than  you  are.  I  should 
like  to  share  the  long  nights  of  this  season  with  you.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  8th  January  was  issued  the  forty-ninth  bulletin 
which  announced  the  capitulation  of  Breslau,  and  that 
M.  de  Zastrow  "  the  wise  and  moderate  man  who  signed 
the  armistice  which  the  King  of  Prussia  had  refused  to 
sign,"  had  been  named  Foreign  Minister.  The  Grand  Army 
was  then  told  that  the  Russian  soldiers  were  highly  irritated 
with  the  Czar  and  with  their  generals,  and  that  Baron  de 
Vincent  had  arrived  with  letters  from  the  Emperor  of 
Austria. 

To  M.  DE  CHAMPAGNY. 

"Warsaw,  wth  January,  1807. 
"  You  must  allow  the  Place  de  la  Concorde  to  retain 
its  present  name.     Concorde,  this  is  what  renders  France 
invincible. 

"  Napoleon." 


THE   DUTCH    TRADE.  285 

To  M.  CAMBACfiRES. 

"Warsaw,  i^th  January,  1807. 
"  I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  3  ist  December.    The 
affair  of  Hesse  Cassel  is  terminated.     It  appears  that  it 
was  the  soldiery  which  wished  to  move.     «  Napoleon  " 

In  fact  some  10,000  Hessians  refused  for  a  time  to  lay 
down  their  arms. 

On  the  same  day  his  Majesty  wrote  to  the  King  of 
Holland  complaining  that  according  to  reports  from 
London  trade  "with  Holland  was  just  as  brisk  as  before 
the  decree  of  Berlin.     Brother  Louis  was  to  see  to  this. 

The  ififtieth  bulletin,  after  referring  to  the  flight  of  the 
King  of  Prussia  to  Memel  and  to  other  matters,  went  on  to 
say  on  the  subject  of  Turkish  affairs — "  Austria  and  France 
are  equally  interested  in  not  seeing  Moldavia,  Wallachia, 
Servia,  Greece,  Roumelia,  and  Anatolia  become  the  play- 
things of  Muscovite  ambition.  The  interest  of  England 
in  this  matter  is  not  less  evident  than  that  of  Austria  and 
France ;  but  will  she  recognise  this  }  Will  she  impose 
silence  on  the  hatred  which  governs  her  cabinet  .'  Will 
she  listen  to  the  lessons  of  policy  and  experience  }  If  she 
closes  her  eyes  to  the  future,  if  she  listens  only  to  her 
jealousy  of  France  she  will  perhaps  declare  war  against 
the  Porte ;  she  will  become  the  auxiliary  of  the  insatiable 
ambition  of  the  Russians.  .  .  ." 

To  THE  EMPRESS. 

'"Warsaw,  i6th  January,  1807. 
"  My  good  Friend, — I  have  received  your  letter  of  the 
5th ;  what  you  say  of  your  grief  gives  me  pain.  Why 
these  tears,  this  chagrin  .'  I  shall  soon  see  you  ;  do  not 
doubt  my  sentiments ;  and  if  you  wish  to  be  still  dearer 
to  me  exhibit  greater  strength  of  mind.  I  feel  humiliated 
at  the  idea  that  my  wife  can  doubt  my  destinies.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 


286     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

On  the  17th  Napoleon  wrote  a  flattering  letter  to  the 
Shah  announcing  his  successes  in  Poland,  and  calling  upon 
him  to  attack  the  common  enemy  with  vigour  in  Georgia. 

"  Fortune,"  he  said,  "  has  placed  a  bandage  over  the  eyes 
of  our  enemy.  Already  sorely  pressed  in  the  east  and 
the  west  he  has  declared  war  against  the  Ottoman  Porte. 
•  No  doubt  an  invisible  power,  the  same  which  caused  me 
to  conquer,  and  which  watches  over  your  glory,  wished  to 
drag  our  enemies  to  their  destruction  in  blindly  arming 
them  against  the  forces  of  three  powerful  empires.  Let  us 
all  three  join  together  and  form  an  eternal  alliance.  .   .  . 

"  Napoleon. 

"  Given  at  our  Imperial  Palace  of  Warsaw,  17th  January 
1807,  and  third  year  of  my  reign." 

To  THE  EMPRESS. 

"Warsaw,  iZth  January,  1807. 
"  I  fear  that  you  are  greatly  grieved  at  our  separation, 
which  must  last  some  weeks  longer,  and  by  your  return  to 
Paris.  I  exact  greater  strength  of  mind  on  your  part.  I 
am  told  that  you  are  always  crying.  Fie  !  how  naughty 
that  is.  Be  worthy  of  me  and  show  more  courage.  Cut 
a  suitable  figure  in  Paris,  and  above  all  be  contented.  My 
health  is  good,  and  I  greatly  love  you  ;  but  if  you  weep 
constantly  I  shall  believe  you  devoid  of  courage  ;  I  do  not 
love  cowards  ;  an  Empress  should  have  a  brave  heart. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  M.  FOTJCH^. 

"Warsaw,  l?ith  January,  1807. 

"  You  mention  a  certain  Mademoiselle  Grouthe,  who  says 

that  she  is  the  daughter  of  Louis  XVL     I  suppose  that 

you  have  taken  steps  to  put  an  end  to  this  farce.     When 

half  France  believed    that    Cagliostro   had  been  brought 


TERRIBLE    MORTALITY.  287 

up  in  the  great  Pyramid  at  Cairo,  what  may  not  be 
expected  from  a  matter  capable  of  furnishing  a  pretext 
to  malevolent  persons  ?  .  .  .  i<  Napoleon  " 

It  was  not  until  the  20th  January  that  Napoleon  replied 
to  the  letter  of  the  Emperor  of  Austria  of  the  21st 
December. 

Austria,  as  Russia  and  as  Prussia  had  done  on  previous 
occasions,  had  wished  to  mediate,  but  she  was  informed 
that  the  peace  and  harmony  which  she  desired  to  see 
reigning  in  Europe  had  been  rendered  impossible  by  what 
had  just  taken  place  at  Constantinople. 

In  the  fifty- third  bulletin  the  Grand  Army  was  informed 
that  the  English,  seeing  that  Kalmucs  and  Tartars  could 
not  stand  French  bayonets,  had  called  to  their  aid 
dysentry,  the  plague,  and  other  epidemics,  and  had  spread 
reports  as  to  the  ravages  made  by  sickness  in  the  ranks  of 
the  army,  and  in  the  manufacturing  districts.  These 
wicked  reports  were  indignantly  contradicted. 

According  to  the  French  returns  it  was  afterwards 
shown  that  during  this  short  campaign  no  less  than  420,000 
men  were  received  into  hospital,  210,000  fever  patients, 
and  100,000  wounded  men,  and  that  32,000  men  died. 
These  are  official  figures  quoted  by  General  Dumas, 
vol.  xi.  486. 

To  THE  EMPRESS. 

"Warsaw,  ■2ird  January,  1807. 
"  I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  isth.  It  is  impossible 
for  me  to  allow  women  such  a  journey — bad  roads,  dan- 
gerous, and  muddy.  Return  to  Paris  and  be  gay ; 
perhaps  I  shall  soon  be  there.  I  laughed  at  what  you  said 
about  taking  a  husband  in  order  to  be  with  him.  I  thought 
in  my  ignorance  that  the  wife  was  made  for  the  husband, 
the  husband  for  the  country,  his  family,  and  glory  ;  forgive 
my  error,  one  has  always  something  to  learn  from  you 
pretty  women "  NAPOLEON." 


2  88  THE    CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  THE  KING  OF  SAXONY. 

"  Warsaw,  i\th  January,  1 807. 
"  Sir,  my  Brother, — I  congratulate  myself  on  the 
peace  which  unites  us,  and  which  time  will  only  strengthen. 
Our  aUies  are  the  same,  the  interests  of  your  majesty 
have  become  mine,  and  our  union  has  been  still  more 
consolidated  by  those  sentiments  of  confidence,  attach- 
ment, and  esteem  with  which  I  have  the  honour  to 
be,  &c.,  &c. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  THE  KING  of  NAPLES. 

"Warsaw,  2Zth  January,  1807. 
"  Sir,  my  Brother, — I  could  not  receive  the  wishes  of 
your  Majesty  for  my  happiness  without  a  lively  emotion. 
Your  destiny,  my  successes  have  placed  vast  countries 
between  us.  To  the  south  you  touch  the  Mediterranean, 
I  touch  the  Baltic  ;  but  by  the  harmony  of  our  plans  we 
tend  towards  the  same  goal.  Look  after  your  coasts ; 
drive  off  the  English  and  their  commerce.  Their  exclusion 
will  restore  peace  to  your  States.  Your  kingdom  is  rich, 
populous ;  with  the  aid  of  God  it  will  be  happy  and 
powerful.  Receive  my  most  sincere  wishes  for  the  pros- 
perity of  your  reign,  and  reckon  always  on  my  fraternal 
affection.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  marshal  berth ier. 

"  Warsaw,  28^/2  January,  1807. 
"  My  Cousin, — Write   to   my  minister  at  Dresden   so 
that  the  Saxon  contingent  may  arrive  as  soon  as  possible 
at  Glogau. 

"  Napoleon." 

In  a  message  to   the   Senate  dated   Imperial  camp  of 
Warsaw,  29th  January,   1807,  the   Emperor  said  among 


PEACE    AND    WAR.  289 

other  things — "  We  have  ordered  our  Minister  of  Foreign 
Affairs  to  lay  before  you  a  report  on  the  danger  of  the 
Ottoman  Porte.  A  witness  from  the  first  days  of  our 
youth  of  all  the  ills  produced  by  war,  our  happiness,  our 
glory,  our  ambition  has  been  centred  in  the  conquests  and 
labours  of  peace.  But  the  force  of  circumstances  in 
which  we  find  ourself  deserves  our  chief  care."  And 
then  followed  an  apology  for  the  war  with  Russia  which 
was  creating  the  greatest  uneasiness  through  the  country. 

To  M.  LEBRUN. 

"Warsaw,  7S)th  January,  1807. 

"  I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  17th,  and  thank  you 
for  all  you  say.  I  am  aware  of  your  attachment,  which  I 
greatly  prize.  What  are  you  doing  in  Paris  }  I  have 
not  heard  that  you  gave  a  little  ball  during  the  Carnival. 

"  Napoleon.  " 


All  the  great  officers  of  the  state  were  supposed  to 
spend  money  in  entertaining  so  as*  to  keep  Paris  gay. 

On  the  same  day  Napoleon  in  a  letter  to  Talleyrand  said 
that  he  felt  inclined  to  place  25,000  men  on  the  Danube, 
and  that  if  the  Porte  wished  it  he  would  send  half-a-dozen 
line  of  battle  ships  to  cruise  with  the  Turkish  fleet  in  the 
Black  Sea.  All  this  was  to  be  kept  very  secret,  and  the 
proposals  communicated  to  the  Sultan  alone. 

Selim  declined  the  offer,  for  his  suspicions  had  been 
aroused  by  the  high  handed  conduct  of  Caesar  Berthier, 
the  Governor  of  the  Ionian  Isles,  who  had  summoned 
some  Turkish  places  on  the  Adriatic  coast  to  open  their 
o-ates  under  a  threat  of  bombardment.  This  reminded 
the  Turks  of  what  the  French  had  done  in  Egypt,  and 
induced  them  to  decline  the  proposed  assistance.  Better 
to  fight  the  Russians  alone  than  to  call  in  such  dangerous 
friends. 


VOL.  II.  ^ 


290  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  THE  KING  OF  NAPLES. 

"  Warsaw,  ii^th  January,  1807. 
"  Turkey  has   declared  war  against  Russia.     A  Tartar 
who  left  Constantinople  on  the  2nd  brings  me  excellent 
news  from  that  country. 

"  A  million  has  been  forwarded  to  you  from  Turin. 
My  health  never  was  better,  and  the  consequence  is  that 
I  have  become  more  galant  than  formerly. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  M.  CAMBACERES. 

"  SCHLITT,  5M  February,  1807. 
"  My  Cousin, — I  am  in  pursuit  of  the  Russian  army. 
I  have  driven   it  from  all  its  positions,  and  am  going  to 
force  it  back  behind  the  Niemen.     It  is  splendid  weather, 
and  everything  is  going  on  well.  «  NAPOLEON." 

To  M.  DE  TALLEYRAND. 

"  Arensdorf,  (>th  February,  1807. 
Our  affairs  here  could  not  be  going  on  better.  A  corps 
of  20,000  men  has  beep  cut  off.  The  Russian  army  is 
flying  it  knows  not  where,  in  the  greatest  disorder;  artillery 
baggage,  magazines  are  falling  into  our  hands.  My  only 
fear  is  lest  the  corps  cut  off  should  be  Prussian  corps. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  M.  DE  TALLEYRAND. 

"Eylau,  (jth  February,  1807 
"  It  is  2  A.M.    I  am  tired.    I  can  write  only  a  few  words. 
Marshal  Duroc  will  inform  you  that   I   gained  a  victory 
yesterday  over  the  Russian  army. 

"  As  for  the  communication  made  by  the  King  of  Prussia, 
I  think  that  you  may  reply  to  this  effect :  that  I  accept  the 
overtures  made  with  a  view  of  bringing  the  war  to  a  close, 
and  that  I  will  send  plenipotentiaries  as  soon  as  Russia 
or  Prussia  have  made  theirs,  to  Memel  or  elsewhere. 

"  Napoleon." 


BATTLE  OF  EYLAU.  29 1 

To  THE  EMPRESS. 

"Eylau,  t^th  February,  1807.  3  A.M. 
"  My  Friend, — There  was  a  great  battle  yesterday  ;  I 
gained  the  victory,  but  we  have  lost  a  great  many  men. 
The  loss  of  the  enemy,  which  is  still  more  considerable, 
does  not  console  me.  I  write  these  few  lines  to  you 
myself,  although  I  am  very  tired,  to  tell  you  that  I  am 
well  and  that  I  love  you. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  M.  CAMBACiRES. 

"  Eylau,  ()th  February,  1807. 

"  My    Cousin, — The  weather   has  become   severe.      I 

fought  a  battle  yesterday  and   gained  the  victory,  but  I 

lost   a   great   many   men.      However,  you  will  find   the 

details  in  the  bulletin,  which  is  exact. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  THE  EMPRESS. 

"Eylau,  9M  February,  1807.    5  p.m. 
"  I  send  you  a  line,  my  friend,  lest  you  should  be  uneasy. 
The  enemy  lost  the  battle,  40  guns,  12  standards,  12,000 
prisoners;  he  suffered  horridly.     I  have  lost   1,600  killed 
and  between  3,000  and  4,000  wounded.  .  .  . 

"Napoleon."  ' 

Similar  letters  were  written  in  various  directions,  and 
the  Russian  loss  was  set  down  at  30,000  men.  In  the 
bulletin  Napoleon  stated  his  loss  to  have  been  1,900 
killed,  5,700  wounded  ;  that  of  the  Russians  from  12,000 
to  15,000  prisoners,  as  many  men  placed  hors  de  combat^ 
18  colours,  and  45  guns;  7,000  dead  Russians  were 
counted  lying  on  the  field  of  battle.  The  enemy,  it  was 
said,  had  been  driven  back  a  hundred  leagues  from  the 

Vistula. 

u  2 


292  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  THE  EMPRESS. 

"  Eylau,  \ith  February,  1807.  3  a.m. 
"  I  write  you  a  line,  my  dear  friend  ;  you  must  have 
been  very  anxious.  I  beat  the  enemy  on  a  memorable 
day,  but  it  cost  me  the  lives  of  many  gallant  fellows.  In 
consequence  of  the  bad  weather  I  shall  go  into  canton- 
ments. 

"  I  beg  of  you  not  to  be  disconsolate  ;  all  this  will  soon 
be  finished,  and  the  happiness  of  seeing  you  will  make  me 
promptly  forget  my  fatigues.  Besides,  I  have  never  felt 
better.  .  .  .  Adieu,  my  friend  ;  a  thousand  kisses. 

"  Napoleon." 

note  in  the  emperor's  handwriting. 

"Eylau,  \2th  February,  1807. 
"  It  has  been  found  in  the  army  that  the  bulletin  of  the 
battle  of  Eylau  exaggerated  our  losses,  and  that  it  was 
not  sufficiently  advantageous  for  our  army."  The  Emperor 
said  upon  this  occasion  —  "A  father  who  loses  his 
children  finds  no  charm  in  victory.  When  the  heart  speaks 
even  glory  has  no  illusions," 

To  THE  KING  OF  PRUSSIA. 

"Eylau,  I'^th  February,  1807. 
"  Sir,  my  Brother, — I  send  you  my  aide-de-camp, 
General  Bertrand,  who  possesses  my  entire  confidence.  He 
has  things  to  say  to  you  which  I  hope  will  prove  agree- 
able. Believe  me  that  this  will  be  the  happiest  moment 
of  my  life  ;  I  flatter  myself  that  it  will  be  the  commence- 
ment of  a  durable  friendship  between  us. ' 

"  Napoleon." 

The  instructions  given  to  General  Bertrand  were  to  this 
gffect : — That  the  Emperor  was  prepared  to  sign  peace 
and  to  restore  the  states  of  the  king  up  to  the  Elbe ;  that 
his  Majesty  was  not   well  pleased  with  Russia  and  the 


RUSSIAN    ACCOUNT   OF  EYLAU.  293 

little  hurry  she  appeared  to  be  in  to  deliver  Prussia  from 
the  situation  in  which  she  had  been  placed. 

Bertrand  was  then  to  try  and  persuade  M.  de  Zastrow 
that  it  would  be  much  more  advantageous  for  the  King  of 
Prussia  to  owe  his  re-establishment  to  France  than  to 
Russia,  as  in  the  latter  case  he  would  become  the  vassal 
of  the  Czar.  As  for  Poland,  the  General  was  to  say  that 
since  Napoleon  had.  become  acquainted  with  that  country 
he  attached  no  importance  to  it.  He  was  also  to  declare 
that  the  Prussian  nation  was  necessary  to  Europe. 

To  THE  EMPRESS. 

"Eylau,  i\th  February,  1807. 

"My  Friend, — I  am  still  at  Eylau.  The  country  is 
covered  with  dead  and  wounded.  This  is  not  the  finest 
part  of  war  ;  one  suffers  and  the  mind  is  oppressed  at 
the  sight  of  so  many  victims.  I  am  well.  I  have  accom- 
plished what  I  wished,  to  have  repulsed  the  enemy  and 
defeated  his  plans. 

You  must  feel  anxious,  and  this  idea  afflicts  me.  How- 
ever, make  your  mind  easy,  my  friend  and  be  gay.  Tell 
Caroline  and  Pauline  that  the  grand  duke  (Murat)  and  the 

prince  (Borghese)  are  well. 

"  Napoleon." 

In  the  fifty-ninth  bulletin  it  is  stated  that—"  The  enemy 
has  published  the  subjoined  note  :— '  On  the  8th  there  was 
a  sanguinary  battle  at  Eylau.  Twice  the  French  became 
masters  of  the  town,  but  in  the  end  the  Prince  Bagratian 
arrived  with  a  strong  column  and  carried  it  at  the  point  of 
the  bayonet.  General  Lestocg  took  the  enemy  in  flank 
and  decided  the  victory  in  favour  of  the  Russians.  The 
Russians  lost  20,000  men  killed  and  wounded.  The 
French  lost  30,000  ;  seven  eagles  have  been  captured  and 
taken  to  Koenigsberg.'  All  this  is  false.  The  enemy 
attacked  the  town  and  was  constantly  repulsed.  He 
acknowledges   having   lost    20,000   men;    he   suffered  far 


2  94     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

more  severely.  The  capture  of  nine  {sic)  eagles  is  as  false 
as  the  capture  of  the  town.   .  .  ." 

The  battle  of  Eylau  was  remarkable  as  the  beginning 
of  the  demi-successes  of  Napoleon.  It  was  a  long  and 
sanguinary  struggle,  which  lasted  from  early  dawn  far  into 
the  night,  and  was  waged  into  varied  success.  Eylau  was 
several  times  taken  and  retaken,  and  if  some  of  the 
Russian  corps  suffered  heavily  that  of  Augereau  was  so 
terribly  cut  up  that  after  the  battle  its  remains  were  in- 
corporated with  other  corps,  while  the  marshal  himself, 
carried  wounded  from  the  field,  repaired  to  Paris. 

"  The  night,"  as  Lanfrey  says,  "  had  not  shadows  suffi- 
ciently thick  to  veil  the  horrors  of  that  field  of  carnagei 
where  nearly  40,000  men  were  lying  dead,  dying,  or 
wounded.  '  What  a  massacre,  and  without  any  result !  ' 
exclaimed  Ney  the  next  morning." 

Fortunately  for  Napoleon  the  Russians  fell  back  for  a 
few  miles  and  left  him  in  possession  of  the  battle-field.  He 
was  thus  able  to  claim  a  victory.  The  French,  however, 
were  unable  to  move.  Though  close  to  Kcenigsberg,  and 
within  sight  of  its  steeples,  they  remained  at  Eylau  for 
nine  days  burying,  the  dead  and  trying  to  open  up 
negotiations  for  peace.  Overtures  addressed  to  General 
Beningsen  met  with  the  reply  that  his  master  had  sent 
him  to  fight  and  not  to  negotiate ;  and  a  letter  to  the 
King  of  Prussia  also  met  with  an  unfavourable  reply. 
Upon  this  Napoleon  retired  sixty  miles  and  went  into 
winter  quarters.  Lanfrey  thinks  that  if  Napoleon  had 
had  to  do  with  Wellington  he  would  never  have  been 
allowed  to  remain  master  of  the  field.  Beningsen,  how- 
ever, was  not  in  the  least  aware  of  the  loss  he  had 
inflicted  on  the  army,  and  he  was  afraid  of  the 
French  being  strongly  reinforced.  Napoleon  was  in  a 
most  critical  position.  During  the  time  he  remained 
at  Eylau  his  cavalry  had  suffered  severely,  especi- 
ally at  the  hands  of  the  Cossacks,  and  matters  .were 
looking   gloomy  indeed.      It    was    at   this   juncture  that 


FEARFUL    LOSSES.  295 

he  turned  towards  Austria,  tried  first  persuation  and 
then  threats.  Austria  offered  to  mediate,  and  Napoleon 
was  greatly  alarmed  lest  this  intervention  should  end  in 
war,  and  lest  150,000  Austrian  mediators  should  appear 
on  the  Elbe. 

Hence  his  anxiety  to  negotiate,  but  while  negotiating 
he  displayed  his  usual  activity,  reorganising  and  rein- 
spiriting  his  army,  and  pushing  on  the  sieges  of  Dantzic 
and  the  other  places  which  still  held  feebly  out. 

At  home  the  greatest  consternation  reigned,  especially 
when  another  levy  of  80,000  men  (the  third  since  the  war 
began)  was  demanded,  and  when  the  terrible  losses  sus- 
tained by  the  army  became  known.  For  months  Napoleon 
never  ceased  repeating  in  private  letters  and  in  ofhcial 
documents  that  his  losses  had  been  trifling,  but  it  appears 
tolerably  certain,  according  to  Jominiand  to  Sir  R.  Wilson, 
that  30,000  Frenchmen  were  put  hors  di  combat  aX  Eylau 
alone. 

The  Due  de  Fezeusac,  too,  in  his  Memoirs,  says  that  the 
Russians  captured  200  waggons  laden  with  wounded  men, 
and  that  the  neighbouring  villages  were  crowded  with  sick. 

To  M.  FOUCHE. 

"LlEBSTADT,  20th  February,  1807. 

"  I  see  with  pleasure  that  the  conscription  is  going  on 

well.     You  have  seen  that  we  had  a  very  sanguinary  affair 

at  Eylau  on  the  8th ;  my  right  had  another  at  Ostralenka 

on  the  i6th;  in  both  the  Russians  were  beaten. 

"  I   do  not  attach  any  importance  to  Kosciusco  ;  he  is 

not  esteemed  in  the  country  as  he  believes  ;  besides,  his 

conduct  proves  that  he  is  only  a  fool.  .  .  . 

"Napoleon." 

to  the  king  of  holland. 

"  OSTERODE,  25/A  February,  1807. 
I  am  informed  that  the  commerce  between  England 
and  Holland  was  never  more  brisk  than  since  the  Berlin 


296     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

decree,  and  the  communications  with  England  more  rapid 
and  more  numerous. 

"You  must  reinforce  your  corps  at  Hamburg  because  I 
have  been  forced  to  withdraw  3,000,  and  to  send  them  to 

join  IVIarshal  Mortier. 

"  Napoleon." 


On  the  26th  Napoleon  wrote  to  the  King  of  Prussia 
expressing  his  willingness  to  make  peace  with  him  and 
with  the  Russians  if  they  would  only  renounce  their 
designs  upon  Turkey  ;  he  was  ready  to  make  peace  even 
with  England.  This  letter  terminated  thus :  "  I  should 
look  upon  myself  with  horror  were  I  to  be  the  cause  of  the 
effusion  of  so  much  blood ;  but  if  England  deems  this 
effusion  of  blood  necessary  for  her  plans  and  her  monopoly 
what  can  I  do  .''  " 

To  M.  FOUCHE. 

"  OSTERODE,  28//^  February,  1807. 
"  Spread  the  following  reports  in  an  official  manner. 
They  are,  however,  true.  Spread  them  first  in  the  salons 
and  then  put  them  in  the  papers — that  the  Russian  army 
is  greatly  weakened,  that  some  regiments  are  reduced  to 
150  men  .  .  .  that  the  Russian  army  demands  peace,  and 
accuses  some  great  lords  of  having  been  purchased  by 
England  and  of  selling  Russian  blood  for  British  gold  ; 
that  after  Eylau  the  Russian  generals  sent  Prince  Bagratian 
to  St.  Petersburg  to  say  that  the  army  had  been  almost 
entirely  destroyed,  and  that  it  would  be  impossible  to 
support  another  campaign. 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  3rd  March  Napoleon  wrote  a  long  letter  to 
Talleyrand,  in  which  he  expressed  his  inability  to  under- 
stand what  Austria  required.  He  had  read  and  re-read 
the  last  despatch  of  M.  de  Stadion  without  being  able  to 
come  to  any  conclusion. 


THE  PORTE  DECLINES  FRENCH  TROOPS.    297 

"  Does  she  wish,"  he  wrote,  "  to  guarantee  the  integrity 
of  Turkey  ?  I  consent.  Does  she  wish  to  conclude  a 
treaty  by  which,  should  Russia  acquire  an  increase  of 
territory  in  Turkey,  the  two  powers  should  make  common 
cause  to  obtain  an  equivalent .-'  That  might  be  arranged." 
[Poor  Sultan  Sehm  !] 

Napoleon  then  added — "  If  affairs  with  Prussia  do  not 
get  settled,  and  if  the  House  of  Austria  will  join  with  us, 
we  might  give  it  a  portion  of  Silesia.  By  this  means  it 
would  regain  what  the  Prussian  monarchy  took  from 
it  formerly.    ..." 


To  M.  DE  TALLEYRAND. 

"  OsTERODE,  March  iitk,  1807. 
"  Since  the  Porte  refuses  to  have  troops  at  Constanti- 
nople or  in  Bosnia,  you  can  assure  the  ambassador  that 
it  shall  no  longer  be  a  question  of  this.  As  for  the  officers 
asked  for,  it  will  be  necessary  to  know  the  number  re- 
quired, their  rank,  and  branch.  ...  I  sent  you  a  letter 
yesterday  for  Marshal  Massena,  who  I  suppose  has  joined 

his  army  corps. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  THE  EMPRESS. 

"OSTE.KO'D^,,  March  nth,  iZoy. 
"  My  Friend, — I  am  sorry  to  see  that  you  are  ill ;  take 
courage.  My  health  is  good,  and  my  affairs  are  doing 
well.  ...  A  great  many  foolish  things  will  be  said  about 
the  battle  of  Eylau.  The  bulletin  tells  everything;  the 
losses  were  rather  exaggerated  than  lessened. 

"  Ever  yours, 

"  Napoleon." 


His  Majesty  now  declared  that  he  had  lost  at  Eylau 
only  1,500  killed  and  3,000  wounded. 


298  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  THE  KING  OF  NAPLES. 

"OSTERODE,  nth  March,  1807. 
"  I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  20th.  The  Enghsh 
squadron  is  before  Constantinople.  I  have  received  news 
up  to  the  loth  February,  which  shows  that  the  English 
ambassador  has  left  Constantinople.  We  shall  now  see 
how  all  this  will  end.  «  Napoleon  " 

In  a  letter  to  General  Duroc  of  the  same  date  the 
Emperor  said — "  I  am  pleased  with  the  Spanish  ambas- 
sador at  Constantinople,  who  is  highly  praised  by 
Sebastiani.  .  .  ." 

And  in  a  letter  to  War  Minister  Clarke,  at  Berlin,  the 
Emperor  bitterly  complained  of  a  report  made  by  Colonel 
Aubert  on  the  battle  of  Eylau.  He  declared  that  the 
battle  was  won  at  4  P.M.,  and  that  as  for  i  S,000  French- 
men having  taken  to  their  heels,  that  was  a  horrid  calumny. 
Some  stragglers  and  a  military  train  alone  had  fled  on  a 
cry  being  raised  that  the  Cossacks  were  coming.  "  I 
exaggerated  my  losses  in  my  bulletin,"  added  his  Majesty. 
''  I  am  now  told  that  there  were  only  from  4,000  to  4,500 
men  wounded."  And — "All  this  is  a  tissue  of  lies.  I 
was  not  for  a  moment  on  foot." 

There  is  abundant  proof  to  show  that  Augereau's  corps, 
16,000  strong,  outnumbered  and  blinded  by  snow,  was 
utterly  routed,  pursued  by  the  Russian  cavalry,  and,  virtu- 
ally speaking,  annihilated.  As  for  the  statement  made 
that  the  Emperor  was  on  foot  during  a  portion  of  the 
battle,  it  is  borne  out  by  General  Bertrand,  who,  in  his 
account  of  Eylau,  says — "  I  was  never  so  much  struck 
with  anything  in  my  life  as  by  the  Emperor  at  Eylau  ; 
when  alone  with  some  officers  of  his  staff  he  was  almost 
trodden  under  foot  by  a  Russian  column  from  4,000  to 
5,000  strong.  The  Emperor  was  on  foot.  Berthier  called 
for  his  horses,  but  the  Emperor  refused  to  mount,  and 
ordered  his  guard  to  advance." 


GENERAL    DE   ST.    PRIEST,  299 

On  the  1 2th  the  Emperor  wrote  a  letter  to  Cambac^r^s, 
in  which  he  said — "  I  never  intended  to  enter  Koenigsberg," 
and  expressing  his  displeasure  that  the  Moniteur  should 
have  announced  this  to  be  his  intention. 

Sir  Robert  Wilson,  in  his  account  of  the  campaign,  says 
that  when  Napoleon  began  the  battle  of  Eylau  he  never 
doubted  that  he  would  be  in  Koenigsberg  the  next  day, 
and  that  Berthier  wrote  to  Josephine  on  the  same  day, 
saying — "  The  Russians  have  fled  to  Gumbinnen  ;  to- 
morrow Koenigsberg  will  receive  the  Emperor."  The  fact 
is  that  the  Russians  struck  for  Dantzic  and  the  French 
for  Koenigsberg,  and  that  both  were  foiled,  at  least  for 
the  moment. 

To  M.  FOUCHE. 

"OSTERODE,  \<)th  March,  1807. 
"  Give  orders   everywhere  for  M.  de   St.  Priest   to  be 
arrested.  «  Napoleon." 

M.  de  St.  Priest  escaped  to  Russia,  and  lived  far  into 
the  reign  of  Napoleon  III.  He  is  chiefly  celebrated  as 
the  author  of  a  rather  neat  inscription  at  Coblentz  (vide 
Vapereau,  p.  1550;  and  Guide-book  to  the  Banks  of  the 
Rhine). 

" '  M.  de  Saint-Priest  was  at  the  battle  of  Austerlitz ;  received  a 
gunshot  wound  at  Lutzen  ;  and  had  just  been  named  Colonel  (in  the 
Russian  army)  when,  in  18 14,  he  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  French, 
and  was  near  being  shot  at  Sedan.' 

"  The  Guide,  under  the  head  of  Coblentz,  says  : — 

"'Opposite  the  church  of  St.  Castor,  a  fountain — ugly  enough — 
attracts  the  attention  of  visitors  by  the  two  following  inscriptions  : — 

"'Annde  1812 
" '  Memorable  par  la  Campagne 
"  '  contre  les  Russes, 
"'  sous  le  Pr^fectorat  de  Jules  Doazan. 


"  '  Vu  et  approuvd  par  nous, 

"  '  Commandant  Russe  de  la  ville  de  Coblentz, 

'"Le  IS  Janvier,  1814. 


300     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

" '  This  Russian  commander  was  no  otlier  than  the  French  Genera] 
de  Saint-Priest,  who — from  modesty,  no  doubt-^dared  not  engrave 
his  name  on  the  fountain. — (Adolphe  Joanne — Les  bords  dii  Rhin 
Illustres.)' " 

On  the  same  day  Napoleon  wrote  a  long  letter  to 
Talleyrand  on  the  subject  of  Austria,  whose  conduct  was 
causing  some  uneasiness  at  Osterode.  The  French  ambas- 
sador, Andreossy,  was  to  say  that  independently  of  the 
140,000  men  which  the  Emperor  had  in  his  depots  in 
France,  he  had  just  raised  80,000  conscripts  of  the  class 
of  1808  ;  that  in  addition  he  had  created  ten  legions  of 
reserve,  each  composed  of  five  battalions  ;  and  that  he  was 
prepared  to  march  into  Bavaria  with  the  army  of  Brittany 
and  Normandy,  40,000  strong.  Andreossy  was  further  to 
declare  that  France  had  given  no  cause  for  complaint,  but 
quite  the  contrary,  for  she  had  demolished  the^'  Prussian 
fortresses  in  Silesia.  If  Austria  doubted  what  he  said  she 
might  send  an  officer  to  inspect  the  army  of  Brittany  and 
Normandy.  She  was  to  be  warned,  too,  that  if  she 
entered  the  lists  Russia  would  desert  her  and  allow  her 
to  be  destroyed,  as  she  had  allowed  Prussia  to  be  destroyed. 
He  was  to  add  that  no  one  but  women  and  children  would 
believe  the  Emperor  capable  of  burying  himself  in  the 
plains  of  Russia. 

The  calling  out  of  the  80,000  conscripts  a  year  before 
their  time  had  created  such  a  painful  impression  in  the 
country  that  in  order  to  assuage  the  general  grief,  says 
the  Annual  Register,  it  was  found  necessary  to  qualify  the 
new  call  by  a  clause  setting  forth  that  these  conscripts  were 
not  to  serve  out  of  France.  Renault  St.  Jean  d'Angely  iS^ 
said  to  have  shed  tears  when  announcing  to  the  Senate  the 
necessity  of  this  levy. 

To  MARSHAL  LEFEBVRE. 

"  Osterode,  \<^th  March,  1807. 
"  The  partisan  SchiU  has  been  cut  off  from  Kolberg. 
That  wretch,  who  is  a  sort  of  brigand,  has  fallen  back  on 


THE    GODDESS    OF    REASON.  30 1 

Koeslin.     Send  some  Saxon  or  Polish  cavalry  in  pursuit 
of  this  wretch.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

Schill  had  made  some  daring  raids  to  the  rear  of  the 
French  army,  and  in  one  of  these  had  snapped  up  Marshal 
Victor,  who  was  afterwards  exchanged  for.  Blucher.  A 
very  dark  fate  awaited  poor  Schill. 

To  M.  FOUCHE. 

"  OSTERODE,  ■loth  March,  1807. 
"  I  see  that  the  affair  of  Mile.  Aubry  is  thought  more 
of  by  the  Parisians   than  all  the  losses  sustained  by  the 
army.     M.  de  Lugay  did  wrong  not  to   show  her  all  the 
interest  which  her  state  inspired. 

"  Napoleon," 

The  lady  in  question,  who  had  played  the  part  of  the 
Goddess  of  Reason  during  the  orgies  of  the  Revolution, 
in  1807  was  representing  "Glory"  at  the  Opera,  when  she 
fell  and  broke  her  arm.  The  Empress  was  present  when 
the  accident  occurred,  and  was  much  shocked. 

To  VICE-ADMIRAL  DECRES. 

"OSTERODE,  22nd March,  1807. 
"  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Rear-Admiral  Allemand 
should    not    attack   an    equal  force  of  the  enemy,   much 
more  a  superior  force.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  GENERAL  DEJEAN. 

"OSTERODE,  25M  March,  1807. 

"  Did  I  ever  give  you  an  order  to  send  10,000  Prussians 

to  Spain  1    I  told  my  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs  to  make 

such  a  proposal  to  Spain,  but  was  that  equivalent  to  an 

an    order   from  me .''     This   sort   of  thing  has   happened 


302     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

several  times.  ...  I  told  the  Porte  that  I  wished  to  send 
30,000  men  to  Constantinople ;  if,  in  consequence  of  that 
declaration,  you  had  ordered  them  to  march,  it  would  have 
been  rather  extraordinary.  Since  the  Prussians  refuse  to 
go  to  Spain,  take  this  pretext  for  spreading  them  through 
Languedoc,  where  they  may  be  employed  on  the  canal 
of  Aries  and  the  swamps  of  Rochefort. 

"  Napoleon." 


It  was  a  common  trick  on  the  part  of  Napoleon  to  send 
the  soldiers  of  one  country  into  another  so  as  to  breed  bad 
blood  between  them.  As  for  prisoners,  a  great  many  were 
required,  not  only  for  public  works,  but  to  carry  on  the 
ordinary  labours  in  city  and  field  in  consequence  of  the 
dearth  of  hands  caused  by  the  conscription. 

To  M.  CAMBACERi:S. 

"OSTERODE,  26M  March,  1807. 
"  I  suppose  that  your  ball  will  be  a  grand  one.  There 
is  nothing  new  here.  I  have  written  to  the  Minister  of 
Police  to  send  Madame  de  Stael  to  Geneva.  This  woman 
continues  her  trade  of  intriguer.  She  went  near  Paris  in 
spite  of  my  orders.  She  is  a  veritable  plague.  Speak 
seriously  to  the  Minister,  for  I  shall  be  obliged  to 
have  her  seized  by  the  gendarmerie.  Keep  an  eye  upon 
Benjamin  Constant ;  if  he  meddles  with  anything  I  shall 
send  him  to  his  wife  at  Brunswick.  I  will  not  tolerate  this 
cHque.  ...  I  desire  to  lend  money  on  pledge  ;  that  is 
to  say,  when  a  manufactory  or  a  commercial  house  is 
threatened  with  failure,  to  lend  money  to  the  extent  of 
half  the  value  of  the  merchandise.  If  there  be  no  law 
according  me  this  power  make  out  a  decree  giving  it  to 
me.  Under  extraordinary  circumstances  one  must  have 
recourse  to  extraordinary  measures.  ...  I  have  appointed 
M.  de  Broglie  Bishop  of  Ghent. 

"  Napoleon." 


THE   DUC   DE    BROGLIE.  303 

The  above  letter  forms  much  food  for  reflection  on  the 
vicissitudes  of  human  life.  Benjamin  Constant,  after 
writing  his  celebrated  pamphlet  intitled  De  l' Esprit  de 
Conqueie  et  de  V  Usurpation,  adhered  to  the  Empire  after 
the  return  from  Elba,  and  helped  to  draw  out  the  constitu- 
tion in  which  was  embodied  the  "Additional  Act."  As 
for  the  Bishop  of  Ghent,  he  was  thrown  into  a  dungeon  at 
Vincennes  for  siding  with  the  Pope.  His  nephew,  the 
Due  Achille  de  Broglie,  married  the  daughter  of  Madame 
de  Stael,  the  fruit  of  that  union  being  the  present  Due  de 
Broglie,  who  has  twice  held  the  office  of  Prime  Minister 
who  has  been  ambassador  to  London,  who  is  now  a 
senator  and  an  Academician,  and  who  enjoys  a  high 
literary  reputation,  worthy  of  his  persecuted  grandmother. 

To  M.  FOUCHE. 

"  OSTERODE,  i^th  March,  1807. 

"  I  have  seen  in  the  newspapers  a  pretended  letter 
written  in  Russia.  It  is  lamentable.  We  do  not  require 
to  be  defended  by  fables.  No  man  in  his  senses  will  be 
deceived,  and  it  will  only  create  a  bad  effect.  The 
Russians  belonging  to  the  army  never  say  among  them- 
selves that  they  gained  the  battle.  .  .  . 

"In  general  all  that  is  published  with  the  view  of  enlighten-  ■ 
ing  public  opinion  appears  to  me  ill-conceived,  and  as  if 
the  author  did  not  beheve  what  he  was  writing.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  THE  EMPRESS. 

"  OSTERODE,  rjih  March,  1807. 

"  My  Friend, — Your  letter  grieves  me.  You  are  not 
going  to  die,  you  are  in  good  health,  and  have  no  reason 
for  sorrow.  .  .  .  You  must  not  think  of  travelling  this 
summer ;  it  is  impossible  to  allow  you  to  run  about  inns 
and  camps.     I  desire  to  see  you  and  to  live  in  tranquillity. 


304     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

I  know  how  to  do  other  things  than  make  war ;  but  duty 
before  everything.  All  my  life  I  have  sacrificed  tran- 
quillity, interest,  happiness  to  my  destiny.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

In  spite  of  the  famous  receipe  the  Princess  Eugene  did 
not  give  birth  to  a  son,  as  the  following  letter  shows  : — 

To  PRINCE  EUGENE. 

"  OSTERODE,  2-]th  March,  1807. 
"My  Son, — I  congratulate  you  on  the  confinement  of 
the  princess  ;  I  am  very  anxious  to  learn  that  she  is  doing 
well  and  out  of  all  danger.  I  hope  that  your  daughter 
will  be  as  good  and  as  amiable  as  her  mother.  It  remains 
for  you  now  to  have  a  boy  next  year.  .  .  .  Have  your 
daughter  called  Josephine.  «  Napoleon  " 

In  1823  Josephine  married  Prince  Oscar,  the  heir  to  the 
throne  of  Sweden,  and  son  of  the  quondam  Marshal 
Bernadotte  and  Desir^e  Clary,  whom  Napoleon  had 
demanded  in  marriage.  A  son  was  born  afterwards,  and 
in  due  time  married  the  daughter  of  the  Czar  Nicolas — 
that  is  to  say  married  into  the  Russian  Imperial  family 
which  had  refused  with  horror  the  matrimonial  overtures 
made  by  Napoleon. 

In  a  letter  of  the  ist  of  April  the  Emperor  informed 
M.  Mollien  that  he  had  paid  the  army  for  four  months  out 
of  the  money  levied  on  the  conquered  countries,  and  that 
he  had  wherewithall  to  pay  them  for  five  months  longer. 
He  complained  that  several  officers  had  drawn  upon  the 
Paymaster-General,  and  consequently  had  been  paid  out 
of  the  public  treasury  ! 

To  THE  EMPRESS. 

"  FiNCHENSTEiN,  ind  April,  lia"]. 

"  My  Friend, — I  write  one  line.  I  have  transferred  my 
head-quarters  to  a  fine  castle  like  that  of  Bessieres  (Grignon), 


WATCHES  FOR  THE  TURKS.         305 

where  I  have  a  number  of  fire-places,  which  is  very  pleasant, 
as  I  often  get  up  in  the  night  and  like  to  see  the  fire.    .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

The  next  day  the  Emperor  wrote  to  the  Sultan  and  to 
the  Shah  encouraging  them  to  attack  the  common  enemy. 
To  the  former  he  said — "  Confide  your  wants  to  me.  I 
am  sufficiently  powerful  and  interested  in  your  success, 
both  by  friendship  and  policy,  not  to  refuse  you  anything." 
He  then  related  how  he  had  refused  to  make  peace  unless 
the  independence  of  the  Porte  were  ratified. 

The  Shah  was  called  upon  to  live  on  good  terms  with 
the  Sultan,  and  to  intercept  all  communications  between 
the  English  and  India. 

In  several  letters  at  this  period  Napoleon  expressed  his 
surprise  at  the  energy  and  courage  suddenly  exhibited  by 
the  Turks,  who  had  forced  Sir  John  Duckworth  to  repass 
the  Dardanelles. 

To  PRINCE  EUGENE. 

"  FiNKENSTEIN,.  4//^  April,  1807.. 

"  My  Son, — Send  General  Lauriston  twenty-five  gold 
and  silver  watches  to  be  given  to  the  Turks.  Also  send 
twenty-five  to  Marmont. 

"  Napoleon." 

to  the  king  of  holland. 

"  FiNKENSTEiisr,  ii,tk  April,  1807. 

"You  say  that  you  have  20,000  men  with  the  grand 
army.  You  do  not  believe  this  yourself.  You  have  only 
10,000;  and  what  men  !  You  should  make  soldiers  instead 
of  marshals,  knights,  and  counts.  If  you  continue  you 
will  make  me  look  ridiculous  in  Holland. 

"  You  govern  that  country  too  much  like  a  Capucin- 
The  goodness  of  a  king  should  be  full  of  majesty.  .  .  . 
A  king  orders,  and  asks  nothing  from  any  one.  .  .  .  When 
people  say  of  a  king  that  he  is  good,  his  reign  is  a  failure. 

VOL.  II.  X 


3o6     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

.  .  .  Your  quarrels  with  the  queen  are  known  to  the  public. 
You  should  exhibit  at  home  that  paternal  and  effeminate 
character  you  show  in  your  manner  of  governing.  .  .  . 
You  treat  a  young  wife  as  you  would  command  a  regiment. 
Distrust  the  people  by  whom  you  are  surrounded ;  they 
are  nobles.  .  .  .  You  have  the  best  and  most  virtuous  of 
wives,  and  you  render  her  miserable.  Allow  her  to  dance 
as  much  as  she  likes,  it  is  in  keeping  with  her  age.  I 
have  a  wife  who  is  forty  years  of  age ;  from  the  field  of 
battle  I  write  to  her  to  go  to  balls,  and  you  wish  a  young 
woman   of  twenty  to  live    in  a  cloister,  or  like  a  nurse 

always  washing  her  children Render  the  mother 

of  your  children  happy.  You  have  only  one  way  of  doing 
so,  by  showing  her  esteem  and  confidence.  Unfortunately 
you  have  a  wife  who  is  too  virtuous  :  if  you  had  a  coquette 
she  would  lead  you  by  the  nose.  But  you  have  a  proud 
wife,  who  is  offended  and  grieved  at  the  mere  idea  that 
you  can  have  a  bad  opinion  of  her.  You  should  have  had 
a  wife  like  some  of  those  whom  I  know  in  Paris.  She 
would  have  played  you  false,  and  you  would  have  been 
at  her  feet.  ...  «  Napoleon." 

At  the  moment  that  Napoleon  wrote  this  delectable 
epistle  he  was  living  in  adultery  himself,  and,  as  we  have 
seen,  rendering  his  own  wife  (poor  Hortense's  mother) 
miserable. 

To  THE  KING  OF  NAPLES. 

"  FlNKENSTElN,  i^-th  April,  1807. 
"  I  must  say  that  I  was  not  pleased  with  the  preamble 
of  your  order  for  suppressing  the  monasteries.  With 
regard  to  all  that  concerns  religion  you  must  use  the 
language  of  religion,  and  not  that  of  philosophy.  That  is 
the  great  art  of  the  person  who  governs.  Why  speak  of 
the  services  rendered  to  art  and  science  by  monks.  .  ,  . 
One  supports  ill-treatment  much  more  readily  from  a 
person  who  is  of  your  way  of  thinking  than  from  a  person 


SUITING   THE   WORD    TO    THE    ACTION,  307 

who  differs  in  opinion  from  you.  Your  preamble  is  philo- 
sophical, and  an  insult  to  the  men  you  evict.  You  should 
have  said  that  the  great  number  of  monks  rendered 
their  existence  difficult,  that  it  was  necessary  for  Iheir 
dignity  that  they  should  have  enough  to  live  upon,  and 
hence  reform  was  indispensable.  .  .  .  Men  will  support 
misfortune  when  it  is  not  accompanied  by  insult,  and 
when  it  is  not  apparent  that  the  blow  comes  from  an 
enemy  to  the  cloth.  Now  the  enemies  of  the  monks  are 
men  of  letters  and  philosophers.  You  know  that  I 
myself  do  not  like  them,  for  I  have  destroyed  them  every- 
where ....  "  Napoleon." 

To  M.  CAMBAC^R^S. 

"  FiNKENSTEiN,  iZih  April,  1807. 
"  No  matter  what  pleasure  it  gives  me  to  interest  myself 
in  all  that  concerns  the  welfare  of  my  people,  it  would  be 
going  too  far  to  mix  myself  up  in  theatrical  squabbles. 
I  therefore  give  you  the  exclusive  supervision  of  the  opera 
until  my  return.  Maintain  a  severe  discipline,  and  cause 
authority  to  be  respected.  ...  "  NAPOLEON." 

To  M.  FOUCHE. 

"  P'INKENSTEIN,  l%th  April,  1807. 

"  I  am  delighted  to  hear  nothing  more  of  Madame  de 
Stael.  When  I  trouble  myself  about  her  it  is  when  I 
have  facts  before  me.  That  woman  is  a  regular  crow  ;  she 
thought  that  she  saw  the  tempest  coming.  .  .  .  Let  her  go 
to  her  Lake  Leman.  "  NAPOLEON." 

To  M.  CAMBACER^S. 

"  FiNKENSTEIN,  iqtk  April,  1807. 

"  There  is  nothing  new  here.  The  Emperor  of  Russia 
and  the  King  of  Prussia  are  with  their  army  in  the  little 
town  of  Bartenstein.  The  siege  of  Dantzic  is  being 
pushed  on  vigorously.  "Napoleon." 

X  2 


308    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

All  that  Napoleon  could  obtain  from  Austria  was  an 
offer  to  mediate,  and  in  April  she  interposed  her  good 
offices.  But  at  Bartenstein  the  Czar  and  the  King  of 
Prussia  decided  upon  the  terms  they  alone  would  accept 
— the  dissolution  of  the  Confederacy  of  the  Rhine  ;  Prussian 
territory  to  be  restored  ;  a  new  Confederation  to  be  formed 
under  the  auspices  of  Austria  and  Prussia.  England  and 
Sweden  adhered  to  this  convention,  and  the  former  pro- 
mised to  send  20,000  men  to  the  Baltic  to  operate  against 
the  French  flank  and  rear.  A  separate  agreement  was 
concluded  between  Prussia  and  England ;  the  former  was 
to  restore  Hanover,  the  latter  to  furnish  a  subsidy  of 
4,000,000/.  Unfortunately  the  change  in  the  policy  of  the 
English  Government,  due  to  the  accession  of  Canning  to 
office,  came  too  late,  and  the  consequences  were  terrible,  as 
was  soon  afterwards  seen. 

On  the  29th  Napoleon  wrote  a  letter  to  the  King  of 
Prussia  rather  vague  in  its  character,  and  while  breathing 
peace  making  no  tangible  proposals.  In  fact'  he  was 
playing  his  old  game  of  trying  to  sow  discord  in  the 
camp  of  the  enemy,  and  to  gain  time. 

To  MARSHAL  BERTHIER. 

"  F-INKENSTEIN,  ist  May,  1807. 
"The  aides-de-camp  of  Marshal  Angereau,  instead   of 
remaining  with  the  army,  have  followed  him  to  Paris.    Let 
me   know  to  what  corps  they  belong,  for  it  is  not  my 
intention  to  allow  them  to  remain  in  Paris. 

"Napoleon." 

They  might  say  more  than  was  agreeable  about  Eylau. 

To  THE  EMPRESS. 

"  FiNKENSTEiN,  2nd  May,  1807. 
"  My  Friend, — I   see  with  pleasure  that  you  are  in 
good    health,    and    that    you   are    always   fond   of  the 


ENGLAND    CAPTURES    MONTEVIDEO.  309 

Malmaison.     It  is  said  that  the  arch-chancellor  has  fallen 

in  love  ;  is  this  a  joke,  or  is  it  true  ?     It  greatly  amuses 

me.  ... 

"  Napoleon." 

To  M.  CAMBACERES. 

"  FINKENSTEIN,  yd  May,  1807. 

"  It  seems  to  me  that  I  wrote  to  the  Princess  Pauline  that 
she  might  go  to  the  waters.  I  only  opposed  this  by  way 
of  advice,  because  I  see  that  the  doctors  order  waters  when 
they  want  to  get  rid  of  their  patients.  .  .  . 

"Napoleon." 

A  decree  had  given  the  Emperor  the  most  extended 
authority  over  his  family,  and  of  this  authority  he  made  a 
most  exorbitant  use. 

In  a  letter  to  Fouch6,  of  the  same  day,  the  Emperor 

wrote : — 

"  Marshal  Angereau  is  surrounded  by  a  lot  of  scamps, 
who  spread  bad  news.  Keep  an  eye  upon  them,  and 
speak  to  the  Marshal  on  the  subject."  Also  — "The 
English  are  trifling  with  the  Russians.  While  they  are 
fighting  on  all  sides  to  please  them,  the  English  undertake 
important  expeditions  on  their  own  account.  They  have 
just  taken  Montevideo.  England  is  therefore  engaged  in 
a  war  which  will  require  a  number  of  men.  .  .  ." 

In  a  letter  to  brother  Joseph,  dated  the  4*,  the  Em- 
peror gave  some  family  news.  He  said  that  he  was  satisfied 
with  Prince  Jerome,  who  had  left  the  navy,  had  become  a 
general  of  division,  and  had  been  actively  employed  durmg 

the  campaign. 

"If  I  am  not  mistaken,"  he  added,  "there  is  the  stuff 
in  him  for  making  a  first-rate  man.  ...  He  is  adored  m 
Silesia  I  have  given  him  an  isolated  command,  for  I  do 
not  believe  in  the  proverb  that,  in  order  to  know  how  to 
command,  one  must  know  how  to  obey. 


310    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

"  I  am  also  pretty  well  satisfied  with  Louis,  although  his 
mind  is  too  charitable,  and  this  does  not  suit  the  dignity  of 
the  diadem.  ..." 

To  M.  CAMBACER^S. 

"  FiNKENSTElx,  -jth  May,  1807. 
"  I  do  not  approve  of  the  resolutions  which  you  have 
taken  on  the  subject  of  the  opera,  because  in  the  general 
orders  drawn  up  by  me  during  my  absence  I  did  not  give 
you  the  right  of  adopting  resolutions.  .  .  .' 

"  Napoleon." 

To  THE  EMPRESS. 

"  FiNKENSTEiN,  loth  May,  1807. 
"  I  know  nothing  of  the  ladies  who  you  say  correspond 
with  me.  I  love  only  my  good,  pouting,  capricious  Jose- 
phine, who  knows  how  to  pick  a  quarrel  with  such  good 
grace,  like  all  she  does  ;  for  she  is  always  amiable,  except 
when  she  is  jealous,  and  then  she  is  the  very  devil. 
But  to  return  to  those  ladies.  If  I  were  to  notice  any  of 
them  I  should  like  them  to  be  rosebuds,  and  none  of 
them  fulfil  that  condition.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  same  day  the  Emperor  drew  up  several  pages 
of  instructions  for  General  Gardane,  who  was  ordered  on  a 
mission  to  Persia.  He  was  to  encourage  the  Shah  to 
resist  the  Russians  on  one  side,  and  the  English  on  the 
other ;  he  was  accompanied  by  artillery  and  engineer 
officers,  who  were  to  place  the  Persian  army  on  a  proper 
footing ;  and  he  was  to  report  on  the  best  route  which  a 
French  army,  wishing  to  invade  India,  could  follow. 

"  In  the  event  of  20,000  Frenchmen  marching  upon 
India,"  he  wrote,  "  it  would  be  well  to  know  how  many 
Persian  auxiliaries  would  join  the  army,  the  places  for 
landing,  the  roads  to  follow,  and  the  provisions  and  water 

^  r?rf«  letter  of  the  i8th. 


DEATH  OF  THE  "LITTLE  NAPOLEON."     31 1 

necessary  for  the  expedition.  .  .  .  General  Gardane  should 
also  enter  into  communication  with  the  Mahrattas  in  order 
to  find  out  what  support  an  expedition  would  receive  in 
India." 

General  Gardane  had  hardly  reached  Teheran,  when 
Napoleon  had  flung  himself  into  the  arms  of  Alexander, 
and  consequently  his  mission  was  at  an  end  as  far  as 
Russia  was  concerned. 


To  THE  EMPRESS,  AT  St.  Cloud. 

"  FiNKENSTEiN,  ii^th  May,  1807. 
"  I  can  conceive  all  the  grief  which  the  death  of  the 
little  Napoleon  must  cause  you  ;  you  can  understand  the 
pain  it  occasions  me.  I  should  like  to  be  near  you,  so 
that  you  might  be  more  moderate  in  your  sorrow.  You 
have  had  the  good  fortune  never  to  lose  a  child  ;  but  this 
is  one  of  the  conditions  and  penalties  attached  to  human 
misery.  Let  me  hear  that  you  are  reasonable  and  in 
good  health.     Would  you  augment  my  pain  } 

"  Napoleon." 

The  death  of  the  "  little  Napoleon,"  or  "  M.  Napoleon," 
as  the  Emperor  liked  to  call  him,  was  a  terrible  blow  to  a 
portion  of  the  imperial  family.  Whatever  may  have  been 
the  truth  concerning  his  birth,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that 
the  Emperor  treated  him  with  an  amount  of  affection 
which  was  not  transferred  to  his  brothers  after  his  death. 
Then  there  was  something  suspicious  in  the  grief  of  Jose- 
phine, who,  when  the  sad  intelligence  reached  her  from 
the  Hague,  was  at  once  convinced  that  nothing  now  stood 
between  her  and  a  divorce.  Why  should  the  Emperor  not 
have  been  content  to  leave  the  Imperial  crown  to  the 
second  son  of  his  brother  Louis — Napoleon  Louis  ?  It  is 
a  remarkable  fact  that  the  Emperor,  after  the  death  of 
the,  "  little  Napoleon,"  seemed  to  care  little  about  him. 
He  was  no  longer  of  any  use,      M.   de   Fontanes  could 


312   The  correspondence  of  napoleon. 

represent  "the  hero  surrounded  by  the  pomp  of  victory 
condescending  to  weep  over  a  child  ; "  but,  according  to 
M.  de  Talleyrand,  the  hero  was  so  far  from  weeping,  that 
when  the  authorities  of  Warsaw  came  to  condole  with  him 
on  his  loss,  he  (M.  de  Talleyrand)  had  to  tell  him  to 
assume  an  air  of  sadness.  Upon  this.  Napoleon  replied 
that  he  had  not  time  "  to  amuse "  himself  with  feeling  or 
regretting  like  other  people. 

He  wrote  several  short  notes  to  the  Empress  and  to  the 
Queen  Hortense,  telling  them  to  bear  up,  to  be  gay,  and 
to  search  distraction  in  Paris,  and  then  he  appeared  rather 
tired  of  their  tears. 

Josephine  guessed  rightly  that  her  doom  was  fixed,  and 
that  she  would  be  divorced.  Strange  irony  of  fate  that  the 
next  wearer  of  the  imperial  purple  should  have  been  Louis 
Napoleon,  who  was  born  about  a  year  after  the  death  of 
the  little  Napoleon,  and  who  was  undoubtedly  the  grand- 
son of  Josephine. 

In  a  letter  to  Prince  Eugene,  dated  the  i8th,  the 
Emperor  said : — 

"You  can  do  what  you  think  suitable  with  regard  to 
the  baptism  of  the  Princess  Josephine.  I  have  read  your 
letter  to  the  Pope  ;  it  appears  to  me  to  be  very  good  ; 
but  I  doubt  if  it  will  produce  an  impression,  as  these  • 
fellows  are  incompetent  beyond  everything  one  can 
imagine." 

There  was  more  bickering  with  the  Court  of  Rome, 
which  would  not  confirm  the  bishops  nominated  by  the 
Viceroy. 

In  a  letter  to  Fouche,  dated  the  20th,  Napoleon 
wrote  : — 

"There  were  things  which  did  not  please  me  at  the 
sitting  of  the  Academy,  which  was  too  political.  It  did 
not  belong  to  the  president  of  a  learned  body  to  speak 
about  Mirabeau.  If  he  spoke  about  him,  he  should  have 
confined  his  remarks  to  his  style,  which  alone  concerned 
him.    When  shall  we  learn  wisdom .'     When  shall  we  be 


CAPTURE   OF   ALEXANDRIA   AKD   DANTZIC.        313 

animated  with  true  Christian  charity  ?  and  when  shall  our 
actions  have  for  object  to  give  pain  to  and  to  humiliate 
no  one  ?  .  .  .  .  What  is  there  in  common  between  the 
Academy  and  politics  ?  Nothing  more  than  between  the 
rules  of  grammar  and  the  art  of  war." 

At  the  reception  of  Cardinal  Maury  the  Abb^  Sicard 
had  ventured  to  abuse  Mirabeau  inde  tree.  Fouche  was 
charged  to  set  matters  right,  and  to  have  some  articles 
written  in  praise  of  the  great  orator. 

On  the  24th  of  May,  Napoleon  wrote  to  Fouche, 
saying  : — 

"  The  last  news  from  the  Mediterranean  is  that  the 
English  have  not  captured  Alexandria,  and  that  they 
have  experienced  a  considerable  check.  If  they  take 
that  city  it  will  cost  them  a  good  deal  of  blood." 

The  English  did  take  Alexandria,  but  afterwards 
evacuated  it. 

To  GENERAL  CLARKE  {War  Minister  at  Berlin). 

"  FiNKENSTEIN,  ^bth  May,  1807. 

"  Dantzic  has  capitulated,  and  my  troops  have  entered 

the  place.    Publish  this  news  in  the  Berlin  journals.    Have 

a  salute  fired  at    Spandau  and  at  other  places.     If  you 

like  you  can  have  a   Te  Deum  sung.     Give  this  capture 

the  greatest  possible  publicity. 

"  Napoleon." 

Dantzic  had  made  a  gallant  resistance,  and  was  not 
to  be  erected  into  a  free  town,  which  was  much  the  same 
as  being  taken  into  the  bosom  of  the  Confederation  of  the 
Rhine  and  becoming  a  French  town. 

To  M.  DE  LAC:]£PEDE. 

"  FiNKENSTEIN,  T]th  May,  1807. 
"Write  a  letter  to  Corporal  Bernandat  of  the  13th  of 
the  line  not  to  drink  more  than  is  good  for  him.    It  appears 
that  he  received  the  cross  for  his  gallantry.     It  must  not 


314    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

be  taken  away  from  him  because  he  likes  drinking.  Give 
him  to  understand  however  that  he  is  wrong  to  put  himself 
in  a  state  which  degrades  the  decoration  he  wears. 

"  Napoleon." 

Had  brother  Louis  written  the  above  he  would  certainly 
have  received  a  sharp  reprimand  for  his  leniency.  The 
famous  naturalist  to  whom  this  letter  was  addressed  was 
Chancellor  of  the  Legion  of  Honour. 

On  the  28th  May  the  Emperor  wrote  a  circular  to  the 
bishops,  who  were  to  return  thanks  to  the  Almighty  for  the 
capture  of  Dantzic.  This  circular  concluded  thus — "  Let 
our  people  also  pray  that  the  cabinet  which  persecutes 
our  holy  religion,  and  also  the  eternal  enemy  of  our 
nation,  may  cease  to  have  any  influence  on  the  Continent, 
so  that  a  solid  and  glorious  peace,  worthy  of  us  and  of 
our  great  people,  may  console  humanity  and  allow  us  to 
give  full  career  to  all  the  plans  we  propose  to  undertake 
for  the  good  of  religion  and  for  the  welfare  of  our  peoples." 

This  circular  was  sent  to  the  Kings  of  Naples  and 
Holland,  and  to  the  Viceroy  of  Italy,  for  their  bishops. 

At  2  P.M.  on  the  5th  June,  Napoleon  wrote  to  Bernadotte, 
saying — "  Marshal  Ney  sends  me  word  that  he  was 
attacked  this  morning  at  six  o'clock.  Is  it  an  affair  like 
yours,  or  is  it  a  serious  attack  ? "  and  "  Although  it  is  not 
probable  that  the  enemy,  after  having  allowed  the  capture 
of  Dantzic,  will  undertake  a  serious  affair ;  yet  should  he 
attempt  anything  it  will  be  at  Guttstadt." 

In  fact,  upon  the  Sth  June  the  whole  Russian  army  got 
into  motion.  Bernadotte  was  wounded  with  a  spent  bullet 
in  the  head  and  driven  back.  Ney  too  was  surprised,  and 
had  Beningsen  pressed  the  retiring  columns  with  vigour, 
they  must  have  been  destroyed.  The  serious  attack,  as 
Napoleon  predicted,  was  made  at  Guttstadt. 

This  advantage  and  some  successful  Cossack  raids  which 
highly  irritated  the  Emperor,  did  not  hinder  Beningsen 
from  falling  back  on  the  intrenched  camp  of  Heilsberg. 


THE  BATTLE   OF   FRIEDLAND.  315 

Paris  in  the  meantime  was  uneasy,  and  Cambac^res  was 
ordered  :  "  Should  public  impatience  grow  too  strong  you 
can  insert  some  details  in  the  Journal  de  I'Empire  in  the 
shape  of  a  private  letter  written  from  Thorn  or  from 
Dantzic  by  an  officer  of  the  army."  ^  To  Fouch^  his 
Majesty  wrote — "  See  the  Empress  often  so  as  to  hinder 
bad  news  from  reaching  her.  A  week  after  the  reception 
of  this  letter  all  will  be  over." 

To  THE  EMPRESS. 

"Feiedland,  15M  June,  1807. 
"  My  Friend, — I  write  you  only  a  few  words,  for  I  am 
very  tired  :  I  have  been  bivouacking  for  several  days.  My 
children  have  worthily  celebrated  the  anniversary  of 
Marengo.  The  battle  of  Friedland  will  be  just  as  cele- 
brated and  as  glorious  for  my  people.  The  whole  Russian 
army  routed,  80  guns  captured,  30,000  men  taken  prisoners 
or  killed,  with  twenty-five  generals ;  the  Russian  guard 
annihilated ;  it  is  the  worthy  sister  of  Marengo,  Austerlitz, 
and  Jena.  The  bulletin  will  tell  you  the  rest.  My  loss  is 
not  large.     I  successfully  out-manoeuvred  the  enemy.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

This  battle,  which  was  less  sanguinary  but  more  decisive 
than  that  of  Eylau,  exercised  an  enormous  influence  on 
the  state  of  the  Continent.  The  Russians,  ill-commanded 
at  the  battle  of  Friedland,  fought  with  a  desperate  courage 
against  superior  numbers  in  a  way  which  excited  general 
admiration.  They  lost  17,000  men  killed  or  wounded, 
5,000  of  the  latter  remaining  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy. 
The  French  however  captured  only  500  unwounded  men, 
17  guns,  and  no  colours.  On  their  side  the  French  lost 
10,000  men  and  two  eagles.  The  Russians  too  were 
allowed  to  retire  to  the  left  bank  of  the  Alle  without  being 
molested.      These   facts   show    how   dearly  victory    was 

1  Vide  letter  of  27th  March  to  Fouchd. 


3l6    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

purchased.  In  fact,  after  Friedland  as  after  Eylau, 
Napoleon  appeared  stunned  by  the  resistance  he  had 
encountered. 

To  M.  CAMBACERES. 

"Tilsit,  i()thjune,  1807. 
"  I  hope  that  the  campaign  which  has  been  finished  in 
a  week  will  give  pleasure  to  my  people.  The  Russian 
army  was  more  crushed  and  beaten  than  ever  the  Austrians 
were.  (?)  Beningsen,  who  commanded  them,  displayed 
very  little  talent.  Their  soldiers  in  general  are  good. 
They  are  greatly  weakened  and  discouraged.  My  army 
is  superb,  and  has  not  suffered.  I  learn  with  pleasure  that 
the  conscription  goes  on  well. 

"Napoleon  ." 

To  M.  CAMBACERis. 

"Tilsit,  22nd  June,  1807. 
"  While   waiting  for  St.   Denis  to    be   ready,-  have  the 
body  of  the  little  Napoleon  placed  in  a  chapel  at  Notre 
Dame.^ 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  same  day,  in  a  Proclamation  to  the  army,  the 
Emperor  said — "  Frenchmen,  you  are  worthy  of  yourselves 
and  of  me.  You  will  return  to  France  covered  with 
laurels  after  having  obtained  a  glorious  and  durable  peace. 
It  is  in  fact  time  that  the  country  should  live  in  repose 
protected  from  the  malignant  influence  of  England.  My 
recompenses  will  prove  to  you  my  gratitude,  and  the 
extent  of  the  love  I  bear  you." 

On  the  22nd  too  an  armistice  was  signed  with  Russia, 
and  another  was  being  discussed  with  Prussia. 

1  The  remains  of  the  "little  Napoleon"  were  in  due  time  transferred 
to  St.  Denis,  but  Louis  XVIII.  had  them  afterwards  removed  from 
that  burial  place  of  the  French  kings. 


THE  EMPEROR  ALEXANDER.         317 

Several  times  in  letters,  bulletins  and  proclamations, 
Napoleon  had  announced  the  capture  of  160,000  stand  of 
arms  at  Koenigsberg^arms  sent  by  England  to  the  allies. 

To  GENERAL  SAVARY. 

"  Tilsit,  25/A  Jutie,  1807. 

"  Let  me  know  if  there  are  any  muskets'at  Koenigsberg. 

I  was  told  that  there  were  160,000,  and  since  then  I  hear 

nothing  more  about  them.     As  I  have  announced  this  fact 

everywhere,  I  shall  be  very  angry  if  I  have  been  deceived. 

"  Napoleon." 

His  Majesty  was  deceived,  and  has  been  accused  of 
mendacity  on  this  subject  by  several  writers.  For  instance. 
Sir  R.  Wilson  says — "  This  assertion  is  a  falsehood  of  the 
most  extravagant  character."  The  weapons  in  question 
had  not  arrived  when  Koenigsberg  fell. 

To  THE  EMPRESS. 

"Tilsit,  25^/2  June,  1807. 
"My  Friend, — I  have  just    seen  the  Emperor  Alex- 
ander ;  I  was  well  satisfied  with  him  ;  he   is  a  handsome, 
good,  and    youthful   Emperor  ;    he  has  more   intelligence 
than   is   generally   supposed.     He   is   coming  to   stay  at 

Tilsit  to-morrow.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  M.  DE  TALLEYRAND. 

"  Tilsit,  2'^th  June,  1807. 

\  "  I  have  just  seen  the  Emperor  of  Russia  in  the  middle 

of  the  Niemen  on  a  raft  where  a  handsome  flag  was  hoisted. 

To-morrow  the  Emperor  is  going  to  present  the  King  of 

Prussia  to   me,  and  is  coming  to  reside    here.     To  that 

effect  I  have  neutralised  the  town  ofTilsit.     I  wish  you  to 

arrive  as  speedily  as  possible.  .  .  , 

"Napoleon." 


31 8     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

It  was  now  that  the  celebrated  Treaty  of  Tilsit  was  dis- 
cussed and  concluded  by  two  monarchs  who  thought  they 
could  share  the  world  between  them. 

The  ostensible  treaty  of  Tilsit  produced  these  results. 
Prussia,   which  had  acted    towards  Russia  with  a   good 
faith  which  atoned  for  previous  backslidings,   abandoned 
by  the  Czar,  lost  half  her  territory.     She  was  treated  in 
a  way  to  make  her  an  irreconcilable  enemy  and  a  dan- 
gerous one.      Dantzic  was  declared  a  free  town.     France 
retained  possession  of  Magdeburg.     Hesse  Cassel  and  the 
Prussian  possessions  west  of  the  Elbe  went  to  form  the 
kingdom    of   Westphalia   which    was    given     to    Jerome 
Bonaparte.     The  King  of  Saxony  was  rewarded  with  the 
grand  duchy  of  Warsaw  or  the  Polish  provinces,  belonging 
to  Prussia,  with  the  exception  of  the  province  of  Bialystdck 
which   went   to  the   Czar.     That  Alexander  should  have 
accepted  even  so  small  a  share  of  the  territory  torn  from 
his  ally  was  not  to  his  credit.     Finland   was  abandoned 
to  the  tender  mercies  of  the  Czar,  and  so  were  the  Danubian 
principalities  in  return  for  the  mouths  of  the  Cattaro  and 
those  Ionian  isles  which  Napoleon  had  once  declared  to 
be  of  more   importance  than   the   whole   of  Italy.     In  a 
letter  to  Marmont  of  the  8th  of  July,  the  Emperor  men- 
tioned his   intention    of    letting    Russia   have   Moldavia, 
Wallachia,  and  Bulgaria,  of  letting   Austria  take  Servia, 
and  of  seizing  upon  Bosnia,  Epirus,  Albania  and  Thessaly, 
for   himself     Six    months  previously   he   had   written   to 
Marmont  to  spare  no  assistance  to  his  faithful  allies  the 
Turks  ;  and  at  Posen   he   had   openly  declared  that  the 
full  and  complete  independence  of  the   Ottoman  Empire 
was   the  object    nearest    to   his   heart,   and   that   it  was 
indispensable  for  the  security  of  France  and  of  Italy. 

Napoleon  flattered  himself  that  he  had  fascinated  the 
Czar,  and  had  made  him  a  firm  friend  if  not  a  willing 
instrument.  Prince  'Metternich,  however,  after  a  long 
conversation  with  Count  Tolstoy,  wrote  home  (i2th 
November,  1807),  that  in  his  opinion  the  close  friendship 


SECRET   TREATY    OF   TILSIT.  319 

existing  between  the  cabinets  of  St.  Petersburg  and  the 
Tuileries  had  been  greatly  exaggerated,  and  Lanfrey  says 
that  Napoleon  went  to  Tilsit  to  deceive  Alexander,  and 
left  it  the  dupe  of  his  own  avidity. 

In  addition  to  the  ostensible  there  was  the  secret  treaty 
of  Tilsit.  Count  Miot  de  Melito,  who  was  with  King 
Joseph  in  Spain,  gives  the  text  of  this. treaty  as  published 
by  order  of  the  Cortes  in  18 12,  being  inclined  to  believe, 
from  what  afterwards  happened,  that  it  is  in  conformity 
with  what  was  really  agreed  upon  between  Napoleon  and 
Alexander.     The  articles  ran  thus  : — ■ 

Art.  I.  Russia  to  take  possession  of  European  Turkey, 
and  to  extend  her  conquests  in  Asia  as  far  as  she 
deems  fit. 

Art  2.  The  Bourbon  dynasty  in  Spain,  and  the  House 
of  Braganza  in  Portugal,  to  cease  to  reign.  A  prince  of 
the  Bonaparte  family  to  succeed  to  each  throne. 

Art.  3.  The  temporal  power  of  the  Pope  to  cease.  Rome 
and  its  dependencies  to  be  united  to  Italy. 

Art.  4.  Russia  to  aid  France  with  her  navy  to  take 
Gibraltar. 

Art.  5.  The  French  to  take  possession  of  Tunis, 
Algiers,  &c. 

Art.  6.  France  to  possess  Malta;  no  peace  to  be  con- 
cluded with  England  until  she  yields  up  that  island. 

Art.  7.  The  French  to  occupy  Egypt,  &c.  &c. 

Art.  8.  The  navigation  of  the  Mediterranean  shall  be 
permitted  to  French,  Russian,  Spanish,  and  Italian  vessels 
only. 

Art.  9.  Denmark  shall  be  indemnified  by  the  Hanse 
towns,  if  she  consents  to  hand  over  her  fleet  to  France, 
&c. 

In  numerous  letters  we  shall  find  Napoleon  referring  to 
points  mentioned  in  this  secret  treaty  which  evidently 
reveals  the  objects  of  his  policy. 


320  THE   CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  M.  DE  CHAMPAGNY  {Foreign  Minister). 

"Tilsit,  lUh  June,  1807. 
"  I  have  received  your  letter  in  which  you  give  me  an 
account  of  the  way  in  which  the  Spaniards  have  been 
received  at  Bordeaux.  Inform  the  Prefect  of  the  Gironde 
of  my  satisfaction,  for  to  bestow  marks  of  consideration 
and  interest  on  my  allies  is  to  be  very  agreeable  to  me. 

"  Napoleon." 

No  one  then  in  France  supposed  that  his  Majesty 
nurtured  any  evil  designs  on  Spain. 

To  Fouch4  Napoleon  wrote  on  the  30th — 

"  The  Emperor  of  Russia  and  the  King  of  Prussia  are 
lodging  here  and  dine  every  day  with  me.  This  makes 
me  hope  for  a  prompt  termination  of  the  war,  a  consumma- 
tion devoutly  to  be  wished  for  in  the  interest  of  my 
people. 

"  Napoleon." 

That  Napoleon  did  not  dine  at  the  table  of  the  allied 
sovereigns  is  accounted  for  by  the  fact  that  he  was  afraid 
of  being  poisoned. 

On  the  same  day  the  Emperor  drew  up  a  table  of  the 
various  estates  at  his  disposal  in  Poland  !  The  total  value 
of  these  estates  was  set  down  at  26,582,652  francs,  or  over 
a  million  sterling.  The  share  accorded  to  Davoust 
amounted  to  nearly  20,000/.,  Lannes  received  over  10,000/., 
while  Bertrand,  Bessi^res,  Berthier,  Soult  and  Victor, 
received  over  4,000/.  each.  Bernadotte,  Massena,  Grouchy, 
Ney,  and  other  officers,  had  their  reward. 

To  M.  fouch:^. 

"Tilsit,  yd  July,  1807. 
"  M.  de  Turenne  will  hand  you  this  letter,  and  acquaint 
you  with  details.     See  that  nothing  more  be  said  against 


THE    QUEEN    OF    PRUSSIA.  32 1 

Russia,  either  directly  or  indirectly.  Everything  leads  to 
the  belief  that  our  system  is  about  to  be  connected  with 
that  power  in  a  stable  manner. 

"  Napoleon." 


To  THE  EMPRESS. 

"Tilsit,  6fh  July,  1807. 
"  I  see  with  pain  that  you  are  an  egotist,  and  that  the 
success  of  my  arms  has  no  attraction  for  you. 

"The  handsome  Queen  of  Prussia  is  to  come  to  dine 
with  me  to-day. 

"I  am  in  good  health,  and  greatly  wish  to  see  you 
when  destiny  permits  it.  The  probability  is  that  this 
will  not  be  long.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon.  " 

To  THE  EMPRESS. 

"Tilsit,  "jth  July,  1807. 

"My  Friend, — The  Queen  of  Prussia  dined  with  me 
yesterday.  I  had  to  defend  myself  against  being  obliged 
to  make  some  further  concessions  to  her  husband  ;  I  was 
galant,  but  adhered  to  my  policy.  The  Queen  is  very 
amiable.  .  .  .  When  you  read  this  letter  peace  will  have 
been  concluded  with  Russia  and  Prussia,  and  Jerome 
recognised  as  King  of  Westphalia.  ,  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  THE  EMPRESS. 

"Tilsit,  %th  July,  1807. 

"  The  Queen  of  Prussia  is  really  charming ;  she  is  full 
of  coquetterie  towards  me.  But  do  not  be  jealous  ;  I  am 
an  oilcloth  off  which  all  that  runs.  It  would  cost  me 
too  dear  to  play  the  galant. 

"Napoleon." 

VOL.   11.  Y 


32  2  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF   NAPOLEON, 

To  M.  DE  TALLEYRAND. 

"  Tilsit,  <:)th  July,  1807. 

"Commandant  Guilleminot  must  repair  to  the  head- 
quarters of  General  Michelson  [commanding  the  Russian 
forces  in  the  principalities].  Thence  he  must  go  to  the 
Grand  Vizir,  inform  him  that  peace  has  been  concluded, 
and  acquaint  him  with  the  articles  of  the  treaty  concerning 
the  Porte.  .  ,  . 

"  Commandant  Guilleminot  must  afterwards  go  to  Con- 
stantinople and  take  a  letter  in  cipher  to  Sebastiani. 
You  will  let  my  ambassador  know  that  my  system  with 
regard  to  the  Porte  is  shaky  and  on  the  point  of  changing ; 
that  I  am  not  decided,  however  ;  that  the  greatest  friend- 
ship exists  between  me  and  Russia;  that  the  Emperor 
Alexander  has  passed  twenty  days  here,  and  that  I  hope 
our  union  will  be  lasting  ;  that,  on  the  other  hand,  the  fate 
of  the  Sultan  Selim  touched  my  heart,^  and  that  the  little 
respect  shown  to  my  ambassador  and  to  my  troops  was 
much  felt  by  me.  .  .  .  Sebastiani  must  make  known,  if 
possible,  the  interest  which  I  take  in  Selim,  but  he  must  do 
this  in  a  manner  so  as  not  to  accelerate  his  death.  He  must 
declare  that  it  is  ridiculous  that  the  Emperor  Mustapha 
should  not  have  written  to  me,  to  me  who  alone  have 
protected  his  empire.  ...  I  still  remain  the  friend  of  the 
Porte ;  but  I  have  become  once  more  the  friend  of 
Russia.  .  ,  , 

"  Napoleon." 

To  M.  FOUCH6. 

"  KCENIGSBERG,  \oth  July,  1807. 
"  I  arrived  here  this  morning  at  three  o'clock.     I  am 
staying   in   an   old    castle   which   was   the  cradle   of  the 
Prussian  monarchy.     Peace  has  been  signed  and  ratified, 

1  Poor  Selim  had  been  dethroned,  and  his  nephew,  Mustapha,  now 
ruled  in  his  stead. 


A    LONG    DRIVE.  323 

and  everything  is  going  on  well.  That  arch  madman,  the 
King  of  Sweden,  has  seized  this  opportunity  to  denounce 
the  armistice.  It  is  a  pity  they  cannot  put  the  fellow  in 
a  lunatic  asylum. 

"  Napoleon." 

Sweden  declared  war  when  it  was  too  late,  and  the 
consequence  of  his  rash  if  gallant  act  was  the  loss  of 
Finland. 


To  THE  EMPEROR  OF  RUSSIA. 

"KCENIGSBERG,  i^th  July,  1807. 

"Sir,  my  Brother, — Desirous  of  placing  near  your 
Majesty  some  one  who  will  be  able  to  express  to  you  viva 
voce  the  sentiments  with  which  you  have  inspired  me,  I  send 
you  my  aide-de-camp,  the  General  of  Division,  Savary, 
whom  I  have  appointed  ambassador  to  your  court.  I 
beg  your  Majesty  to  receive  him  with  that  kindness 
which  is  peculiar  to  you.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

Savary,  who  must  have  reminded  the  Czar  painfully 
of  Austerlitz  and  of  the  violent  death  of  the  Due 
d'Enghien. 

To  THE  EMPRESS. 

"  Dresden,  \Zth  July,  1807. 

"My  Friend, — I  arrived  here  yesterday  quite  well, 
although  I  remained  a  hundred  hours  in  my  carriage 
without  leaving  it.  I  am  staying  with  the  King  of 
Saxony,  with  whom  I  am  highly  satisfied.  I  am  then 
half  way  home,  and  I  warn  you  that  I  shall  tumble 
down  on  St.  Cloud  one  of  these  fine  nights  like  a  jealous 

fellow.  ... 

"  Napoleon." 

Y  2 


324  THE   CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  M.  DE  TALLEYRAND. 

"Dresden,  i<)th  yuly,  1807. 
"...  The  day  after  your  arrival  in  Paris  you  must 
inform  the  Minister  of  Portugal  that  by  the  ist  Sep- 
tember the  ports  of  that  country  must  be  closed  to 
England  ;  in  default  of  which  I  shall  declare  war  against 
Portugal,  and  confiscate  the  English  merchandise.  .  .  . 
The  same  day  send  a  despatch  to  my  ambassador  at 
Madrid,  so  that  he  may  see  the  Prince  of  the  Peace, 
and  conclude  a  convention  for  the  closing  of  the  Portuguese 
ports.  In  default  of  this  the  Ministers  of  France  and  of 
Spain  will  leave  Lisbon,  and  the  two  Powers  will  declare 
war  against  Portugal :  an  army  of  20,000  Frenchmen  will 
march  to  Bayonne  on  the  ist  September  to  join  a  Spanish 
army  and  to  conquer  Portugal.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

In  a  despatch  of  the  i6th  October,  Prince  Metternich 
gives  a  description  of  the  violent  language  addressed  to 
various  ambassadors.  To  M.  de  Lina  Napoleon  said  :  "  It 
Portugal  does  not  do  what  I  wish,  the  House  of  Braganza 
will  not  reign  for  two  months.  I  shall  not  tolerate  a 
single  English  envoy  in  Europe ;  I  shall  declare  war 
against  any  Power  that  has  one  in  two  months  from  this. 
I  have  300,000  Russians  at  my  disposal.^  ..." 

To  M.  DE  TALLEYRAND. 

"  Dresden,  22nd  July,  1807. 
"  Write  to  M.  Alquier  to  present  a  note  in  which  he 
will   insist   on    the   number    of  French    cardinals   being 

^  Vide  thirty-fourth  bulletin.  "  The  Russians  ill-treat  the  poor  as 
well  as  the  rich.  They  plunder,  burn  villages,  and  massacre— these 
are  their  amusements.  The  battle  of  Austerlitz  was  a  European 
victory,  because  it  destroyed  the  prestige  attached  to  the  name  of 
these  barbarians."  In  the  twenty-fifth  bulletin  Napoleon,  after  giving 
an  account  of  the  atrocities  committed  by  the  Russians  in  Austria  (a 
friendly  counti-y),  added — "No  doubt  this  is  the  last  time  that  any 
European  Government  will  call  in  such  fatal  aid." 


#    mm 


POPE    AND    EMPEROR.  325 

proportionate  to  the  number  ol  Roman  cardinals,  and  the 
number  of  German  and  Spanish  cardinals,  in  proportion 
to  the  population  of  each  country;  for  it  is  not  proper 
that  the  Church  of  France,  that  an  empire  so  large  and 
powerful,  should  be  without  organs  in  the  consistory.  He 
must  add  that  it  is  high  time  to  finish  all  these  little 
quarrels,  and  that  I  am  highly  indignant  and  irritated  at 
the  threat  of  excommunicating  me,  and  of  declaring  that 
I  have  forfeited  the  throne ;  it  only  remains  for  them  to 
shut  me  up  in  a  monastery,  and  to  have  me  whipped  like 
Louis  le  Debonnaire.  .  ,  . 

"  Napoleon." 

The  Emperor  also  wrote  a  letter  of  several  pages  to  the 
Viceroy  of  Italy,  which  was  to  be  forwarded  to  the  Pope, 
and  in  which  such  passages  as  these  are  to  be  found  : 
"  Does  the  Pope  think  that  the  rights  of  the  throne  are  less 
sacred  in  the  eyes  of  God  than  those  of  the  tiara  .'  .  .  .  They 
wish  to  denounce  me  to  Christendom  !  The  madmen  !  This 
ridiculous  idea  can  only  arise  from  a  profound  ignorance 
of  the  age  in  which  we  live.  The  Pope  who  takes  such  a 
step  will  cease  to  be  a  Pope  in  my  eyes.  I  shall  consider 
him  as  an  Antichrist.  ...  If  this  were  done  I  would 
separate  my  people  from  all  communion  with  Rome,  and 
I  would  establish  my  police  there.  .  .  .  What  does  Pius 
VII.  wish  to  gain  by  denouncing  me  ?  Lay  my  thrones 
under  interdict  and  excommunicate  me  ?  Does  he  think 
that  the  arms  will  fall  from  the  hands  of  my  soldiers  ? 
Does  he  wish  to  put  a  poniard  in  the  hands  of  my  people 
to  assassinate  me  ?  Infuriated  Popes  have  preached  this 
infamous  doctrine.  .  .  .  The  present  Pope  is  too  powerful ; 
priests  are  not  made  to  govern ;  let  them  imitate  St.  Peter, 
St.  Paul,  and  the  Apostles,  who  are  well  worth  a  Julius,  a 
Gregory,  a  Leo.  Jesus  Christ  said  that  His  kingdom  was 
not  of  this  world.  Why  does  the  Pope  object  to  render  to 
Caesar  the  things  that  are  Caesar's  ?  .  .  .  I  begin  to  blush 
and  to  feel  humiliated  at  all  the  foUies  which  the  Court  of 


326    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Rome  makes  me  endure,  and  perhaps  the  time  is  not  far 
distant  when  I  shall  recognise  the  Pope  only  as  Bishop  of 
Rome,  and  equal  in  rank  to  the  bishops  of  my  states.  I 
shall  not  fear  to  assemble  the  Galilean,  Italian,  German, 
and  Polish  Churches  in  council  to  do  my  work  without  a 
Pope,  and  to  protect  my  people  against  the  pretensions  of 
the  priests  of  Rome." 

To  MARSHAL  BERNADOTTE. 

"St.  Cloud,  2nd  August,  1807. 
"...  If  England  refuses  to  accept  the  Russian  media- 
tion, Denmark  must  declare  war  against  her,  or  I  must 
declare  war  against  Denmark.  In  the  latter  case  your 
duty  will  be  to  seize  on  the  whole  Danish  continent.  .  .  . 
You  must  make  a  great  fuss  about  Denmark  having  ■ 
opened  the  passage  af  the  Sund,  and  having  allowed  the 
sea  to  be  violated,  which,  for  the  Danes  (!),  ought  to  be  as 
inviolable  as  their  own  territory.  ,  ,  . 

"  Napoleon." 

Marshal  Bernadotte  had  been  appointed  Governor  of 
the  Hanse  towns. 

The  above  letter  proves  that  England  was  quite  right  to 
anticipate  his  Majesty  in  this  matter. 

To  PRINCE  EUGENE. 

"St.  Cloud,  4M  August,  1807] 

"  I  do  not  know  what  rash  act  you  suppose  the  Pope  to 

be  capable  of  committing.     You  should  have  sent  some 

troops  in  the  direction  of  Bologna,  and  if  he  commits  an 

imprudence  it  will  be  a  fine  opportunity  for  depriving  him 

of  the  Roman  States. 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  5th  the  Emperor  wrote  to  his  brother  the  King 
of  Wirtemberg  demanding  the  hand  of  the  Princess 
Catherine  for  his  "  very  dear  brother  Jerome  Napoleon," 


JEROMES    WIVES.  327 

It  will  be  remembered  that  one  of  the  grounds  upon 
which  Napoleon  had  asked  the  Pope  to  annul  the  marriage 
of  Jerome  with  Miss  Patterson  was  that  she  was  a  Protes- 
tant, and  now  his  Majesty  was  going  to  marry  his  brother 
to  a  Protestant  princess.  The  Princess  Catherine  was  at 
first  very  much  opposed  to  the  match,  both  because  Jerome 
was  a  Catholic,  and  because  she  had  heard  sad  tales  of 
French  profligacy  ;  then  she  was  engaged  to  be  married  to 
the  Hereditary  Grand  Duke  of  Baden,  who  was  both  a 
German  and  a  Protestant. 

Ever  since  the  Miss  Patterson  afiair  the  Emperor  and 
the  Pope  had  been  on  the  worst  possible  terms.  The 
Pontiff  had  I'evenged  himself  for  a  series  of  acts  of  usurpa- 
tion and  violence  by  refusing  to  break  the  matrimonial- 
chain  of  Jerome,  and  it  was  not  with  impunity  that  any 
one  thwarted  the  plans  of  the  Emperor.  Both  Napoleon 
and  Pius  VII.  behaved  with  bad  faith  in  this  matter.  The 
former  had  assured  the  Pope  that  the  marriage  ceremony 
had  been  performed  by  an  obscure  Spanish  Priest,  whereas 
it  had  been  solemnised  by  the  Catholic  Primate  of  the 
United  States  ;  and  he  otherwise  misrepresented  the  matter, 
adding  that  it  was  in  the  interest  of  religion  that  he  should 
not  have  a  Protestant  woman  about  him  whose  children 
might  one  day  inherit  the  French  throne.  On  his  side  the 
Pope,  after  himself  carefully  examining  the  affair,  declared 
that  he  could  discover  no  cause  of  nullity.  He  pointed  out 
that  the  plea  of  seduction  which  had  been  urged  was  incon- 
sistent with  the  plea  that  the  marriage  had  been  performed 
without  the  consent  of  Jerome's  mother,  for  it  showed  that 
there  had  been  mutual  consent.  As  for  the  difference  of 
religion,  the  Pope  remarked  that  this  furnished  a  case  of 
nullity  only  in  marriages  contracted  between  Catholics  and 
infidels.  At  one  moment,  he  wrote,  he  had  hoped  to  be 
able,  with  a  clear  conscience,  to  conform  to  the  wishes 
of  his  Majesty,  for  a  canonical  cause  of  nullity  might  be 
deduced  from  the  clandestine  rrianner  in  which  the  marriage 
had  been  performed.     This  was  contrary  to  the  Council  of 


328     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Trent,  but  unfortunately  this  blemish  could  be  invoked 
only  in  those  countries  where  the  decrees  of  the  said 
Council  had  been  published,  and  in  spite  of  the  most 
minute  search  he  could  not  discover  that  they  had  been 
published  at  Baltimore.  In  spite  of  his  ardent  desire  to 
be  agreeable  to  his  Majesty  he  could  not  render  himself 
guilty  of  an  abominable  abuse  before  the  throne  of  the 
Almighty.  That  Napoleon  had  some  reason  to  complain 
that  the  objections  raised  by  the  Pope  were  frivolous  is 
proved  by  the  fact  that  Pius  VII.  afterwards  dissolved  the 
marriage  of  the  Due  de  Berri  with  Miss  Amy  Brown, 
performed  in  1806  in  England,  where  the  decrees  of  the 
Council  of  Trent  have  never  been  published,  and  this  on 
the  demand  of  Louis  XVIII.,  whose  first  act  on  his  resto- 
ration was  to  abolish  the  law  of  divorce  !  There  was  so 
little  ground  for  annulling  the  latter  marriage  that  the 
daughters  of  the  duke  and  of  Madame  Brown  were  made 
countesses  by  the  king,  and  were  declared  to  be  legitimate 
by  Pius  VII. !  Again,  the  French  Cardinal  de  Belloy  had 
no  hesitation  in  declaring  Jerome's  first  marriage  invalid, 
and  the  marriage  ceremony  with  Catherine  of  Wirtemberg 
was  performed  by  the  Prince  Primate  of  the  Confederation 
of  the  Rhine. 

To  M.  GAUDIN. 

"  St.  Cloud,  %th  August,  1807. 

"  I  am  proprietor,  in  the  duchy  of  Warsaw,  of  all  the 

debts  due  to  the  King  of  Prussia  by  private  individuals. 

These  debts  are  due  for  money  advanced  to  proprietors  on 

the  security  of  their  land.     They  appear  to  amount  to  a 

sum  of  60,000,000  francs.  .  .  } 

"  Napoleon." 

1  The  requisitions  during  the  war  were  enormous.  According  to 
official  documents,  signed  by  Daru,  Germany  had  to  pay  24,200,000/.  ; 
Italy  a  tribute  of  1,200,000/.  ;  Spain,  2,880,000/.  ;  Portugal,  640,000/. ; 
Austria  (arrears),  2,000,000/.  Tptal,  30,920,000/.  Hanover,  too,  had 
to  pay  over  90,000/.  The  Prussians  say  that  Germany  had  to  pay  not 
24,200,000/..  but  29,590,000/.,  and  also  to  hand  over  a  number  of 


MERCHANDISE    AFLOAT.  329 

To  VICE-ADMIRAL  DECR^S. 

"St.  Cloud,  \oth  August,  1807. 
"  You  should  give  orders  in  all  my  ports,  without  laying 
an  embargo  upon  Portuguese  vessels,  that  none  should  be 
allowed  to  sail,  so  that  in  the  event  of  war  with  that  Power 
I  may  be  able  to  seize  on  all  its  ships  in  my  ports.  Let  me 
know  the  number  of  Danish  vessels  in  my  ports. 

"  Napoleon." 

And  yet  the  French  Emperor  was  never  weary  of 
protesting  against  the  intolerable  tyranny  of  England  on 
the  ocean ! 

To  VICE-ADMIRAL  DECR^S. 

"St.  Cloud,  \ith  August,  1807. 
"  It  appears  that  a  great  number  of  English  speculators 
have  sent  merchandise  to  Montevideo.  There  is  no  market 
for  these  goods,  but  if  there  be  it  is  probable  that  the  ships 
will  return  laden  with  the  produce  of  the  country.  I  am 
of  opinion  that  eight  or  ten  frigates  sent  out  to  the  '  rear ' 
of  Montevideo  would  do  a  good  business.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  opening  of  the  Legislative  Body  on  the  i6th  01 
August  Napoleon  gave  an  account  of  his  stewardship.    He 

works  of  art.  Then  we  find  Hamburg  and  the  Hanse  towns  called 
upon  to  furnish  200,000  pairs  of  shoes,  50,000  great  coats,  37,000  vests, 
and  16,000  coats.  The  Hanse  towns  could  not  possibly  supply  these 
effects,  and  consequently  Bourienne,  who  had  been  appointed 
governor,  had  to  contract  for  them  with  English  houses,  and  when 
the  Grand  Army  took  the  field  in  June  it  fought  under  the  eyes  of 
Napoleon,  and  in  spite  of  the  Continental  blockade,  in  uniforms 
imported  from  Leeds  and  Halifax  ! 

Lanfrey  sets  down  the  value  of  the  domains  upon  which  Napoleon 
seized  in  Italy,  Poland,  Hanover,  and  Westphalia,  at  10,000,000/, 

As  for  the  town  of  Hamburg,  it  had  not  finished  paying  off  its 
liabilities  when  the  Franco-German  war  broke  out  in  1870. 


330     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

said — "Since  your  last  session  new  wars,  new  triumphs, 
and  new  treaties  of  peace  have  changed  the  political  aspect 
of  Europe "  ..."  In  all  I  have  done  I  have  had  in  view 
solely  the  welfare  of  my  people,  which  is  dearer  to  me  than 
my  glory.  I  desire  a  maritime  peace.  No  feeling  of 
resentment  shall  influence  my  determinations  ;  I  can  have 
none  against  a  nation,  the  plaything  and  the  victim  of 
the  parties  by  which  it  is  torn.  .  .  .  But  no  matter  what 
issue  the  decrees  of  Providence  may  have  assigned  to  the 
maritime  war,  my  people  will  find  me  always  the  same,  and 
I  shall  find  my  people  always  worthy  of  me."  And  then, 
carried  away  by  their  attitude  while  he  was  more  than 
500  leagues  from  Paris,  he  said — "  You  are  a  good  and 
a  great  people." 

To  VICE-ADMIRAL  DECR£:S. 

"Paris,  21st  August,  1807. 
"  Denmark  has  declared  war  against  England.     Send  a 
courier  to  Toulon  and  to  Genoa,  so  that  the  Danish  ships 
may  be  detained  in  those  ports  lest  they  should  fall  into 
the  hands  of  the  English. 

"  Napoleon.  " 

To  GENERAL  SAVARY. 

"  St.  Cloud,  26th  August ^  1807. 
"  The  English  have  disembarked  at  Copenhagen.  They 
are  bombarding  that  town.  My  opinion  is  that  Russia 
should  march  an  army  against  Sweden  to  force  her  to  take 
part  with  Denmark.  The  Emperor  Alexander  has  only  to 
say  what  he  desires  and  I  will  do  all  that  is  necessary.  I 
have  a  considerable  army  at  Hamburg.  I  also  think  that 
if  the  English  go  on  in  this  way  it  will  be  necessary 
to  close  all  the  ports  of  Europe  to  them,  even  those  of 
Austria,  to  driv€  all  the  English  ambassadors  from  the 
Continent,  and  to  have  all  private  individuals  arrested.  If 
the  Emperor  be  of  this  opinion  we  will  make  a  joint 
declaration  to  Austria,  which  will  be  obliged  to  submit. 

"  Napoleon." 


PERFIDIOUS    ALBION.  33  I 

To  CHARLES  IV.,  King  of  Spain. 

"  RamboUILLET,  ith  September,  1807. 
"  Sir,  my  Brother, — The  choice  of  the  Duke  of  Frias 
as  extraordinary  ambassador  can  be  only  agreeable  to  me 
since  he  possesses  your  confidence.  I  receive  with  pleasure 
the  congratulations  which  your  Majesty  has  charged  him 
to  offer  for  the  success  with  which  it  has  pleased  Providence 
to  bless  my  arms  in  the  common  cause.  Your  Majesty 
who  has  behaved  upon  this  occasion  as  a  faithful  ally  will 
second  me,  with  still  more  zeal,  in  the  present  matter  which 
is  of  peculiar  interest  to  you.  .  .  .  Above  all  Portugal  must 
be  wrested  from  the  influence  of  England,  so  as  to  oblige 
this  latter  Power  to  sue  for  peace.  <•  Napoleon  " 

The  Minister  of  War  having  submitted  to  the  Emperor 
an  application  on  the  part  of  the  Prince  of  Hohenzollern, 
who  commanded  a  Westphalian  regiment,  for  an  extension 
of  leave — 

DECISION. 

"  Rambouillet,  wth  September,  1807. 
"  General    Clarke    will    tell    this    officer    to    study    his 
manoeuvres,  as  it  is  my  intention  to  make  him  take  the 
command  at  an   early  date,  and  he  will  draw  down  upon 
himself  an  affront  if  he  does  not  know  his  duty. 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  1 6th  of  September  Napoleon  announced  to 
Savary  that  the  Porte  had  accepted  his  mediation,  and  that 
"the  English  'breathe  the  devil '  on  the  Continent.  They 
say  that  the  Emperor  of  Russia  is  going  to  be  assassinated. 
They  kill  me  with  all  kinds  of  maladies.  They  are  going 
to  declare  war  with  Austria."  On  the  same  day  his 
Majesty  wrote  to  the  Czar  thanking  him  for  some  furs, 
sending  him  some  Sevres  china,  and  saying  that  the 
moment  was  not  far  distant  when  England  would  be  driven 
from  the  whole  Continent. 


332  THE   CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON, 


To  M.  DE  CHAMPAGNY. 

"  FONTAINEBLEAU,  22nd  September,  1807. 

"M.  deLima  (Portuguese  ambassador)  went  yesterday 
to  see  the  Grand  Duke  of  Berg  (Murat)  without  having 
been  presented  to  that  prince,  which  was  his  duty,  for 
three  reasons — because  he  is  my  brother-in-law,  because 
he  is  grand  admiral,  and  because  he  is  a  reigning  prince. 
Inform  him  of  my  displeasure.  M.  de  Metternich  had  the 
good  sense  to  have  himself  presented  the  evening  before. 

"In  concert  with  M.  de  Segur,  you  must  write  me  a 
report  as  to  the  way  in  which  ministers  and  ambassadors 
should  be  received.  ...  I  desire  that  everything  may  be 
arranged  before  Friday,  so  that  on  the  arrival  of  the 
Russian  ambassador  he  may  find  everything  settled.  It 
will  be  well  for  you  to  enlighten  me  as  to  what  was  the 
practice  at  Versailles  and  what  is  done  at  Vienna  and 
St.  Petersburg.  Once  my  regulations  adopted,  every  one 
must  conform  to  them.  I  am  master  to  establish  what 
rules  I  like  in  France  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

The  etiquette  of  the  new  Imperial  court  soon  became 
more  severe  than  that  of  Versailles  or  Vienna,  for  the 
vigilant  eye  of  Napoleon  allowed  not  the  slightest 
transgression  to  pass  with  impunity. 

On  the  23rd  September,  Napoleon  sent  Marshal 
Berthier,  Prince  of  Neufchatel,  a  list  of  the  various  sums 
destined  to  reward  the  commanding  officers  of  the  Grand 
Army.  Berthier  himself  was  to  have  40,000/. ;  Marshals 
Ney,  Davoust,  Soult,  and  Bessieres,  24,000/.  each ;  Marshals 
Massena,  Angereau,  Bernadotte,  Mortier,  and  Victor, 
16,000/  each.  Then  come  twenty-five  generals,  who  were 
to  receive  8,000/.  each.  M.  de  S^gur,  too,  was  to  have 
8,000/.  for  teaching  etiquette ;  and  Senator  Beauharnais, 
brother  to  Josephine's  first  husband  and  now  ambassador 


GENERAL   BLUCHER.  333 

at  Madrid,  also  8,000/.  The  marshals  who  had  no  houses 
in  Paris  were  each  to  purchase  one. 

A  note  in  the  handwriting  of  the  Emperor  showed  it 
to  be  his  intention  that  thirty  dukes  should  be  established 
in  Paris,  each  with  at  least  4,000/.  a  year,  to  shed  lustre  on 
the  throne  ;  also  sixty  counts  with  2,000/.  a  year,  and  400 
barons  with  oat  least  200/  a  year.  The  dukes  and  the 
counts  were  to  receive  money  to  purchase  residences. 

As  has  been  remarked,  Napoleon  did  not  bestow  his 
gifts,  he  sold  them. 


To  THE  PRINCE  OF  NEUFCHATEL. 

"  FONTAINEBLEAU,  24M  September,  1807. 
"Write  to  Marshal  Victor  to  inform  General  Blucher 
that  if  he  makes  any  preparations  for  war,  and  if  he  does 
not  cease  his  bragging,  he  will  send  troops  to  besiege  him  in 
Kolberg ;  that  this  is  the  formal  order  of  the  Emperor, 
who  is  tired  of  the  Prussian  fanfaronnades. 

m 

"  Napoleon." 


To  GENERAL  DUROC. 

"FONTAINEBLEAU,  25//%  September,  1807. 

"  Send  for  M.  Izquierdo  to-morrow,  and  confer  with 
him  about  the  money  which  the  King  of  Spain  owes  me, 
the  affairs  of  Portugal,  and  those  of  Etruria.  .  .  .  As  for 
Portugal,  I  shall  make  no  difficulty  in  giving  the  King 
of  Spain  a  suzerainty  over  that  country,  and  even  oi 
detaching  a  portion  of  it  for  the  Queen  of  Etruria  and 
for  the  Prince  of  the  Peace. 

"As  for  the  affairs  of  Etruria,  you  will  inform  him  that 
it  is  very  difficult  that  a  branch  of  the  house  of  Spain 
should  continue  to  remain  established  in  the  middle  of 
Italy ;  that  this  offers  me  great  difficulties  now  that  all 
Italy  belongs  to  me.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon," 


334    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

It  was  Napoleon  who  himself  had  established  the  house 
of  Spain  in  Etruria,  in  exchange  for  Louisiana.  But  we 
shall  refer  again  to  this  matter  when  we  come  to  the 
treaty  of  Bayonne. 


To  GENERAL  SAVARY  {on  a  Mission  at  St.  Petersburg). 

"  FONTAINEBLEAU,  2StA  September,  1807. 

"  I  did  not  know  that  you  were  so  galant  as  you 
have  become.  All  the  fashions  for  your  pretty  Russian 
ladies  shall  be  forwarded.  I  will  pay  the  expenses  myself. 
You  must  present  them,  saying  that  having,  by  chance, 
opened  the  despatch  in  which  you  asked  for  them,  I 
wished  to  make  the  selection  myself.  You  know  that 
I  understand  toilette  very  well.  Talleyrand  will  send 
actors  and  actresses. 

"  I  am  very  displeased  with  the  Prussians ;  there  is  no 
doing  anything  with  them  ;  they  are  as  stupid  as  ever. 

"Do  not  alarm  the  Emperor  Alexander  uselessly.  Sur- 
rounded as  he  is  by  the  love  of  his  subjects,  he  has  nothing 
to  fear,  if  he  will  only  show  a  little  vigour.^ 

"  I  am  waiting  for  M.  de  Tolstoi,  and  I  shall  receive 
him,  not  as  an  ambassador,  but  as  a  man  honoured  by  the 
peculiar  friendship  of  the  Czar.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  same  day,  in  a  letter  to  the  Emperor  Alexander, 
Napoleon  said  :  "Your  Majesty  will  be  much  afflicted  by 
what  is  passing  at  Copenhagen.  It  appears  to  me  that 
it  would  be  easy  to  drive  the  English  from  the  entire 
Continent :  a  joint  declaration  would  do  that." 

1  It  was  feared  that  Alexander  would  share  the  fate  of  Paul,  and  for 
similar  reasons.  "  When  he  was  crowned,"  says  Lardner,  in  his 
History  of  Russia  (vol.  iii.  p.  261),  "  a  woman  of  rank  remarked  on 
the  occasion  of  the  ceremony  that—'  the  young  Emperor  walked,  pre- 
ceded by  the  assassins  of  his  grandfather,  followed  by  those  of  his 
father,  and  surrounded  by  his  own,'  ". 


M.    DE   BEAUHARNAIS.  335 

In  numerous  letters  Napoleon  referred  to  English  mer- 
chandise, which,  in  spite  of  the  stringency  of  his  orders, 
appeared  to  penetrate  everywhere,  even  into  his  own 
palace.  To  Prince  Eugene  he  wrote  :  "  A  great  quantity 
of  English  merchandise  passes  through  Italy  under  false 
seals."  The  viceroy  was  to  see  to  this.  To  King  Louis 
the  Emperor  wrote :  "  Your  intentions  with  regard  to 
hindering  communications  between  Holland  and  England 
are  not  carried  out.  ...  At  the  last  fair  at  Rotterdam  all 
the  shops  were  filled  with  English  goods.  .  .  .  The  Dutch 
have  no  right  to  trade  with  England."  "Let  the  mer- 
chants cry  out ;  do  you  think  those  of  Bordeaux  don't 
bellow  ?  "  And  to  M.  Gaudin  his  Majesty  wrote  :  "  I  learn 
that  the  director  of  the  customs  allows  prohibited  goods  to 
enter  on  the  pretext  that  they  belong  to  the  Empress.  .  .  . 
Make  me  a  report  upon  this.  .  .  .  When  laws  weigh  upon 
society  every  one  must  set  an  example." 

To  EUGENE  NAPOLEON,  Viceroy  of  Italy. 

"  FoNTAlNEBLEAU,  1st  October,  1807. 
"  The  Empress  has  made  a  present  of  a  garland  of 
hortensias  to  the  Vicereine  of  Italy.  I  wish,  without  letting 
the  princess  know  anything  of  the  matter,  that  you  would 
have  it  valued  by  some  good  jeweller  and  let  me  know 
the  result,  so  that  I  may  see  to  what  extent  these  gentle- 
men rob  me. 

"Napoleon." 

To  M.  DE  CHAMPAGNY. 

"  FONTAINEBLEAU,  "jth  October,  iZiyj. 
"  Inform  M.  de  Beauharnais  that  I  saw  with  regret  his 
despatch  relative  to  his  communications  with  the  agents  of 
the  Prince  Royal  (Prince  of  Asturias) ;  that  it  seemed 
to  me  wretched ;  that  these  intrigues  are  unworthy  of 
my  ambassadors.  .  .  . 

'  Napoleon." 


33^  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF   NAPOLEON. 

It  will  be  afterwards  seen  that  the  Emperor  himself 
was  at  the  bottom  of  this  intrigue,  which  led  to  the  war 
with  Spain,  and  which  was  one  of  the  most  infamous 
transactions  of  his  reign. 

To  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"  FoNTAlNEBLEAU,  I7.th  October,  1807. 
"  Send  an  extraordinary  courier  to  General  Junot, 
ordering  him  twenty-four  hours  after  its  reception  to 
enter  Spain  with  his  army,  and  to  march  upon  Portugal. 
Tell  him  that  my  ambassador  has  left  Lisbon,  and  that 
therefore  not  a  moment  is  to  be  lost  in  order  to  be 
beforehand  with  the  English. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  CHARLES  IV.,  King  of  Spain. 

"  FONTAINEBLEAU,  \ith  October,  1807. 
"Sir,  my  Brother, — When  Holland,  the  Princes  of 
the  Confederation  01  the  Rhine,  your  Majesty,  the 
Emperor  of  Russia,  and  myself,  have  united  to  drive  the 
English  from  the  Continent  and  to  reap  vengeance  for 
the  new  crime  committed  against  Denmark,  Portugal 
offers  for  the  last  sixteen  years  the  scandalous  example 
of  a  power  sold  to  England.'-  .  .  .  The  port  of  Lisbon  has 
been  a  mine  of  inexhaustible  treasure.  ...  It  is  time  to 
close  Oporto  and  Lisbon  to  them.  .  ,  . 

"  Napoleon." 

And  the  king  was  called  upon  to  co-operate  with  Junot, 
who  would  reach  Burgos  by  the  ist  November. 

On  the  13th  October,  writing  to  Davoust,  who  had  been 
left  in  command  of  the  Grand  Army  at  Warsaw,  Napoleon 
said  :  "  The  rumours  of  war  with  Austria  are  absurd.  You 
should  always  hold  the  most  pacific  language.     The  word 

1  Portugal  had  paid  France  6^0,000/.  for  the  privilege  01  keeping 
her  ports  open  and  remaining  neutral !  The  treaty  to  this  effect  was 
concluded  between  the  two  countries  on  the  19th  March,  1804.  The 
sole  offence  of  Portugal  was  wishing  to  adhere  to  this  bargain. 


joMiNi.  337 

war  should  never  pass  your  lips.  You  should  receive  the 
Austrian  officers  well." 

And  the  next  day,  writing  to  Savary,  his  Majesty  said, 
"  England  has  made  no  propositions,  either  directly  or 
indirectly.  Everything  leads  to  the  belief  that  her  inten- 
tion is  to  continue  the  war.  Our  first  operation,  after 
Lord  Gower  has  been  driven  from  St.  Petersburg,  should 
be  to  drive  the  English  minister  from  Vienna.  ...  1  am 
pleased  to  see  that  the  Emperor  has  marched  his  army 
into  Finland.  Sweden  must  be  forced  to  close  her  ports, 
and  to  declare  war  against  England." 

The  fact  is,  that  as  Napoleon  never  forgot  the  Portu- 
guese frigates  which  helped  to  blockade  him  in  Egypt,  as 
he  never  forgot  nor  forgave  the  conduct  of  Spain  just 
before  Jena,  nor  the  conduct  of  Prussia  before  Austerlitz  ; 
so  with  Austria ;  he  had  already  made  up  his  mind  to 
punish  her  for  refusing  his  alliance  before  the  battle  of 
Friedland. 

On  the  1 6th  of  October  the  celebrated  military  historian 
Jomini,  having  complained  that  after  having  served  on  the 
Emperor's  staff  during  the  late  campaign,  his  name  had 
been  struck  off  the  staff  by  Berthier,  Napoleon  decided 
that  Jomini  should  be  attached  to  Marshal  Ney's  staff. 

His  Majesty  afterwards  created  Jomini  a  baron,  but 
refused  him  military  promotion,  in  spite  of  his  eminent 
services  in  the  field  and  his  military  writings.  The  conse- 
quence was  that  Jomini  offered  his  services  to  the  Czar, 
but  he  had  hardly  taken  up  his  quarters  at  St.  Peters- 
burg, when  he  was  summoned  to  Paris  by  Napoleon,  and 
offered  to  choose  between  a  dungeon  at  Vincennes  and  the 
rank  of  general.  Jomini  accepted  the  latter  alternative, 
and  served  pnce  more  for  a  time  in  the  French  army. 

To  GENERAL  JUNOT. 

"  FONTAINEBLEAU,  i^th  October,  1807. 
".  .  .  .  Send  me  a  description  of  the  provinces  through 
which  you  pass,  the  roads  and  the  nature  of  the  ground. 
VOL.  II.  z 


33^  THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Send  me  sketches.  Let  the  officers  of  engineers  perform 
this  work,  which  is  important.  Let  me  see  the  distance  of 
the  villages,  the  nature  of  the  country,  and  its  resources. 
Do  not  leave  your  army — first,  because  a  genera,l  should 
never  leave  his  army ;  afterwards,  because  he  is  great  only 
with  his  army,  and  he  is  small  at  court. 

"  I  have  just  learned  that  Portugal  has  declared  war 
against  England  ;  that  is  not  sufficient ;  continue  your 
march.  I  have  reason  to  believe  that  there  is  an  under- 
standing with  England,  so  as  to  give  the  British  troops 
time  to  arrive  from  Copenhagen.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

The  above  letter  sufficiently  shows  the  intentions  of 
Napoleon  towards  Spain,  and  that  he  was  determined  to 
seize  upon  Portugal,  no  matter  what  happened.  Portugal 
had  been  called  upon  to  close  her  ports  to  England,  to 
declare  war  against  England,  to  detain  all  Englishmen  in 
Portugal,  and  to  confiscate  all  British  property.  The 
Prince  Regent  reluctantly  consented  to  the  three  first 
demands,  but  having  opposed  the  last  as  contrary  to  his 
honour,  Napoleon  at  once  withdrew  his  ambassador. 

On  the  23rd  October,  the  treaty  of  Fontainebleau  was 
drawn  up  between  France  and  Spain  for  the  partition  of 
Poland,  and  this  was  followed  on  the  27th  by  a  secret  con- 
vention, and  a  convention  relative  to  the  occupation  of 
Portugal,  or  rather  of  a  portion  of  that  country.  For  a 
second  time  Charles  IV.  became  a  consenting  party  to  the 
spoliation  of  his  unoffending  neighbour.    He  had  his  reward. 

On  the  31st  the  Emperor  wrote  a  series  of  instructions 
to  Junot,  among  which  one  finds  the  following  paragraph: — 
"  I  have  already  informed  you  that  in  authorising  you  to 
enter  the  country  as  an  auxiliary,  it  was  to  enable  you  to 
render  yourself  master  of  the  fleet,  but  that  my  mind  was 
decidedly  made  up  to  seize  upon  Portugal." 

None  of  the  fortresses  were  to  be  confided  to  the  Spanish 
allies. 


MADAME   GRASSINI.  339 

1  To  M.  DE  LAC^PEDE. 

"  FoNTAiNEBLEAU,  3irf  October,  1807. 

"  You  will  receive  a  decree  nominating  the  sire   Duran- 

deau,  commandant    of    the  National   Guard  of  Viteaux, 

member  of  the  Legion  of  Honour,  in  consequence  of  his 

courageous  conduct  in  arresting  the  brigands  who  robbed 

Madame  Grassini.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

The  fact  is  that  Madame  Grassini,  upon  whom  the 
brigands  had  fallen,  was  a  lady  whose  beauty  and  whose 
vocal  talent  had  some  years  before  conquered  the  heart 
of  the  First  Consul.  A  liaison  ensued,  which  lasted  for  a 
year.  Bourrienne,  in  his  J/^»«i??>j-,  says  that  in  1815  this 
lady's  good  graces  were  sought  by  the  Duke  of  Wel- 
lington in  order  that  he  might  resemble  General  Bonaparte 
in  something ! 

On  the  1st  November  Napoleon  wrote  to  M.  Cretet, 
Minister  of  the  Interior,  on  the  subject  of  public  works 
at  Ajaccio.  In  this  letter  he  said — "  The  Neapolitan 
galley  slaves  and  the  blacks  who  are  in  Corsica  commit 
highway  robberies  because  they  are  not  employed.  The 
King  of  Naples  has  4,000  more  galley  slaves  whom  I 
cannot  admit  into  France,  much  less  into  Italy,  where 
they  cause  trouble.  The  real  place  for  them  is  Corsica," 
which  island  had  long  been  considered  a  refugium  pecca- 
torunt.  Seneca  described  its  inhabitants  as  robbers,  liars, 
and  atheists ;  and  Napoleon,  who  knew  his  countrymen, 
probably  thought  a  few  more  galley  slaves  would  not 
hurt.  The  French  themselves  felt  very  sore  on  the 
subject  of  the  colony  which  the  Romans  would  not  keep 
having  furnished  them  with  a  master. 

To  GENERAL  SAVARY, 

"FONTAINEBLEAU,  1st  November,  1807. 
"As  for    our   affairs  they  are   of  three  kinds — ist,  to 
make  war  against  England;  2nd,  to  oblige  Austria  and 

z  2 


340    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Sweden  to  declare  against   England ;    3rd,  to  settle  the 
affairs  of  the  Porte.  .  .  > 

"  Napoleon." 

In  the  same  letter  Napoleofi  consented  to  receive 
Russian  naval  cadets  in  his  ports,  and  to  let  the  Czar  have 
50,000  stand  of  arms,  for  he  had  a  million  in  his  own 
arsenals,  and  there  was  no  sacrifice  which  he  would  not 
make  to  be  agreeable  to  the  Emperor  Alexander.  He 
also  said  that  he  had  purchased  the  hotel  of  the  Princess 
Caroline,  his  sister,  and  that  he  offered  it  as  a  gift  to  the 
Czar  for  his  ambassadors,  and  further  that  he  had  decided 
upon  sending  Caulaincourt  to  St.  Petersburg  as  his  Extra- 
ordinary Ambassador,  with  a  salary  of  24,000/.  a  year, 
"  which,  joined  to  what  he  has,  will  allow  him  to  cut  a 
suitable  figure." 

To  M.  FOUCH± 

"  FONTAlNEBLEAU,  ^tk  November,  1807. 

"  For  the  last  fortnight  you  commit  nothing  but  follies  ; 

it  is  time  to  put  an  end  to  them,  and  to  cease  meddling 

-directly  or  indirectly  in  matters  which  do  not  concern  you. 

Such  is  my  will. 

"  Napoleon." 

An  interesting  despatch  is  to  be  found  on  this  subject  in 
Prince  Metternich's  Memoirs  :— 

METTERNICH  TO  STADION. 

"  Paris,  ^otk  November,  1807. 
After  referring  to  the  tumours  of  a  repudiation  of 
Josephine,  the  Austrian  ambassador  went  on  to  say— 
"The  Minister  of  Police  went  to  see  the  Empress  the 
other  day  at  Fontainebleau,  and  told  her  that  the  public 
welfare,  and  above  all  the  consolidation  of  the  present 
dynasty,  required  that  the  Emperor  should  have  children, 
and  that  she  ought  to  ask  the  Senate  to  join  with  her  in 


RUMOURS   OF   A    DIVORCE.  34 1 

supporting  a  demand  which  would  be  most  painful  to  the 
Emperor.  The  Empress,  prepared  for  this  question,  asked 
Fouch^  if  he  had  received  the  orders  of  the  Emperor  on 
the  subject  of  the  step  he  had  taken.  '  No,'  he  replied, 
'  I  speak  to  your  Majesty  as  a  minister,  as  a  private  indi- 
vidual, and  as  a  subject  attached  to  the  glory  of  the 
country.'  '  I  have  no  account  to  render  you,'  interrupted 
the  Empress ;  '  I  look  upon  my  union  with  the  Emperor 
as  traced  in  the  book  of  destiny.  ,  .   .' 

"Several  days  elapsed  without  anything  occurring  be- 
tween the  imperial  couple,  when  suddenly  tlie  Emperor 
once  more  shared  the  apartment  of  his  wife,  and  asked  her 
the  reason  of  her  sadness.  The  Empress  then  related  the 
conversation  she  had  had  with  Fouch6.  The  Emperor 
declared  that  he  had  never  charged  his  minister  with  such 
a  mission.  He  added  that  she  ought  to  know  him  well 
enough  to  be  sure  that  he  required  no  intermediary  to 
arrange  matters  with  her. 

"  A  short  time  afterwards  Fouche  reiterated  bis  demand 
in  a  long  letter  which  is  said  to  have  been  a  masterpiece 
of  eloquence,  power,  and  reason.  Josephine  went  at  once 
to  the  Emperor,  who  received  her  very  coldly,  and  who  . 
after  many  complaints  and  reproaches  concerijing  her  sus- 
ceptibility and  her  jealousy,  repeated  what  he  had  told  her 
before.  He  promised  her  that  he  '  would  wash  Fouchd's 
head.' 

"  His  Majesty  set  out  for  Italy.  The  public  continued  to 
busy  itself  with  rumours  which  no  one  contradicted,  when 
on  the  23rd  the  Government  Commissioner  of  the  bank 
assembled  the  merchants  at  the  Bourse  to  tell  them  that 
he  had  been  directed  by  the  Minister  of  Police  to  contradict 
the  rumours  of  a  divorce." 

Prince  Metternich  went  on  to  say  that  no  minister  would 
have  dared  to  act  as  Fouch6  had  done  without  the  orders 
of  the  Emperor,  and  that  a  petition  was  about  to  be 
addressed  to  the  chief  of  the  State,  asking  him  to  insure 


342     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

the  succession  in  a  direct  line.  ...  "It  is  urgent,"  he 
added,  "  to  know  upon  what  princess  the  choice  of  the 
Emperor  will  fall."  Referring  to  the  rumour  of  a  matri- 
monial alliance  with  the  Czar,  Prince  Metternich  said  that 
clearly  the  question  of  such  an  alliance  had  been  discussed 
between  the  two  sovereigns  at  Tilsit,  that  General  Cau- 
lincourt  had  been  directed  to  make  a  formal  demand,  and 
that  if  Alexander  refused  his  sister,  complications  would  at 
once  arise,  the  extent  of  which  it  would  be  impossible  to 
determine. 

As  we  shall  see,  very  serious  complications  did  grow 
out  of  this  matter,  such  as  the  march  to  Moscow  and 
back. 

In  a  long  letter  to  Savary,  dated  the  7th,  the  Emperor 
gave  an  account  of  the  brilliant  way  in  which  the  new 
Russian  ambassador  had  been  received  and  which  had 
caused  great  jealousy.  "  It  was  agreed,"  wrote  Napoleon, 
"that  he  should  write  to  Prince  Kourakine,  and  that  I 
should  hand  him  the  draught  of  a  note  in  order  to  decide 
the  court  of  Vienna  to  declare  war  against  England.  I 
spoke  to  him  frankly  on  the  subject  of  the  affairs  of  Turkey, 
giving  him  to  understand  that  anything  which  could  draw 
closer  our  bonds  would  suit  me ;  that  the  world  was  large 
enough  for  two  powers.  .  .  .  M.  de  Tolstoi  spoke  to  me  a 
good  deal  about  evacuating  Prussia ;  I  said  that  would 
soon  be  done.  I  added  that  Russia  no  doubt  intended  to 
keep  Wallachia  and  Moldavia,  in  which  case  it  was  only 
fair  that,  by  way  of  compensation,  I  should  keep_  some 
provinces  of  Prussia ;  that  if  Russia  had  more  extended 
ideas  on  the  subject  of  Turkey  M.  de  Romanzoff'  should 
send  him  more  precise  instructions;  that,  as  for  me,  I 
wished  to  do  all  that  could  tighten  our  bonds." 

In  a  postscript  the  Emperor  added: — "The  courier 
from  Vienna  has  just  arrived.  The  Emperor  of  Austria 
has  decided  upon  declaring  war  against  England  unless 
she  puts  things  back  in  the  state  she  found  them  at  Copen- 
hagen.    It  would  be  shameful  for  Russia,  after  an  event 


THE    PRINCESS    OF    LUCCA.  343 

which  so  intimately  concerns  her,  to  remain  behindhand. 
But  I  hope  that  Lord  Gower  has  already  been  dismissed." 
On  the  8th  of  November  a  letter  was  written  to  Junot  to 
say  Portugal  had  consented  to  close  her  ports  to  England, 
but  for  all  this  he  was  not  to  delay  his  march  upon  Lisbon 
for  a  single  day.  If  the  Prince  Regent  wished  to  live  in  peace 
with  France  he  was  to  send  a  plenipotentiary  to  Paris,  but 
in  the  meantime  Junot  was  to  seize  on  the  fleet  and  the 
arsenals. 

To  EUGENE  NAPOLEON. 

"  FONTAINEBLEAU,  wth  November,  1807. 

"  Marescalchi  will  communicate  to  you  the  treaty  which 
I  have  concluded  with  Spain ;  you  will  see  that  Tuscany 
belongs  to  me.  My  intention  is  to  unite  it  to  Italy.  I 
think  that  I  have  troops  enough  at  Leghorn  to  accomplish 
this.  But  you  must  prepare,  in  secret,  the  necessary 
measures, 

"  Napoleon." 

The  Princess  of  Lucca  (sister  Eliza)  having  submitted 
some  new  coins  for  her  principality  to  the  Emperor  with 
his  superscription  Napoleone prot^gge  t Italia: 

DECISION, 

"FONTAINEBLEAU,  wth  November,  1807. 

"  This  type  is  not  suitable ;  what  it  is  wished  to  put  in 
place  oi  Dieu  protege  la  France  is  indecent. 

"Napoleon." 

Napoleon  meant  to  say  that  this  little  bit  of  flattery  on 
the  part  of  his  sister  was  blasphemous,  but  there  was  surely 
more  blasphemy  in  connecting  the  name  of  the  Almighty 
in  any  way  with  his  usurpations.  The  idea  of  the  Princess 
of  Lucca  was  to  render  to  Caesar  the  things  that  were 
Caesar's. 


344    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

In  a  letter  to  Junot  dated  the  I2th  occur  such  paragraphs 
as  these  : — 

"It  is  for  you  to  set  an  example  of  disinterestedness. 
See  above  all  that  the  army  is  paid.  What  is  derived  from 
captures,  from  jewels,  and  from  English  merchandise  shall 
be  half  for  the  privy  purse  and  half  for  the  army ;  and,  in 
this  half  the  generals  and  the  chiefs  will  have  no  reason  to 
complain  of  their  treatment. 

"  The  English  goods  must  be  seized  and  Englishmen 
arrested  and  sent  to  France;  all  English  property,  even 
funded,  such  as  houses,  vineyards,  &c.,  must  be  seques- 
trated in  my  name. 

"  I  enjoin  you  once  more  to  behave  well,  and  as  I  would 
do  myself,  and  to  give  an  example  of  the  greatest  purity ; 
it  is  much  better  to  have  a  fortune  nobly  acquired,  that 
you  are  not  ashamed  of,  and  which  you  have  received  from 
my  hands,  than  an  illegitimate  fortune.  It  being  probable 
that  the  military  glory  which  you  will  reap  in  Portugal 
will  not  be  great,  you  must  therefore  acquire  that  of  an 
upright  and  irreproachable  administrator. 

"  The  chief  of  your  staff  is  an  individual  who  is  not  over 
delicate ;  he  took  a  great  deal  of  money  at  Fulda.  .  .  . 

"  Have  all  the  precious  articles  you  take  packed  in 
boxes  and  sent  to  the  Sinking  Fund  Office.  .  .  ." 

Inhere  is  something  at  once  lugubrious  and  grotesque  in 
this  way  of  crying  halves  with  Junot  who  was  about  to  let 
loose  his  soldiery  on  an  unfortunate  country  which  had 
committed  no  crime  beyond  remaining  on  friendly  relations 
with  England.  It  is  pretty  well  known  what  attention 
Junot  paid  to  the  advice  of  the  arch  plunderer,  with  whose 
purity  no  one  was  better  acquainted  than  the  commander- 
in-chief  of  the  army  of  Portugal. 

Lord  Londonderry,  in  his  story  of  the  Peninsular  War, 
says  that  the  Portuguese  had  to  pay  .£'4,000,000  for  the 
protection  of  their  private  property.  "  Such  were  the  orders 
of  Napoleon."  The  consequences,  or  some  of  them,  were, 
that  "  the  peasantry,  heart-broken  and  desperate,  refused 


THE  FRENCH  IN  PORTUGAL.         345 

to  SOW  their  fields,  and  the  higher  classes,  whose  usual 
place  of  residence  was  Lisbon,  fled  from  their  homes,  till 
the  city  presented  the  appearance  of  a  place  depopulated 
by  war  or  pestilence." 

As  an  instance  of  how  the  French  army  afterwards 
behaved,  Southey  says  that  "  General  Loison  promised  the 
Archbishop  of  Oporto  that  his  property  should  not  be 
touched.  After  this  promise  Loison  himself  and  some  of 
his  officers  entered  the  archbishop's  library,  which  was  one 
of  the  finest  in  Portugal ;  they  took  down  all  the  books  in 
the  hope  of  finding  valuables  behind  them  ;  they  broke  off 
the  gold  and  silver  clasps  from  the  magnificent  bindings  of 
the  rarest  part  of  the  collection,  and  in  their  disappoint- 
ment at  finding  so  little  plunder  tore  in  pieces  a  whole 
pile  of  manuscripts.  They  took  every  gold  and  silver  coin 
from  his  cabinet  of  medals,  and  the  jewels  with  which  his 
relics  were  adorned.  Loison  was  even  seen  in  noon-day  to 
take  the  archbishop's  episcopal  ring  from  his  table  and 
to  put  it  in  his  pocket." 

The  same  author  says  that  "  The  French  had  entered 
Portugal  with  so  little  baggage  that  even  the  generals 
borrowed,  or  rather  demanded,  linen  from  those  upon  whom 
they  were  quartered.  Soon,  however,  without  having 
received  any  supplies  from  home,  they  were  not  only  splen- 
didly furnished  with  ornamental  apparel,  but  sent  to  France 
large  remittances  in  bills,  money  and  effects,  especially  in 
cotton.  .  .  .  The  emigration  (of  the  royal  family)  had 
been  determined  upon  so  late  that  many  rich  prizes  fell 
into  their  hands.  Fourteen  cart-loads  of  plate  from  the 
patriarchal  church  reached  the  quay  at  Belem  too  late  to  be 
received  on  board.  This  treasure  was  conveyed  back  to 
the  church.  .  .  .  When  the  French  seized  it  they  added  to 
their  booty  a  splendid  altar  service  which  had  been  wrought 
by  the  most  celebrated  artist  in  France.  Junot  fitted  him- 
self out  with  the  spoils  of  Queluz,  and  Loison  had  shirts 
made  of  the  cambric  sheets  belonging  to  the  royal  family, 
which  were  found  at  Mafra." 


346     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

We  shall  have  something  more  to  say  on  this  subject 
when  we  come  to  the  Convention  of  Cintra. 

On  the  15th  November  the  Emperor,  in  sending  brother 
Jerome,  King  of  Westphalia,  a  Constitution,  gave  him  such 
sound  advice  as  this  :  "  What  people  would  wish  to  return 
under  the  arbitrary'^Prussian  system  after  having  tasted  the 
blessings  of  a  wise  and  liberal  administration  ?  The  people 
of  Germany,  of  France,  of  Italy,  and  of  Spain  desire 
equality  and  liberal  ideas.  For  many  years  I  have  con- 
ducted the  affairs  of  Europe  and  I  have  reason  to  be 
convinced  that  the  buzzing  of  the  privileged  classes  is  at 
variance  with  public  opinion.  Be  a  constitutional  king. 
Even  should  the  common  sense  and  the  intelligence  of  the 
age  not  require  this,  in  your  position  good  policy  would 
command  it.  You  will  find  yourself  possessed  of  a  force 
of  opinion  which  will  give  you  a  natural  ascendency  over 
your  neighbours  who  are  absolute  monarchs." 

Article  2  runs  thus  :  — "  We  reserve  for  ourself  the 
allodial  domains  of  the  princes  to  be  employed  in  recom- 
penses which  we  have  promised  to  the  officers  of  our 
armies  who  rendered  us  the  greatest  service  during  the 
present  war." 

Art.  7  set  down  the  contingent  which  the  new  kingdom 
was  to  furnish  to  the  Confederation  of  the  Rhine  at  25,000 
men. 

It  may  be  said  that  these  two  articles  were  destined 
to  prove  thorns  in  the  side  of  King  Jerome,  whose  im- 
poverished country  was  thus  heavily  taxed  at  starting. 

On  the  6th  December  Napoleon  wrote  from  Venice  to 
M.  Maret,  Secretary  of  State,  complaining  of  the  con- 
tinuance of  rumours  calculated  to  afflict  the  Empress 
[rumours  of  a  coming  divorce],  and  directing  him  to  insert 
this  paragraph  in  the  Moniteur : — 

"  Two  marriages  are  about  to  take  place  at  Munich — 
that  of  the  Princess  Charlotte  of  Bavaria  with  the  Prince 
Royal  of  Wirtemberg,  and  that  of  the  sister  of  the 
Emperor  of  Russia  with  the  Prince  Royal  of  Bavaria." 


THE  MILAN  DECREE.  347 

M.  Maret  was  also  to  insert  that  the  Prince  Augustus 
of  Prussia,  who  had  been  made  prisoner  and  had  been 
sent  to  Coppet,  had  learned  very  bad  principles  from 
Madame  de  Stael.  ... 

The  marriages  mentioned  here  connected  the  Bonaparte 
family  with  that  of  the  Romanoffs, 

To  JEROME  NAPOLEON,  King  of  Westphalia. 

"  Venice,  7/;^  Decetnber,  1867. 
"  I  send  you  the  replies  of  the  Empress  of  Russia.  I 
opened  that  addressed  to  you.  I  did  not  take  the  same 
liberty  with  that  for  the  princess,  because  I  suppose  that 
it  contained  nothing  important.  However,  I  beg  you  will 
send  me  a  copy  of  it.  .  .   . 

"  Napoleon." 

A  letter  of  the  same  date,  addressed  to  the  Emperor  of 
Russia,  concluded  thus : — 

"  I  have  just  received  the  declaration  which  your 
Majesty  has  sent  to  London.  Of  all  the  powers  on  the 
Continent  Sweden  alone  remains  at  peace  with  England. 
Your  Majesty  will  probably  set  this  matter  to  rights. 

"I  am  truly  glad  to  see  the  work  of  Tilsit  consoli- 
dated. I  shall  be  more  so  when  your  Majesty  keeps  your 
promise  of  coming  to  Paris ;  ^  it  will  be  a  very  pleasant 
moment  for  me  and  for  my  people.  We  shall  get  the 
better  of  England,  we  shall  pacify  the  world,  and  the 
peace  of  Tilsit  will  be  a  new  epoch  in  the  annals  of 
the  world." 

On  the  17th  December  Napoleon  issued  his  celebrated 
Decree  of  Milan,  by  which  any  neutral  vessel  who  had 
submitted  to  be  searched,  or  had  consented  to  touch  at 
an  English  port,  was  to  be  regarded  as  losing  her 
nationality. 

^  When  Alexander  did  visit  Paris  it  was  hardly  a  pleasant  moment 
foi  his  quondam  friend  and  hero. 


348     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Article  3.  The  British  Isles  are  declared  in  a  state  of 
blockade  by  sea  and  by  land. 

On  the  same  day  his  Majesty  wrote  to  M.  Cretet ; — 

"  Flushing  having  been  united  to  France,  I  beg  you 
will  have  it  attached  to  the  nearest  department." 

And  to  Vice-Admiral  Decres,  saying  that  a  Russian 
vessel  had  put  into  Morlaix,  where  she  was  to  be  de- 
tained, because,  if  really  Russian,  she  would  inevitably 
fall  into  the  clutches  of  England,  and  if  her  Russian  flag 
were  a  mere  mast,  of  course  she  should  not  be  allowed 
to  sail. 

To  KING  JOSEPH. 

"Milan,  December  i-jth,  1807, 

"I  saw  Lucien  at  Mantua.  I  think  he  promised  to 
send  me  his  eldest  daughter.  This  young  person  must 
be  in  Paris  by  January.  Lucien,  who  appeared  to  be 
swayed  by  conflicting  feelings,  had  not  the  strength  of 
mind  to  come  to  a  decision.  I  did  all  I  could  to  persuade 
him  to  employ  his  talents  for  me  and  for  his  country.  It 
he  wishes  to  send  me  his  daughter  she  must  start  without 
delay,  and  he  must  send  me  a  declaration  placing  her 
entirely  at  my  disposition.  There  is  not  a  moment  to 
be  lost.  Events  are  marching  rapidly,  and  my  destinies 
must  be  accomplished.  I  await  with  impatience  a  clear 
and  concise  answer  with  regard  to  Charlotte. 

"  The  interests  of  Lucien's  family  will  be  provided  for. 
A  divorce  with  Madame  Jouberthon  once  pronounced, 
and  Lucien  estabhshed  in  a  foreign  country  [as  king  of 
Italy  or  of  Tuscany],  he  will  be  at  liberty  to  live  on  terms 
of  intimacy  with  Madame  Jouberthon,  but  not  in  France ; 
nor  must  he  reside  with  her  as  if  she  were  a  princess  and 
his  wife.  Madame  Jouberthon  shall  have  a  high  title 
conferred  upon  her  at  Naples  or  elsewhere.  Politics  alone 
influenced  me  in  this  matter.  I  have  no  desire  to  meddle 
with  the  tastes  and  passions  of  Lucien.  .  ■  . 

"  Napoleon." 


CHARLOTTE  BONAPARTE.  349 

Napoleon,  in  the  first  place,  had  done  all  in  his  power 
to  prevent  the  marriage  of  Lucien  with  the  divorced  wife 
of  the  stockbroker  Jouberthon,  and  he  had  driven  him 
into  exile.  Now  he  offered  him  a  crown  if  he  would 
repudiate  her,  but  Lucien  was  made  of  sterner  stuff  than 
Jerome,  and  refused.  He,  however,  consented  to  send  his 
daughter  Charlotte  to  Paris,  and  to  allow  Napoleon  to 
dispose  of  her  hand. 

This  matter  intimately  concerns  us,  for  had  Charlotte 
Bonaparte  proved  more  tractable  she  might  have  become 
Queen  of  Spain,  and  in  that  case  there  would  have  been 
no  Peninsular  War.  The  idea  of  Napoleon  was  to  wed 
her  to  the  Prince  of  Asturias,  and  to  govern  Spain  through 
his  niece.  The  Emperor,  however,  having  opened  her 
letters  to  her  father,  and  found  them  filled  with  criticisms 
of  the  Imperial  court,  from  whose  immoral  atmosphere  she 
longed  to  escape,  sent  her  back  to  her  father,  who  was 
only  too  delighted  to  receive  her  back. 

On  the  28th  December  came  a  second  Milan  decree, 
levying  a  contribution  of  100,000,000  francs  on  Portugal 
for  the  purpose  of  redeeming  all  the  properties  belonging 
to  private  individuals  !  and  confiscating  all  the  property  of 
the  Queen,  the  Prince  Regent,  and  the  nobles  who  had 
abandoned  their  country.  Junot's  force  was  to  become 
"  the  army  of  Portugal,"  was  to  be  paid  and  equipped  by 
Portugal,  and  each  man,  in  addition  to  his  rations,  was  to 
receive  a  bottle  of  wine  per  diem. ! 

When  the  above  decree  was  issued  the  House  of 
Braganza  had  ceased  to  reign.  A  month  previously  the 
royal  family  had  embarked  for  Rio  Janeiro  on  board 
the  Portuguese  fleet,  escorted  by  four  English  ships  of 
the  line. 


CHAPTER    V. 

THE  YEAR   1808. 

A  GREAT  deal  of  the  correspondence  of  1808  is  devoted 
to  Spanish  affairs,  and  it  will  be  well  to  bear  in  mind  the 
following  facts :  In  1 795 ,  Spain  concluded  a  treaty  with 
France  at  Bale,  by  which  the  Republican  troops  were  to 
evacuate  the  provinces  of  the  Ebro,  and  France  was  to 
receive  in  return  the  Spanish  portion  of  the  island  of 
St.  Domingo.  This  treaty  gave,  so  much  satisfaction  that 
Manuel  Godoy,  who  was  instrumental  in  concluding  it, 
was  created  Prince  of  the  Peace.  Godoy  was  at  the  same 
time  the  favourite  of  the  king,  the  lover  of  the  queen, 
the  husband  of  a  princess  of  the  blood,  and  prime  minister. 
Several  other  treaties  were  afterwards  concluded  between 
the  two  countries,  all  of  which  entailed  losses  and  dis- 
honour on  Spain,  the  loss  of  Louisiana,  Trinidad,  and 
other  colonies,  the  loss  of  her  galleons  and  her  commerce, 
and  the  total  destruction  of  her  fleet  at  Trafalgar.  In 
addition  she  had  to  furnish  troops  to  France,  and  subsidies. 
Just  before  Jena,  the  Prince  of  the  Peace  conceived  that  the, 
moment  had  arrived  to  shake  off  this  costly  alliance,  and. 
he  went  as  far  as  issuing  a  bombastic  proclamation,  and 
ordering  a  levy  of  conscripts.  Before  he  could  commit  any 
overt  act,  however,  the  news  of  the  defeat  of  the  Prussians 
arrived,  and  the  Prince  of  the  Peace,  at  once  changing 
his  tactics,  despatched  the  Duke  of  Frias  to  congratulate 


SPANISH    AFFAIRS.  35I 

Napoleon  on  his  victory.  The  Emperor  allowed  his  wrath  to 
remain  dormant,  but  there  is  little  doubt  that  at  Berlin  he 
made  up  his  mind  to  punish  this  treason,  and  to  dethrone 
the  Bourbons.  He  received  the  Spanish  ambassador  with 
great  amiability,  and  wrote  to  Charles  IV.  calling  him  the 
faithful  ally  of  France.  Strange  to  say,  Godoy,  the  author 
of  the  proclamation,  was  universally  detested  in  Spain  as 
the  docile  instrument  of  the  policy  of  Napoleon,  while  the 
Prince  of  Asturias  became  a  popular  hero  as  the  antagonist 
of  France. 

Shortly  after  tliis,  Napoleon  persuaded  the  feeble 
Charles  to  sign  the  iniquitous  treaty  of  Fontainebleau, 
by  which  the  high  contracting  powers  were  to  partition 
Portugal ;  the  Prince  of  the  Peace  was  to  have  one  slice  of 
thatxountry,  the  Queen  of  Etruria  was  to  have  another, 
and  Charles  was  to  have  half  the  Portuguese  colonies.  Of 
course  the  Portuguese  ports  were  to  be  closed  to  England, 
and  a  corps  of  40,000  French  troops  was  to  assemble  at 
Bayonne  in  order  to  be  able  to  march  on  Portugal,  should 
Junot,  with  his  25,000  men,  and  the  Spanish  contingent 
also  25,000  strong,  ordered  to  march  upon  Lisbon,  not 
prove  sufficient.  The  great  object  of  Napoleon,  was  to 
get  hold  of  the  Portuguese  fleet,  and  to  have  an  excuse  for 
pouring  troops  into  Spain.  What  afterwards  happened 
showed  that  Napoleon  had  no  idea  of  keeping  faith  with 
Charles.  Junot  entered  Lisbon,  but  the  Portuguese  fleet 
had  just  time  to  make  its  escape  with  the  royal  family 
on  board. 

At  this  period,  Beauharnais,  the  brother  of  Josephine's 
first  husband,  was  ambassador  in  Spain,  a  simple-minded, 
upright  gentleman.  There  were  two  parties  at  Madrid, 
that  of  the  court  and  Manuel  Godoy,  and  that  of  the 
Prince  of  Asturias  and  Juan  Escoiquiz  his  tutor.  Know- 
ing the  Prince  of  the  Peace  to  be  distasteful  to  Napoleon, 
the  French  ambassador  attached  himself  to  the  latter 
party.  Escoiquiz,  who  was  a  crafty  and  ambitious  monk, 
was  determined  to  turn  the  goodwill  of  Beauharnais   to 


352    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

account,  in  order,  if  possible,  to  gain  the  powerful  protec- 
tion of  Napoleon.  He  knew  that  the  Emperor  had  a  weak- 
ness for  royal  alliances,  and  so  he  entered  into  negotia- 
tions with  Beauharnais  to  obtain  the  hand  of  an  imperial 
princess  for  the  Prince  of  Asturias.  Napoleon  encouraged 
these  overtures,  but  said  they  were  too  vague.  This  was 
in  July,  1807.  In  the  month  of  October,  he  received  a 
regular  demand  signed  by  the  Prince  of  Asturias,  and 
addressed  to  "  that  hero  who  effaces  all  those  who  pre- 
ceded him,"  begging  Napoleon  to  grant  him  the  honour 
of  allying  himself  to  the  imperial  family.  While  Beau- 
harnais was  intriguing  with  Escoiquiz,  Napoleon  was 
intriguing  with  the  opposite  party. 

In  December,  1808,  Prince  Metternich  wrote  a  remark- 
able despatch  on  the  restless  activity  of  the  Emperor,  in 
which  he  said  :  "  Napoleon,  before  the  end  of  the  war  with 
Prussia,  prepared  the  destruction  of  Spain,  the  oldest,  the 
most  ill-used  and  most  disinterested  of  the  allies,  not  only 
of  Napoleon,  but  of  all  the  preceding  governments  in 
France.  This  should  prove  that  friendship  is  no  safe- 
guard for  a  Power  which  finds  itself  in  the  path  of  the  French 
Emperor.  .  .  .  Engrossed  with  the  idea  of  invading  Spain, 
Napoleon  would  listen  to  no  remonstrances  against  a  plan 
as  impolitic  in  its  conception  as  it]^was  criminal  and  ridi- 
culous in  its  means  of  execution.  Guided  by  his  own 
insatiable  ambition,  and  the  perfidious  counsels  of  Murat, 
who  hoped  to  seat  himself  on  the  throne,"  &c. 

As  the  Prince  of  Asturias  in  his  letter  to  Napoleon  had 
brought  the  gravest  charges  against-  his  father,  this  gave 
the  Emperor  an  excuse  for  interfering  between  Charles  IV. 
and  his  son.  Beauharnais  was  directed  to  continue  his 
negotiations,  and  Ferdinand  was  encouraged  to  rebel 
against  his  parents. 

On  the  29th  October,  the  king  suspected  Ferdinand  of 
conspiring  against  him,  caused  him  to  be  arrested,  and  had 
his  papers  seized.  Among  other  compromising  papers  was 
found  the  memorandum  of  Escoiquiz  demanding  the  hand 


MATRIMONIAL    SCHEMES.  353 

of  a  French  princess.  Charles  at  once  wrote  to  Napoleon 
asking  him  to  recall  Beauharnais.  He  had  so  little  idea  of 
Napoleon  being  mixed  up  in  the  intrigue  that  he  implored 
his  advice.  On  the  receipt  of  the  king's  letter,  Napoleon, 
who  thought  that  his  perfidy  had  been  unmasked,  flew  in 
a  violent  passion,  and  overwhelmed  Masserano,  one  of  the 
Spanish  ambassadors,  with  invectives.  He  declared  that 
Beauharnais  had  been  calumniated,  that  he  would  at  once 
march  upon  Spain,  and  troops  were  hurried  up  by  post 
from  Metz,  Nancy  and  Sedan,  to  the  frontier.  Napoleon 
was  just  about  to  fall  on  his  prey  when  the  news  arrived 
that  Ferdinand  had  implored  his  father's  pardon  in  the 
most  abject  terms,  and  had  been  forgiven.  The  Emperor 
had  no  longer  an  excuse  for  interfering. 

The  fact  was  that  Ferdinand  had  made  a  clean  breast 
of  it,  and  that  the  Court  of  Madrid  had  been  terrified 
out  of  its  life  on  finding  Napoleon  himself  mixed  up  in 
the  intrigue.  Ferdinand  was  therefore  pardoned,  so  that  the 
Emperor  should  have  no  excuse  for  carrying  out  his  threat. 

Napoleon  not  only  refused  to  recall  Beauhai'nais,  or  to 
disavow  him,  but  he  declared  that  he  would  not  tolerate 
the  publication  of  anything  concerning  either  himself  or 
his  ambassador  in  connection  with  this  affair,  and  he  wrote 
to  King  Charles  assuring  him  that  he  had  never  received 
any  letter  from  his  son,  that  he  had  never  heard  him 
spoken  of,  and  was  not  aware  of  his  existence.  The  fact 
is  that  the  Emperor  was  at  that  moment  intent  upon 
giving  his  niece  Charlotte,  Lucien's  eldest  daughter,  to  the 
Prince  of  Asturias. 

When  Charles  IV.  realised  the  situation,  he  considered 
that  the  best  thing  he  could  do  would  be  to  repeat  the 
demand  urged  by  his  son,  and  he  consequently  wrote 
an  affectionate  letter  to  the  Emperor  asking  for  the  hand 
of  a  French  princess,  and  begging  his  Majesty  to  carry 
out  the  stipulations  of  the  treaty  of  Fontainebleau. 

After  allowing  some  time  to  pass,  Napoleon  replied 
that  he  would  willingly  consent  to  a  matrimonial  alliance, 

VOL.   II.  A  A 


354     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

on  condition  of  the  Prince  of  Asturias  having  received  his 
Majesty's  pardon.  The  Emperor,  who  was  aware  that 
this  pardon  had  been  accorded,  said  nothing  about  the 
treaty,  and  continued  to  march  troops  into  Spain.  As 
for  the  match  between  Charlotte  Bonaparte  and  the 
Prince  of  Asturias,  it  had  to  be  given  up.  The  young 
lady  having  expressed  her  desire  to  escape  from  the  im- 
moral atmosphere  of  the  imperial  court,  was  sent  home. 

Napoleon  repaired  to  Bayonne  to  watch  matters  from 
the  frontier,  sending  Murat  on  to  Madrid.     The  Emperor 
was  hardly  settled  at  Bayonne  before  a  revolution  occurred 
at  Aranjuez,  in  consequence  of  the  people  suspecting  the 
king   of    wishing    to    leave    the    country.       Charles    was 
dethroned    and    Ferdinand    was    proclaimed    king.      The 
Spaniards  were  somewhat  bewildered,  but  were  inclined 
to  think  that  the  object  of  Napoleon  was  to  deliver  them 
from  an  odious  government    and   to  support   Ferdinand. 
Napoleon,  however,  refused  to  recognise  Ferdinand,  on  the 
ground  that  his  father  had  been  forced  to  abdicate  and 
had  retracted  his  abdication,  and  by  coaxing  both  parties 
to    Bayonne,    he    ended    by    frightening    Ferdinand    into 
abdicating  in  his  turn,  and  by  persuading  Charles  to  cede 
him  his  rights  and  to  become  his  pensioner.     By  a  series 
of  tricks  the   Bourbons    were  deposed,   and  the  Spanish 
throne,    after    having    been    offered    to    King    Louis    of 
Holland,  was  finally  accepted  by  King  Joseph  of  Naples. 
While  Napoleon  was  at  Bayonne  he  had  a  long  con- 
versation  with  Escoiquiz,  of  which  the  monk  has  left  a 
graphic  description.     The    chief  points    upon   which   the 
Emperor  insisted,  while  every  now  and  again  pulling  the 
monk's  ears,  were  that  the  abdication  of  Charles  was  not 
voluntary ;    that    it   was    necessary   for  the   interests   of 
France  that  the  Bourbons   should  cease   to   reign ;   that 
Charles  IV.,  when  he  thought  he  was  occupied  in  Spain, 
before  Jena,  wished  to  declare  war  against  him. 

Escoiquiz  maintained  that  Napoleon  by  giving  Ferdi- 
nand the  hand  of  a  French  princess  would  make  him  a 


ESCOIQUIZ.  35^ 

faithful  ally,  and  he  warned  the  Emperor  of  the  insuper- 
able difficulties  which  would  attend  any  attempt  to  force 
a  foreign  king  upon  a  high-spirited  nation.  While  speaking 
very  firmly,  the  monk  at  the  same  time  indulged  in  what 
he  considered  wholesome  flattery.  He  apologised  for  this 
in  the  following  curious  note :  "  I  must  warn  my  readers 
that  such  language  was  indispensable  in  speaking  to  this 
vain  and  ferocious  man.  The  truth  could  reach  his  hard- 
ened heart  only  under  the  guise  of  flattery.  I  was  at 
Bayonne,  and  I  was  dealing  with  Attila.  I  need  say  no 
more."  Escoiquiz  having  pointed  out  numerous  difficul- 
ties, the  conversation  took  this  turn  : — 

Napoleon.  You  exaggerate,  canon  ;  I  have  nothing  to 
fear  from  the  only  Power  which  might  cause  me  some 
uneasiness.  The  Emperor  of  Russia,  to  whom  I  com- 
municated my  plans  when  at  Tilsit,  approved  of  them, 
and  pledged  his  word  of  honour  not  to  thwart  them.  As 
for  the  other  Powers,  they  will  take  good  care  not  to  stir.^- 
At  all  events,  the  Spaniards  will  not  offisr  a  serious  resist- 
ance. The  wealthy  will  remain  quiet  for  fear  of  losing 
their  property ;  and  the  clergy,  whom  I  shall  hold  respon- 
sible for  any  disorders,  will  soon  exert  their  influence  in 
the  same  direction.^  Believe  me,  canon,  that  a  country  in 
which  there  are  many  monks  is  easy  to  subdue. 

'  This  was  a  grievous  enor  on  the  part  of  Napoleon,  as  he  soon 
found  out. 

"  When  summoned  to  wait  upon  Napoleon  at  Bayonne  the  Bishop 
of  St.  Andero  replied  in  the  following  terms  ;  "  I  cannot  make  it 
convenient  to  attend,  and  if  I  could  I  would  not.  I  judge  of  your 
sincerity  towards  Spain  by  your  conduct  towards  Portugal  and  other 
kingdoms  with  which  you  have  interfered.  If  you  are  in  earnest  in 
your  offer  to  befriend  the  Spanish  nation  liberate  our  sovereign  and 
his  family,  and  withdraw  your  troops  from  among  us.  .  .  ."  And  in 
one  of  his  bulletins,  not  published  in  the  Correspondence,  the  Emperor 
afterwards  spoke  of  the  Bishop  of  Santander,  who  had  published  a 
pastoral  full  of  dignity  and  eloquence  against  the  invasion  of  his 
country,  as  "  a  furibond  and  fanatical  priest,  animated  with  the  spirit 
of  the  demon  and  always  inarching  with  a  cutlass  at  his  side." 

A  A  2 


356     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Escoiquiz.  I  respect  the  opinions  of  your  Majesty,  anc 
I  recognise  the  inferiority  of  my  political  talents ;  but 
acquainted  with  the  character  of  my  countrymen,  I  hav( 
the  honour  to  warn  your  Majesty  that  the  wealthy  classei 
and  the  clergy  will  be  the  first  to  set  the  people  th( 
example  of  sacrificing  all  they  have,  and  that  the  natioi 
in  a  body  will  oppose  the  elevation  of  any  other  sovereigi 
but  Ferdinand. 

Napoleon.  Supposing  what  you  say  to  be  true,  I  shal 
still  attain  my  object  by  sacrificing  200,000  men,  an( 
I  am  far  from  supposing  that  Spain  will  cost  me  S( 
many. 

Escoiquiz  insisted  that  it  would  require  300,000  mei 
to  hold  Spain,  and  asked  of  what  use  an  alliance  woulc 
be  on  such  terms.  Nothing,  however,  would  shake  thi 
iron  will  of  Napoleon.  At  St.  Helena,  however,  hi 
admitted  that  if  he  had  listened  to  some  of  the  reason 
advanced  by  Escoiquiz  he  would  have  acted  wisely.^ 

In  the  whole  of  this  Spanish  business  Napoleon  wa 
badly  inspired.  He  thought  to  accomplish  his  design 
by  craft,  and  he  found  himself  immersed  in  a  sea  c 
troubles,  for  the  whole  nation  sprang  to  arms  to  resis 
him. 

In  some  "  Observations  "  written  by  Prince  Metternicl 
in  April,  1809,  ^^  said  (vol.  ii.  p.  297)  :  "Napoleon,  afte 
Tilsit,  had  the  choice  between  overthrowing  Austria  c 
Spain.  He  preferred  beginning  with  the  second,  becaus 
he  thought  that  he  could  accomplish  his  purpose  withou 
striking  a  blow.  Nothing  would  have  been  more  un 
popular  in  France  than  a  war  immediately  after  th 
disastrous  campaign  of  Poland.     The  Grand  Army  itsel 

^  He  also  said,  "  That  unfortunate  affair  proved  my  ruin,  it  divide 
my  forces,  opened  a  '  wing '  for  the  English  soldiers,  and  attacked  m 
morality  in  Europe.  I  embarked  badly  in  the  affair.  The  immoralil 
was  too  patent,  the  injustice  too  ;cynical,  and  the  attempt  presente 
itself  merely  in  its  hideous  nudity,  deprived  of  all  that  was  grandios 
and  of  the  numerous  benefits  with  which  my  intention  was  filled.  .  . 


AUSTRIA   arms;  357 

fatigued,  cut  up,  wished  for  repose."  Prince  Metternich 
then  said  that  no  doubt  existed  about  Napoleon  looking 
upon  the  destruction  of  the  throne  of  the  Bourbons  as  an 
intennMe pacifique  between  the  war  of  1807  and  war  with 
Austria.  "This  is  what  was  signed  at  Tilsit."  He  also 
wrote  that :  "  Napoleon,  absorbed  in  his  plans  against 
Spain,  would  listen  to  no  remonstrance  against  a  project 
which  was  as  impolitic  in  its  conception  as  it  was  criminal 
in  its  means  of  execution.  He  allowed  himself  to  be 
guided  by  his  insatiable  ambition  and  by  the  perfidious 
counsels  of  Murat."  Of  Murat,  who  thought  that  he 
would  be  called  to  reign  at  Madrid. 

Austria,  aware  of  the  intentions  of  Napoleon,  and  seeing 
him  levying  fresh  troops  not  only  in  France  but  in  Italy 
and  throughout  the  Confederation,  began  to  arm  also. 
Hence  an  angry  correspondence  between  the  two  cabinets, 
which  was  destined  to  end  in  war. 

Napoleon  was  at  Bayonne,  intent  upon  repairing  such 
reverses  of  his  lieutenants  in  Portugal  and  Spain  as  the 
defeat  of  Junot  at  Vimeiro,  which  led  to  the  convention 
of  Cintra  and  the  capitulation  of  Baylen,  where  20,000 
men  under  General  Dupont  laid  down  their  arms.  Sud- 
denly, alarmed  at  the  threatening  attitude  of  Austria,  he 
repaired  to  Erfurth  to  meet  the  Czar.  Before  venturing 
into  Spain  it  was  necessary  to  make  sure  of  Russia,  and  to 
make  sure  of  Russia  it  was  necessary  to  give  effect  to  the 
promises  of  Tilsit  with  regard  to  Moldavia  and  Wallachia. 
At  Erfurth  Russia  recognised  King  Joseph,  and  agreed  to 
attack  Austria  should  Austria  attack  France. 

On  several  occasions  during  the  year  1808  Napoleon 
declared  his  ardent  desire  to  make  peace,  and  he  per- 
suaded Alexander  to  write  a  joint  letter  with  him  to  the 
King  of  England,  proposing  terms  which  he  must  have 
known  to  be  unacceptable,  and  which  were  probably 
offered  in  order  to  gain  time  and  to  delay  the  despatch 
of  British  troops  to  Portugal.  Canning  replied  to  the  letter 
.of  the  two  Emperors,  insisting  on  the  allies  of  England, 


358     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

the  Kings  of  Portugal,  of  Naples,  and  of  Sweden,  and  the 
Spanish  "insurgents,"  being  admitted  to  any  negotiation. 
Napoleon  positively  refused  to  hear  of  the  admittance 
of  the  Spanish  "  insurgents,"  and  asked  what  England 
would  say  if  he  had  proposed  the  admission  of  the  Roman 
Catholic  insurgents  in  Ireland !  England,  on  her  side, 
would  no  more  recognise  King  Joseph  than  would  Austria, 
who  contended  that  even  if  Charles  and  Ferdinand  had 
abdicated  in  a  regular  way,  there  were  other  heirs  to  the 
Spanish  throne. 

To  JEROME  NAPOLEON,  King  of  Westphalia. 

"Paris,  i^th  January,  1808 
"...  I  think  that  if  you  begin  by  making  your  treasury 
support  these  expenses  you  will  ruin  it.  What  will  you 
do  when  the  Grand  Army  passes  through  your  states .' 
It  remained  for  a  year  in  Bavaria  without  costing  the 
king  a  farthing  ;  it  was  fed  by  the  inhabitants.  It  is  true 
that  they  were  a  little  burdened  ;  but  if  the  king  had  been 
obliged  to  pay  the  army,  he  would  not  have  been  able  to 
support  it  for  a  fortnight.  .  .  .  These  circumstances  are 
not  new  for  me.  I  was  two  years  in  France  without 
finances.     In  Italy  it  has  been  the  same  for  six  years.   .  .. 

"  Napoleon." 
To  marshal  moncey. 

"  Paris,  -jth  January,  1808. 
"Your  head-quarters  should  be  Vittoria  on  the  loth. 
However,  you  need  not  push  forward  too  rapidly,  as  there 
is  no  hurry.  .  .  .  Directly  you  enter  Spain  send  ofiScers 
right  and  left  to  gather  information  with  regard  to  the 
situation  and  the  feeling  of  the  country. 

"  Napoleon." 

Similar  instructions  were  addressed  to  General  Mouton, 
afterwards   better  known   as  Comte  Lobau — instructions 


GENERAL    MIOLLIS.  359 

which  clearly  foreshadowed  the  intention  of  the  Emperor 
to  invade  a  country  with  which  he  had  recently  concluded 
a  close  alliance. 

To  EUGENE  NAPOLEON,  Viceroy  of  Italy. 

"  Paris,  r^th  January,  1808. 
"  My  Son, — As  soon  as  you  receive  this  letter  send 
orders  to  General  Miollis  to  march  upon  Perugia  with  all 
his  artillery,  cavalry,  and  infantry.  Order  General  Lemar- 
rois  to  march  on  Fogliano,  leaving  a  battalion  to  guard 
Ancona.  I  have  given  orders  for  the  King  of  Naples  to 
send  a  column  of  3,000  men  to  Terracina.  .  .  .  From 
Perugia  General  Miollis  will  continue  his  march  to  Rome, 
on  the  pretence  of  passing  through  that  city  on  his  way  to 
Naples.  Orders  have  been  given  for  the  Terracina  column 
to  march  upon  Rome  as  soon  as  General  Miollis  has 
entered  that  city.  General  Miollis  on  his  arrival  must 
take  possession  of  the  castle  of  Angelo  ;  he  must  render 
all  possible  honours  to  the  Pope,  and  declare  that  his 
mission  is  to  occupy  Rome  in  order  to  arrest  the  Neapo- 
litan brigands  who  seek  refuge  there.  He  must  have  the 
consul  and  the  agents  of  King  Ferdinand  arrested,  the 
English  Consul,  and  all  the  Englishmen  who  are  in  Rome. 
He  must  keep  his  men  in  order,  remain  quiet,  not  meddle 
with  the  Government,  and  merely  cause  his  troops  to  be 
fed  and  paid.  "NAPOLEON." 

A  letter  similar  to  the  above  was  addressed'  to  King 
Joseph.  It  commenced,  however,  thus — "The  imper- 
tinences of  the  court  of  Rome  have  no  limits,  and  I  am 
impatient  to  have  done  with  them.  I  have  sent  away  the 
negotiators." 

To  CHARLES  IV.,  King  of  Spain. 

"Paris,  loih  January,  1808, 
"  I  was  in  Italy  when  I  received  your  Majesty's  letter 
of  the  1 8th  November,  by  which  you  informed  me  of  your 


360     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

desire  to  draw  closer  the  bonds  between  the  two  states  by 
uniting  the  Prince  of  Asturias  with  a  French  princess.  I 
share  the  feelings  of  your  Majesty  ;  I  willingly  consent  to 
this  alliance.  But  your  Majesty  can  understand  that  no 
man  of  honour  would  like  to  ally  himself  to  a  son  dis- 
honoured by  his  Declaration,  without  being  certain  that  he 
has  recovered  your  good  graces.  Your  Majesty  cannot 
doubt  my  desire  to  dissipate  all  the  clouds  and  difficulties 
which  have  arisen  between  us,  so  that,  in  concert,  we  may 
once  more  take  the  necessary  measures  for  subduing  our 
most  implacable  enemies, 

"Napoleon." 

In  a  second  letter  written  on  the  same  day,  the 
Emperor  said — "  I  have  received  your  Majesty's  letter.  I 
do  not  think  that  affairs  are  sufficiently  advanced  for 
the  publication  of  our  convention  settling  the  fate  of 
Portugal.  .  .  , 

To  M.  DE  CHAMPAGNY  {Minister  of  Foreign  A^airs). 

"Paris,  n.th  January,  1808. 

"...  I  have  read  your  despatches  from  Spain  and 
Portugal  with  attention.  You  must  have  a  historical 
notice  of  the  conspiracy  written,  so  that  I  may  make  use 
of  it  according  to  circumstances.  Write  to  General  Junot 
to  remain  master  of  the  entire  kingdom  of  Portugal  until 
commissioners  have  been  appointed  to  fix  the  limits 
according  to  convention. 

"  I  have  read  the  despatches  from  Russia.  .  .  .  You  will 
write  to  Sebastiani  that  negotiations  have  been  commenced, 
and  you  will  direct  him  to  ask  these  two  questions — ist, 
Should  the  Russians  try  to  keep  Moldavia  and  Wallachia, 
will  the  Porte  declare  war  in  conjunction  with  France  ? 
What  are  its  means  for  waging  war  .■'  2nd,  If  the 
English  land  at  Corfu  will  the  Porte  force  AH  Pasha 
to  provision  that  fortress  and  protect  the  passage  of 
couriers  and  troops  on  land  .■'  .  .  .  You  will  inform  Count 


MOLDAVIA  AND  WALLACHIA.         36 1 

Tolstoy  that  I  have  accorded  an  entire  amnesty  for  all 
that  happened  in  Dalmatia  and  Albania  through  deference 
for  the  Emperor  Alexander.  ... 

"  Napoleon." 


With  respect  to  Moldavia  and  Wallachia,  Napoleon 
acted  with  his  usual  perfidy.  By  the  treaty  of  Tilsit 
the  Czar  was  to  have  those  provinces,  but  at  the  same 
time  the  Emperor  had  promised  the  Porte  that  if  it  would 
accept  his  mediation,  he  would  engage  that  Moldavia  and 
Wallachia  should  be  evacuated  by  the  Russians.  When 
he  made  this  promise  he  thought  it  very  improbable  that 
his  offer  would  be  accepted  by  Turkey.  It  was  accepted, 
however,  and  its  acceptance  placed  Napoleon  in  an  awk- 
ward predicament.  As  Sebastiani  had  just  exposed  the 
bad  policy  of  allowing  Turkey  to  fall  under  the  domination 
of  Russia,  Napoleon  determined  to  try  and  elude  his 
promise  to  Alexander,  and  Savary  was  charged  to  try  and 
amuse  him  with  fine  promises  and  to  turn  his  attention  in 
the  direction  of  Sweden. 

By  the  treaty  of  Tils't  the  French  were  to  occupy 
Prussia  until  the  war  contribution  was  paid.  That  con- 
tribution was  fixed  at  a  fabulous  sum  so  that  Napoleon 
might  keep  a  large  force  in  Prussia  as  a  sort  of  permanent 
menace  to  Russia.  More  than  once  this  question  was  on 
the  point  of  bringing  about  hostilities  between  the  two 
countries,  but  when  Napoleon  and  Alexander  met  at 
Erfurth,  the  Emperor  was  no  longer  in  a  position  to  refuse 
the  demands  of  the  Czar.  Spanish  affairs  had  accom- 
plished this  change,  which  made  Count  Tolstoy  say  to 
his  brother  —  "  The  Emperor  Alexander  builds  a  great 
many  churches  ;  advise  him  to  build  one  to  Our  Lady  of 
Help  in  Spain." 

And  England  was  asked  to  sanction  all  these  iniquities  ; 
the  seizure  of  Spain  and  Portugal  by  France,  and  of 
Finland  and  the  Principalities  by  Russia. 


362  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  JEROME  NAPOLEON. 

"  Paris,  \Zth  January,  i8o8. 
"My  Brother, — With  your  letter  of  the  12th  I  have 
received  the  petition  of  the  Duke  of  Brunswick.  You 
should  not  reply  to  that  prince,  since  he  has  not  employed 
the  word  subject  in  his  letter,  and  as  you  can  recognise 
only  subjects  in  Brunswick.  The  presence  of  a  prince  of 
the  House  of  Brunswick  would  be  damaging  to  the  country) 
and  should  not  be  permitted.  In  two  or  three  years'  time 
there  will  be  no  harm  in  allowing  him  to  retire  to  some 
spot.     In  the  meantime  you  should  not  reply  to  him. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  FETH-ALI,  Shah  of  Persia. 

"Paris,  \%th  January,  i8oS. 
"  Salutations  to  the  sovereign  who  extends  the  glory  of 
Persia  and  who  reigns  with  wisdom  and  firmness.  .  .  . 
There  remains  only  one  enemy  for  us  to  fight  against, 
England.  I  have  determined  the  Powers  of  Europe  to 
second  me  in  my  efforts  to  oblige  her  to  renounce  her 
tyrannical  pretension.  Let  your  Majesty  unite  your  efforts 
to  mine,  and  you  will  participate  in  the  glory  of  having 
restored  peace  to  the  world. 

"I  pray  God,  very  great,  very  powerful,  and  very 
glorious  Prince,  that  He  may  watch  over  the  prosperity 
of  your  Empire  and  augment  the  number  of  your  years. 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  22nd  January  Napoleon  forwarded  to  his  Minister 
of  Foreign  Affairs  a  copy  of  the  instructions  to  be  sent 
to  M.  Alquier  at  Rome.  As  soon  as  the  French  troops 
were  at  the  gates  of  the  city,  M.  Alquier  was  to  present 
a  note  to  the  Cardinal  Secretary  of  State  calling  upon  him 
to  "arrest  all  the  Neapolitan  brigands  dripping  with  French 
blood,"  the  agents  of  Queen  Caroline  and  of  England,  and 


FRENCH    IN    ROME.  363 

to  purge  the  Eternal  City  of  all  the  enemies  of  France. 
M.  Alquier  was  also  to  be  informed  that — 

"  The  Emperor  has  no  ambition  to  obtain  an  extension 
of  territory  for  his  Italian  states,  and  does  not  wish  to 
deprive  the  Pope  of  anything ;  but  he  wishes  the  Pope  to 
be  included  in  his  system,  and  to  exercise  in  his  states  the 
same  influence  which  he  exercises  in  Naples,  in  Spain,  in 
Bavaria,  and  in  the  states  of  the  Federation.  If,  however, 
the  court  of  Rome,  through  the  blindness  which  urges  it 
on,  should  commit  any  fresh  imprudence  it  will  lose  for 
ever  its  temporal  states." 

Everything  was  to  be  done  as  quietly  as  possible — "  Let 
M.  Alquier  give  a  ball  to  the  French  officers,"  added  the 
Emperor,  "  to  which  he  must  invite  the  principal  Roman 
ladies  ;  let  him  present  the  officers  to  the  Pope.  .  .  . 
While  wishing  to  avoid  any  scandal,  I  am  determined  to 
act  severely  on  the  first  bull  which  the  Pope  permits 
himself  to  publish ;  a  decree  shall  be  at  once  issued 
annulling  the  donation  of  Charlemagne  and  uniting  the 
States  of  the  Church  to  those  of  Italy,  furnishing  a  proof 
of  the  harm  which  the  sovereignty  of  Rome  has  done  to 
religion,  and  showing  the  contrast  between  Jesus  Christ 
dying  on  the  cross  and  his  successor  making  himself  a 
king." 

To  VICE-ADMIRAL  DECR^S. 

"Paris,  2jih  January,  1808. 

"  I  have  asked  the  King  of  Spain  in  such  a  way  as  not 
to  meet  with  a  refusal,  that  the  120  gun  ships,  the  Prince 
of  Asturias  and  the  Montanez,  may  be  ceded  to  me  ;  I 
will  cede  in  return  to  the  King  of  Spain  the  Atlas,  74, 
which  is  at  Vigo.  You  will  order  Vice  Admiral  Rosily  to 
hoist  his  flag  on  board  the  Prince  of  Asturias.  ...  I  have 
also  asked  the  King  of  Spain  to  take  efficacious  measures 
for  arming  four  other  vessels  at  Cadiz,  so  that  they  may  be 
ready  to  join  my  squadron.   ...  If  all  this  succeeds  I 


364     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

shall  have  seventeen  vessels  at  Toulon,  ten  French  and 
seven  Spanish ;  and  at  Cadiz  twelve  vessels,  seven  French 
and  five  Spanish. 

"  Napoleon." 


The  British  navy  in  January,  1808,  consisted  of  144  ships 
of  the  line,  20  ships  from  44  to  50  guns,  178  frigates,  226 
sloops  of  war,  227  armed  brigs  in  commission.  Counting 
vessels  building  and  in  ordinary  England  possessed  over 
1,000  ships  of  war.  No  less  than  232  of  these  ships, 
including  68  sail  of  the  line,  were  captured  from  the 
enemy. 

To  THE  EMPEROR  OF  RUSSIA. 

"  Paris,  -ind  February,  1808. 

"  Sir,  my  Brother, — General  Savary^-has  just  arrived, 
I  have  spent  hours  with  him  speaking  about  your  Majesty, 
.  .  .  You  have  seen  the  debates  in  the  English  parliament, 
and  the  decision  to  carry  on  the  war.  I  have  written  to 
Caulaincourt  on  this  subject,  and  if  your  Majesty  will  con- 
descend to  speak  with  him  he  will  acquaint  you  with  my 
opinion.  It  is  only  by  large  and  vast  measures  that  we 
shall  be  able  to  arrive  at  peace  and  consolidate  our  system. 
Let  your  Majesty  augment  and  fortify  your  army.  I  will 
give  you  all  the  help  I  can  :  no  feeling  of  jealousy  animates 
me  against  Russia  :  I  desire  her  glory,  prosperity,  and  ex- 
tension. Will  your  Majesty  allow  a  person  tenderly  and 
truly  devoted  to  you  to  give  you  a  bit  of  advice  .■'  Your 
Majesty  should  drive  the  Swedes  to  a  greater  distance 
from  his  capital.  Extend  your  frontiers  on  this  side  as  much 
as  you  like  \id  est,  give  up  all  idea  of  Constantinople], 

"  An  army  of  50,000  men — Russians,  French,  and 
perhaps  Austrians — marching  upon  Asia  by  way  of  Con- 
stantinople would  have  no  sooner  reached  the  Euphrates 
than  England  would  tremble  and  go  down  upon  her  knees. 
I  am  ready  in  Dalmatia  :  your  Majesty  is  ready  on  the 
Danube.     A  month  after  coming  to  terms  an  army  could 


THE    ROAD    TO    INDIA.  365 

be  on  the  Bosphorus.     The  blow  would  re-echo  through 
India,  and    England  would   be  subdued.      I  shall  refuse 
none  of  the  preliminary  stipulations  necessary  to  attain  so 
great    an   end.      But   the   reciprocal    interest    of  our   two 
countries  should   be  combined  and   balanced.      This  can 
only  be  settled  in  an  interview  with  your  Majesty,  or  after 
sincere  conferences  between  Romanzoff  and  Caulaincourt, 
and  the  despatch  here  of  a  man  favourable  to  the  system. 
Count  Tolstoy  is  an  excellent  man,  but  he  is  prejudiced 
against  and  distrusts  France,  and  is  far  from  being  on  a 
par  with  the  events  of    Tilsit  and    the  new  position  in 
which  the   close   friendship    between   your   Majesty   and 
myself   have   placed    the   universe.      Everything   can   be 
signed  and  decided  before  the    15th  March.     On  the   1st 
May  our  troops  can  be  in  Asia,  and  at  the  same  epoch  the 
troops  of  your  Majesty  at  Stockholm.     Then  the  English, 
threatened    in    India,    driven    from    the    Levant,    will    be 
crushed    under    the   weight    of    events    with    which    the 
atmosphere  is   laden.      Your   Majesty  and    myself  would 
have  preferred  the  pleasures  of  peace  and  to  pass  our  lives 
in  the  midst  of  our  vast  empires,  engaged  in  vivifying  them 
and   rendering  them  happy  by  means  of  arts  and  a  bene- 
ficent administration.     The  enemies  of  the  world  object  to 
this.     We  must  become  greater  in  spite  of  ourselves.     It  is 
both  wise  and  politic  to  do  what  destiny  orders,  and  to  go 
where  the  irresistible  march  of  events  leads  us.     Then  this 
cloud  of  pigmies  will  yield  and  will  follow  the  movement 
which  your  Majesty  and   I   shall  order,  and  the  Russian 
people  will  be  content  with  the  glory,  the  wealth,  and  the 
fortune  which  will  be  the  result  of  these  great  events.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  MADAME  MERE. 

"Varis,  4fh  J^eiruarj/,  iZoS. 
"  Madame, — I  have  read  with  attention  the  report  con- 
cerning 'the  Sisters  of  Charity.     I  am  very  anxious  to  see 


366    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

the  number  of  the  different  institutions  for  the  relief  of  the 
sick  augment  in  my  empire.  I  have  informed  my  minister 
of  worship  of  my  desire  to  have  the  regulations  of  these 
establishments  revised  .  .  .  All  the  annual  aid  which  you 
have  thought  fit  to  ask  for  shall  be  granted.  I  am  even 
disposed  to  grant  new  and  larger  favours.  ...  I  can, 
Madame,  only  express  my  satisfaction  for  the  zeal  which 
you  have  shown  and  the  new  cases  which  you  have  under- 
taken. They  can  add  nothing  to  the  feelings  of  veneration 
and  of  filial  love  which  I  bear  you. 

"  Napoleon." 


The  Emperor  had  placed  his  mother  at  the  head  of  all 
the  charitable  institutions  of  France,  but  this  arrangement 
did  not  last  long,  "  Madame  Mere "  being  decidedly  of 
opinion  that  charity  should  begin  at  home,  having  little 
confidence  in  the  stability  of  the  present,  and  much 
uneasiness  with  regard  to  the  future. 

To  M.  DE  CHAMPAGNY. 

"  Paris,  \th  February,  1808. 

"  You  must  despatch  a  courier  to  Constantinople  upon 
Algerian  affairs.  You  must  send  for  the  Turkish  am- 
bassador and  inform  him  that  through  condescendence  for 
the  Porte  I  have  not  yet  undertaken  an  expedition  against 
Algiers  ;  but  that  if  by  return  of  courier  my  slaves  are  not 
liberated,  I  shall  seize  on  that  country.  The  Minister  of 
Marine  has  been  ordered  to  send  an  aviso  to  Algiers  with 
despatches  to  M.  Dubois-Thainville  directing  him  to  inform 
the  Dey  that  unless  he  releases  the  Genoese,  Corsican,  and 
Italian  slaves  I  shall  declare  war  against  him  .  .  .  that  a 
French  army  will  land  unless  my  flag  is  respected,  and  the 
English  treated  as  all  the  enemies  of  the  Mussulmans 
should  be  treated. 

"  Napoleon." 


IMPERIAL   JOURNALISM.  367 

To  EUGENE  NAPOLEON. 

"  Paris,  11th  February,  1808. 
"  My  Son, — I  have  news  that  my  troops  entered  Rome 
on  the  2nd,  and  that  the  consul  and  the  agents  of  Queen 
Caroline  were  at  once  arrested.  Write  to  General  Miollis 
to  take  over  the  police,  to  treat  the  Papal  troops  well  and 
see  that  they  want  for  nothing,  to  drive  out  the  Neapolitan 
rebels,  even  the  cardinals.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  M.  DE  CHAMPAGNY. 

"  Paris,  ibth  February,  1808. 
"  Write  to  M.  Beauharnais  that  some  time  ago  I  sent 
eight  horses  to  the  King  of  Spain  and  six  to  the  Prince  of 
the  Peace.  I  do  not  know  how  my  Grand  Equerry  sent  the 
horses,  but  if  they  have  not  reached  Madrid  I  desire  that 
on  their  arrival  M.  Beauharnais  may  place  them  in  his 
stables,  for  it  would  not  be  suitable,  in  the  present  state  of 
affairs,  that  I  should  make  a  present  to  the  King  of 
Spain.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  M.  FOUCHjfe. 

"  Parts,  17M  February,  1808. 
"  Whence    come    the    details    in    the    journals    to-day 
concerning  the  reception  of  M.  de  Caulaincourt  1 

"  The  Publiciste  might  have  dispensed  itself  with  praising 
M.  de  Lambert.  Have  articles  written  describing  that 
officer  as  a  traitor  who  fought  against  his  country,  and  who 
had  the  pain  of  being  present  at  the  triumph  of  the  French. 

"  Napoleon." 

Savary  had  been  very  coldly  received  in  Russia  and  had 
found  all  the  houses  of  the  nobility  closed  to  him.  It  was 
the  same  with  Caulaincourt,  whose  hands  were  also  stained 
with  the  blood  of  the  Due  d'Enghien.  The  Empress 
mother  refused  to  see  him. 


368     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

The  Annual  Register  announced  the  arrival  of  the  new 
French  ambassador  at  his  post  in  these  terms  : 

"  Caulaincourt,  the  ruffian  who  seized  the  Duke  d'Enghien, 
has  arrived  at  St.  Petersburg  as  the  representative  of 
Bonaparte,  where  he  has  been  received  with  marked 
distinction," 

To  EUGENE  NAPOLEON. 

"  Paris,  i^th  February,  1808. 
"  My  Son, — I  wrote  to  you  to  say  that  I  had  recalled 
Alquier.  I  learn  that  General  Miollis  has  experienced 
some  difficulty  at  Rome  for  the  pay  and  keep  of  his  troops. 
He  must  take  measures  so  that  they  may  want  for  nothing ; 
and,  should  it  happen  that  the  Roman  Government  finds  it 
impossible  to  furnish  what  is  necessary,  General  Miollis 
must  take  over  the  government  and  the  administration  of 
the  city  and  the  ecclesiastical  provinces,  with  the  exception 
of  Ancona,  Camerino,  Urbino,  and  Macerata,  which  are 
under  the  orders  of  General  Lemarrois.  ,  .  .  Tell  Miollis 
in  secret  that  it  is  possible  that  I  may  soon  go  to  Rome. 

"  Napoleon." 

Rome  was  almost  the  only  capital  on  the  Continent 
which  Napoleon  never  visited. 

To  M.  BERTHOLLET. 

"  Paris,  \%th  March,  1808. 

"  Is  it  true  that  a  man  called  Achard  has  made  good 

sugar  from  maple  at  Berlin,  and  that  good  sugar  can  also 

be  made  from  turnips  .'     I  beg  that  you  will  inquire  into 

this. 

"  Napoleon." 

The  Emperor  did  get  the  French  to  use  beetroot  sugar, 
but  he  could  never  persuade  them  that  Swiss  tea  was  equal 
to  that  which  came  from  China,  or  that  chicory  was  as 
good  as  coffee.  There  are  now  500  manufactories  in 
France  engaged  in  making  sugar  from  beetroot. 


FERDINAND  S    MARRIAGE.  369 

On  the  20th  February  Napoleon  wrote  a  long  letter  to 
Murat  or  to  the  Grand  Due  de  Berg,  Lieutenant  of  the 
Emperor  in  Spain,  in  which  instructions  were  given  for  the 
occupation  of  Pampeluna  and  the  march  on  Madrid.  The 
Emperor  said  that  he  was  at  peace  with  Spain,  but  if  the 
general  in  command  at  Navarre  refused  to  hand  over  the 
fortress  of  Pampeluna  force  was  to  be  employed. 

On  the  following  day  his  Majesty  wrote  a  letter  to  King 
Jerome,  in  which  he  said  : 

"  The  horizon  is  not  clear,  and  if  war  breaks  out  in  the 
autumn  you  must  be  ready  organised,  so  that  you  may 
take  the  field  with  two  strong  divisions  of  infantry  and 
cavalry,  and  place  at  my  disposal  a  contingent  triple  that 
which  was  furnished  by  Hesse  Cassel.  .  .   ." 


To  CHARLES  IV.,  King  of  Spain. 

"Paris,  i^th  February,  1808. 

"  Sir, — My  Brother, — Your  Majesty,  in  your  letter  of 
the  1 8th  November  last,  demanded  the  hand  of  a  French 
princess  for  the  Prince  of  Asturias.  I  replied  to  your 
Majesty  on  the  i8th  January  that  I  consented.  Your 
Majesty,  in  your  letter  of  the  5th  February,  makes  no 
mention  of  this  marriage.  All  this  leaves  several  matters, 
which  are  of  great  interest  to  my  people,  in  obscurity. 
Your  friendship  leads  me  to  expect  that  you  will  clear  up 
all  doubts. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  M.  GAUDIN  {^Minister  of  Finance). 

"  Paris,  26^,^  February,  1808. 

"  I  have  read  with  interest  your  report  on  the  finances 
of  Portugal.  ...  I  do  not  see  any  inconvenience  in  confis- 
cating the  merchandise  taken  from  the  English,  and  in 
restoring  the  merchandise  in  the  custom-houses  which 
really  belongs  to  the  Portuguese,  on  verifying  that  it  does 

VOL.  II.  B  B 


37°  THE    CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

not  come  from  England.  .  .  .  You  might  lay  a  double 
duty  on  this  merchandise  by  way  of  a  war  contri- 
bution. .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  GENERAL  JUNOT. 

"  Paris,  ^th  March,  1808. 
" .  .  .  .  You  should  not  have  published  my  decree  im- 
posing a  contribution  of  4,000,000/.  until  you  were  master 
of  the  country.  .  .  .  On  reading  over  my  letters  again,  you 
will  see  that  since  you  entered  Portugal  you  have  done 
nothing  that  I  desired.  .  .  .  You  entered  Portugal  on  the 
1st  December  ;  on  the  isth  the  Portuguese  troops,  formed 
or  not,  should  have  been  sent  by  forced  marches  to  France, 
so   as   to   have   arrived    at    Bayonne  between   the    15  th 
January  and  the  1st  February,  where  I  should  have  had 
them   organised.      Thus   you  have   allowed   the  forts  to 
remain  for  whole  months  in  the  hands  of  the  Portuguese. 
I  do  not  know  in  what  school  you  have  been  brought  up. 
In  Italy,  where  I  have  no  fault  to  find  with  the  inhabitants, 
where  I  am  their  legitimate  sovereign,  where  the  troops 
are  in  my  pay,  I  never  leave  fortresses  in  the  hands  of 
Italians.  .  .  .  The    first    thing   to    do,   without   losing  a 
moment,  is  to  send  the  Portuguese  troops  to  France.  .  .  . 
I  do  not  know  what  you  understand  by  the  '  Portuguese 
army.'     As  soon  as  the  English  land  it  will  join  them  ;  the 
men  would  be  wretches  if  they  did  not.      I  did  not  believe 
you  so  wanting  in  political  foresight ;  you  are  so  to  an 
unexampled  extent. 

"  Napoleon." 

In  letters  to  Junot  and  Murat,  the  Emperor  announced 
his  intention  of  reaching  Burgos  on  the  20th  March- 
Marshal  Moncey,  with  his  corps,  was  to  be  the  first  to 
enter  Madrid,  whither  he  was  to  be  quickly  followed  by 
Murat.  Murat  was  to  issue  an  order,  saying: — "The 
Emperor  has  learned  with  pleasure    the    good  discipline 


FRENCH  ARMY  TO  ENTER  MADRID.      37 1 

observed  by  the  army  ;  he  invites  it  to  continue  the 
same,  and  to  show  the  greatest  respect  for  the  Spanish 
people,  who  have  so  many  titles  to  be  considered  estimable. 
The  soldiers  should  treat  the  Spaniards  as  they  would 
treat  Frenchmen.  The  friendship  between  the  two  nations 
dates  a  long  way  back ;  it  should,  under  present  circum- 
stances, be  consolidated,  his  Majesty  having  in  view 
matters  useful  and  advantageous  to  the  Spanish  nation,^ 
for  which  he  has  always  had  the  highest  esteem." 

On  the  9th  March  the  Foreign  Minister  was  directed  to 
write  to  M.  Beauharnais,  telling  him  to  inform  the  Spanish 
authorities  that  two  French  divisions  on  their  way  to 
Cadiz  would  stay  for  some  time  at  Madrid.  M.  Beauharnais, 
too,  was  to  ask  what  General  Solano,  with  his  division,  was 
about,  and  if  he  meant  to  oppose  the  march  of  the  French. 
"  Add  in  cipher,"  continued  Napoleon,  "  that  an  army  of 
50,000  men  will  enter  Madrid  on  the  22nd  or  the  23rd. 
Tell  M.  Beauharnais  to  reassure  the  friends  of  the  Prince 
of  the  Peace  and  of  the  Prince  of  Asturias,  and  to  spread 
the  report  that  I  am  going  to  Cadiz,  in  order  to  besiege 
Gibraltar,  and  to  march  into  Africa  and  to  settle  the  affairs 
of  Spain  en  passant,  in  order  to  secure  the  succession. 
Should  the  Prince  of  the  Peace  or  the  Prince  of  Asturias 
express  the  desire  to  come  to  Burgos,  that  will  be  most 
agreeable  to  me.  .  .  ." 

To  EUGENE  NAPOLEON. 

"  Paris,  \oth  March,  1808. 
"  I  approve  of  the  conduct  of  General  Miollis  ;  let  him 
treat  the  Roman  soldiers  well  and  dismiss  the  bad  officers. 

^  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  Joseph  would  have  made  a  much 
better  King  of  Spain  than  either  Charles  or  Ferdinand  had  he  been 
allowed  to  reign.  All  the  Bonapartes  who  tried  their  hands  showed 
a  remarkable  aptitude  for  good  government  —  Joseph,  Louis,  even 
Jerome,  Elisa,  and  Caroline,  while  Lucien,  had  he  accepted  one  of  the 
thrones  offered  to  him,  would  certainly  have  made  a  wise  and  liberal 
ruler. 

B   B   2 


372     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON 

The  Cardinal  Caraffa  must  be  held  responsible  for  the 
stone  thrown  from  his  window  unless  he  finds  the 
offender.  Send  away  from  Rome  the  Neapolitan  cardi- 
nals and  the  cardinals  who  are  my  subjects.  Let  Litta 
return  to  Milan  ;  let  the  Genoese  return  to  Genoa ;  the 
Italians  to  Italy,  the  Piedmontese  to  Piedmont,  the  Nea- 
politans to  Naples.  Let  this  message  be  executed  by 
force,  if  necessary.  Since  the  cardinals  have  caused  the 
pope  to  lose  his  temporal  states  by  their  bad  advice,  let 
them  return  home.  .  .  .  My  troops  are  at  thirty  leagues 
from  Madrid.     Important  events  are  being  prepared.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

In  a  long  letter  to  Murat,  written  on  the  14th  March, 
the  Emperor  pointed  out  that  his  great  object  should  be  to 
reach  Madrid  without  fighting,  and  to  resl  and  supply  his 
troops — "  During  that  time,"  wrote  Napoleon,  "my  differ- 
ences with  the  court  of  Spain  will  be  settled.  I  hope  that 
war  will  not  take  place.  If  I  take  so  many  precautions,  it 
is  that  I  never  leave  anything  to  chance.  Should  war 
break  out  you  will  be  in  a  capital  position,  since  you  will 
have  in  your  rear  a  force  more  than  sufficient  to-  protect 
you,  and  on  your  flank  Duhesme's  division,  14,000  strong. 
You  will  also  have  news  of  the  division  of  General  Junot. 
....  I  desire  to  remain  on  good  terms  with  Spain,  and  to 
accomplish  my  political  ends  without  hostilities.  ...  I 
have  sent  you  an  order  for  the  payment  of  the  troops, 
so  that  on  reaching  Madrid  they  may  spend  money  and 
not  resort  to  violence.  .  .  ." 

To  KING  JOSEPH. 

"Paris,  i6th  March,  1808. 

"  I  ordered  that  the  Neapolitan  cardinals  and  prelates  at 

Rome  should  be  sent  to  you  to  swear  allegiance.      I  learn 

that  you  have  directed  General  Miollis  to  send  them  to 

Alessandria.     I   cannot  understand  this  conduct.     What 


CARDINAL    RUFFO. 


Z72> 


the  devil  can  you  fear  from  two  or  three  old  priests, 
while  the  taking  of  the  oath  would  have  had  an  excellent 
effect  ?  One  of  my  principal  differences  with  the  Pope  is 
because  he  will  call  you  Prince  Joseph,  and  that  he  makes 
the  cardinals,  your  subjects,  refuse  to  take  the  oath.  If  at 
Naples  you  fear  two  or  three  unfortunate  old  men,  you 
must  be  very  insecurely  seated  on  your  throne. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  EUGENE  NAPOLEON. 

"  Paris,  2oth  March,  1808. 
"  My  Son, — I  order  that  Cardinal  Ruffo,  who  formerly 
commanded  in. the  Calabrias~  be  sent  to  Paris,  and  that 
Cardinal  Ruffo,  of  Scylla,  Archbishop  of  Naples,  be  sent  to 
Bologna,  as  well  as  two  other  cardinals  whose  presence  at 
Naples  is  considered  dangerous  by  the  king.  .  .  .  Inform 
General  Miollis  that  there  is  no  arrangement  possible  with 
the  court  of  Rome  ;  since  the  orders  of  the  general  are 
treated  with  contempt,  he  must  seize  upon  the  temporal 
government.  Henceforward  the  battalions  must  pass 
through  the  Vatican,  no  matter  if  the  Pope  be  there.  .  .  . 
However,  I  wish  to  allow  Lent  to  pass  before  settling  the 
affairs  of  Rome  definitely.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

to  the  grand  duke  of  berg. 

"St.  Cloud,  March  2yd,  1808. 
"  I  suppose  that  you  will  arrive  at  Madrid  to-morrow 
You  must  maintain  strict  discipline  there.  If  the  court  be 
at  Aranjuez,  you  must  not  disturb  it,  but  show  a  friendly 
feeling  towards  it ;  if  it  has  retired  to  Seville  you  will  also 
leave  it  alone.  You  must  send  an  aide-de-camp  to  the 
Prince  of  Peace,  to  tell  him  that  he  was  wrong  to  avoid 
the  French  troops  ;  that  he  has  no  reason  to  fear  a  hos- 
tile movement ;  that  the  King  of  Spain  has  nothing  to 
fear  from  our  troops.  .  .  .  General  circumstances  have 
caused  me  to  delay  my  departure.     Russia  has  declared 


374  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

war  against  Sweden.  The  Russian  troops  have  entered 
Finland,  and  my  army,  commanded  by  the  Prince  of  Ponte 
Corvo  (Bernadotte)  is  at  Copenhagen,  and  is  going  to  form 
its  junction  with  the  Russian  army  under  the  walls  of 
Stockholm .  .<  NAPOLEON ." 

To  M.  F0UCH£. 

"  St.  Cloud,  26,th  March,  1808. 
"  The  negligence  which  you  have  displayed  in  the  super- 
vision of  the  press,  that  portion  so  important  of  your  func- 
tions, forces  me  to  suppress  the  Publiciste.  .  .  .  You  will 
send  a  copy  of  my  decree  to  the  other  newspapers,  and  let 
them  know  that  I  have  suppressed  this  paper  because  it 
displayed  English  sympathies,  described  the  French 
soldiers  as  monsters,  and  paid  its  court  to  Switzerland 
by  representing  the  mildest  and  most  humane  of  nations 
as  a  nation  of  tigers.  You  will  give  fresh  instructions  to 
the  Journal  de  F Empire  and  to  the  Gazette  de  France,  and 
inform  them  that  if  they  desire  not  to  be  suppressed,  they 
must  say  nothing  contrary  to  the  glory  of  the  French  arms 

or  tending  to  calumniate  France. 

"  Napoleon." 

P.S. — However,   I  prefer  to  dismiss  the  editor ;  present 
another  to  me. 

To  MARSHAL  BESSIERES  {commanding  the  Imperial  Guard). 

"  St.  Cloud,  idth  March,  1808. 
"  Mv  Cousin, — You  will  have  heard  of  the  insurrection 
at  Madrid,  the  result  of  which  appears  to  be  that  the 
king  will  not  leave,  and  that  my  troops  will  be  well  re- 
ceived. .  .  .  Send  my  pages,  my  saddle  horses,  my  cooks, 
and  all  that  I  have  at  Burgos  to  Madrid.  Let  my  guard, 
infantry,  cavalry  and  artillery  march  so  as  to  reach  Madrid 
as  soon  as  possible  for  I  shall  be  there  myself  before 
loner.  .  .  .  The    best     marchers    should    do    from    ten  to 

twelve  leagues  a  day.  ... 

"  Napoleon." 


PUBLIC    OPINION    IN    SPAIN.  375 

On  the  27th,  the  Emperor  wrote  a  long  letter  to  Murat 
in  which  he  said,  "You  must  prevent  any  harm  being 
done  to  the  king,  to  the  queen,  or  the  Prince  of  the 
Peace.  Until  the  new  king  has  been  recognised  by  me> 
you  must  act  as  if  the  old  king  were  still  on  the  throne. 
Maintain  order  at  Madrid,  and  hinder  any  arming  on  a 
large  scale.  Employ  M.  Beauharnais  in  all  this  until  I 
arrive.  ...  I  am  sending  M.  Laforest  to  Madrid.  He  is 
a  man  of  ability,  and  good  for  any  business.  .  .  .  The 
affair  of  the  20th  has  singularly  complicated  matters. 
You  must  not  imagine  that  you  are  attacking  an  unarmed 
nation,  and  that  you  have  only  to  display  your  troops  in 
order  to  subdue  Spain.  .  .  .  You  have  to  deal  with  a  new 
nation  which  has  all  the  courage  and  all  the  enthusiasm 
of  men  not  worn  out  by  political  passions.  The  aristocracy 
and  the  clergy  are  the  masters  of  Spain.  If  they  tremble 
for  their  privileges  and  their  existence,  they  will  organise 
levies  en  masse  against  us,  and  the  war  will  continue  for 
ever.  .  .  .  The  Prince  of  the  Peace  is  detested  because 
he  is  accused  of  having  handed  over  Spain  to  us.  .  .  .  The 
Prince  of  Asturias  has  none  of  the  qualities  necessary  for 
the  chief  of  a  nation,  but  that  will  not  hinder  him  from 
being  opposed  to  us  and  made  a  hero  of.  .  .  .  England 
will  not  allow  this  opportunity  to  do  us  mischief  to  escape. 
.  .  .  Ferdinand  is  the  enemy  of  France,  and  that  is  why 
he  has  been  made  king.  To  place  him  on  the  throne 
would  be  to  play  the  game  of  factions  which  for  the  last 
five  and  twenty  years  have  desired  the  destruction  of 
France.  A  family  alliance  would  be  a  feeble  bond.  .  .  . 
You  will  act  so  that  the  Spaniards  may  not  suspect  what 
I  intend  to  do,  and  this  will  not  be  difficult  as  I  do  not 
know  myself.  .  .  .  You  will  give  the  nobility  and  the 
clergy  to  understand  that  if  France  interferes  in  the 
affairs  of  Spain,  their  privileges  and  immunities  shall  be 
respected.  ...  I  will  take  care  of  your  personal  interests  ; 
do  not  think  of  them  yourself.  Portugal  will  remain  at 
my  disposal " 


37^     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

It  was  this  same  doubt  with  regard  to  the  intentions  of 
Napoleon  which  at  first  paralysed  the  resistance  of  the 
Spaniards.  That  it  really  existed  in  the  mind  of  Napoleon 
is  another  matter.  Murat  thought  that  he  was  to  be  King 
of  Spain,  and  was  working  in  his  own  interest  ;  but  he  was 
once  more  disappointed  as  at  Warsaw.  The  Spanish 
crown  was  first  offered  to  brother  Louis,  and  that  on  the 
same  day  that  Napoleon  wrote  the  above  letter. 


To  THE  KING  OF  HOLLAND. 

"  St.  Cloud,  27/,%  March,  1808. 

"My  Brother,— The  King  of  Spain  has  just  abdi- 
cated ;  the  Prince  of  the  Peace  has  been  thrown  into 
prison ;  an  insurrection  has  broken  out  at  Madrid.  The 
Grand  Duke  of  Berg  was  obliged  to  enter  the  city  with 
40,000  men.  Up  to  the  present  the  people  call  lustily 
for  me.  Sure  that  the  only  way  to  conclude  a  solid  peace 
with  England  is  to  create  a  great  movement  on  the 
Continent,  I  have  determined  to  place  a  French  prince 
on  the  throne  of  Spain.  The  chmate  of  Holland  does 
not  suit  you.  Besides,  Holland  will  not  be  able  to  rise 
from  its  ruins.  In  the  present  whirlwind,  whether  peace 
be  concluded  or  not,  it  has  not  the  means  of  existing. 
In  this  state  of  affairs  I  have  thought  of  you  for  the  throne 
of  Spain.  You  will  be  the  sovereign  of  a  generous  nation, 
of  11,000,000  men,  and  of  important  colonies.  With 
economy  and  activity,  Spain  will  be  able  to  place  60,000 
men  under  arms,  and  to  have  fifty  vessels  in  her  ports. 
Answer  me  categorically  and  say  what  your  opinion  is  on 
this  subject.  .  .  .  If  I  name  you  King  of  Spain  will  you 
accept.''  Can  I  count  upon  you  .'  .  .  .  Reply  in  two  words. 
I  have  received  your  letter  of  such  a  date,  and  I  answer 
yes  or  no.  You  can  afterwards  write  at  length  and  develop 
your  ideas,  addressing  your  letter  under  envelope  to  your 
wife,  who  will  hand  it  to  me  if  I  am  still   in  Paris,  and 


MURAT   AT    MADRID.  377 

send  it  back  if  I  am  not.  Take  no  one  into  your  con- 
fidence, for  a  thing  must  be  done  before  one  admits  having 
thought  about  it." 


The  next  day  his  Majesty  wrote  again  to  Murat  saying, 
"  I  highly  approve  of  your  conduct.  I  presume  that  you 
have  not  allowed  the  Prince  of  the  Peace  to  perish,  and 
that  you  have  not  permitted  King  Charles  to  go  to 
Badajos.  If  he  be  still  in  your  hands  you  must  dissimu- 
late with  Beauharnais,  and  say  that  you  cannot  recognise 
the  Prince  of  Asturias  until  I  have  recognised  him.  .  .  ." 

On  the  31st,  writing  to  Marshal  Davoust  at  Warsaw, 
the  Emperor  said — 

"  I  am  on  very  good  terms  with  Russia,  and  also  with 
Austria.  I  see  no  probability  of  war,  but  when  one  has 
an  army  it  should  always  be  ready  to  act.  .  .  .  The 
Grand  Duke  of  Berg  entered  Madrid  on  the  24th  with 
the  army  corps  of  Marshal  Moncey  and  General  Dupont, 
that  is  to  say  with  more  than  50,000  men.  Marshal 
Bessieres  commands  a  corps  at  Burgos,  and  General 
Duhesme  is  at  Barcelona.  I  occupy  all  the  strong  places 
in  Spain.  You  will  have  seen  in  the  Moniteur  an  account 
of  the  events  which  took  place  at  Madrid  on  the  i8th 
and  20th.  King  Charles  was  overpowered ;  he  has  im 
plored  my  protection.     I  am  going  to  the  Pyrenees.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 


Napoleon  at  this  time  was  again  attempting,  with  the 
aid  of  Spain,  Russia,  Denmark,  Holland  and  Venice,  to 
reorganise  a  naval  force  capable  of  disputing  with  Eng- 
land. He  addressed  a  series  of  letters  to  Admiral 
Decr^s  on  this  subject.  He  said  in  one  letter,  "  I  count 
upon  having  four  line  of  battle  ships  at  Rochefort,  and 
four  at  Lorient  and  six  frigates  ;  two  frigates  at  St.  Malo, 


Z7^  THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

two  at  Bordeaux,  two  at  Nantes,  and  one  at  Cherbourg ; 
that  the  Austerlitz  and  Denaworth  will  be  launched  at 
Toulon.  Thus,  at  the  end  of  September,  I  shall  have 
eight  French  ships  and  two  Dutch  frigates  at  Flushing ; 
eight  Dutch  ships  and  two  frigates  at  Texel ;  five  ships 
and  four  frigates  at  Brest  ;  four  ships  at  Rochefort  and 
four  at  Toulon;  eight  French  and  fifteen  Spanish  ships  at 
Cadiz  ;  and  at  Toulon  twelve  ships.  In  all  seventy-four  ships. 
This  with  an  army  from  Bayonne  to  Cadiz,  one  at  Lisbon, 
one  at  Brest,  one  at  Texel,  will  give  us  a  good  chance 
against  the  English.  The  twelve  ships  at  Toulon  can 
be  augmented  by  the  Superbe  at  Genoa,  and  two  Russian 
ships  which  are  at  Elba." 

In  another  letter  we  see  that  sailors  were  to  be  obtained 
at  Hamburg,  Bremen,  Lubeck  and  in  Denmark,  that  more 
ships  were  to  be  laid  down  in  France,  and  that  the 
Emperor  of  Russia  had  placed  his  squadrons  at  the  dis- 
posal of  Napoleon. 

On  the  1st  April,  Napoleon,  still  at  St.  Cloud,  wrote 
to  Murat  saying  that  he  would  probably  be  at  Bayonne 
on  the  6th.  He  said  :  "  My  guard  must  have  marched  some 
time  ago  for  Madrid.  My  horses,  the  detachments  of  my 
house  and  my  mouth  (household  and  cooks)  must  have 
also  started  for  Madrid.  You  must  install  all  that  {tout 
geld)  where  I  am  to  lodge.  I  do  not  know  if  the  Prado, 
which  is  a  country  house  of  the  King  of  Spain,  is  large 
enough  for  me.  If  it  be  not  large  enough,  perhaps  it  will 
be  well  for  me  to  go  to  the  Escurial.  .  .  ." 

On  the  3rd  April,  Napoleon  wrote  a  terrible  jobation, 
four  printed  pages  in  length,  to  the  King  of  Holland,  who 
had  been  weak  enough  to  grant  a  reprieve  to  some 
"  brigands "  who  had  attacked  and  massacred  some  cus- 
tom-house men.  This  was  a  terrible  crime,  and  King 
Louis  was  told  that  in  protecting  smugglers  he  was  fight- 
ing the  battle  of  England,  and  his  imperial  brother  en- 
tered into  the  whole  history  of  the  continental  blockade 
which    was   to   ruin    England    to    the    great    advantage 


SWORD    OF   FRANCIS    I.  379 

and  prosperity  of  the  Dutch  and  his  Majesty's  other 
vassals. 

On  the  6th  April  Napoleon  wrote  to  Murat  from 
Bordeaux,  where  he  remained  several  days,  saying  :  "  The 
sword  of  Francis  1st  was  not  worth  all  the  fuss  made 
over  it.  Francis  1st  was  King  of  France,  but  he  was  a 
Bourbon.  Besides,  he  was  not  taken  by  the  Spaniards, 
but  by  the  Italians." 

And  on  the  9th :  "I  see  that  you  attach  too  much 
importance  to  the  opinion  of  Madrid.  I  have  not  united 
such  large  armies  in  Spain  to  follow  the  fantasies  of  the 
populace  of  the  capital.  .  .  .  It  is  desirable  that  the  Prince  of 
Asturias  should  remain  at  Madrid,  or  should  come  to  meet 
me.  In  the  latter  case  I  will  wait  for  him  at  Bayonne.  It 
would  be  unfortunate  were  he  to  adopt  a  third  course. 
Savary  knows  all  my  plans,  and  will  tell  you  my  intentions. 
When  one  knows  the  end  in  view,  with  a  little  reflection, 
means  are  easily  found." 

And  on  the  loth :  "  You  can  everywhere  declare 
verbally  that  it  is  my  intention  to  preserve  the  integrity 
and  the  independence  of  the  country,  as  well  as  the 
privileges  of  all  classes  ;  that  I  will  take  an  engagement 
to  this  effect,  that  my  desire  is  to  see  Spain  happy  and  in 
such  a  system  that  she  can  never  be  redoubtable  for 
France.  .  .  .  You  will  find  in  the  kindness  and  utility  of 
my  plans  with  respect  to  Spain,  arguments  fit  to  con- 
ciliate all  parties.  Those  who  desire  a  liberal  govern- 
ment and  the  regeneration  of  Spain,  will  find  them  in  my 
system.  Those  who  fear  the  return  of  the  Queen  and  the 
Prince  of  the  Peace  can  be  without  alarm,  as  those  two 
individuals  will  be  without  influence  and  without  credit. 
The  grandees  who  wish  for  consideration  and  honours,  and 
who  did  not  obtain  them  in  the  last  administration,  will 
find  them.  The  good  Spaniards  who  are  anxious  for 
tranquillity  and  a^good  administration,  will  find  all  these 
advantages  in  a  system  which  will  maintain  the  integrity 
and  independence  of  the  Spanish  monarchy," 


380  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  THE  KING  OF  NAPLES. 

"Bayonne,  \^th  April,  1808. 

"  I  have  received  your  letter  with  those  of  the  Queen  of 
Naples,  of  Charlotte,  and  Zena'ide  (Joseph's  daughter). 

"  I  reached  Bayonne  yesterday.  The  Infant  Don  Carlos 
is  here  also,  but  I  have  not  seen  him,  as  he  fell  ill  on  the 
evening  of  my  arrival.  I  am  expecting  the  Prince  of 
Asturias,  who  has  assumed  the  title  of  Ferdinand  VII. 
He  is  on  the  frontier.  I  also  expect  the  unfortunate  King 
Charles  and  the  Queen.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  FERDINAND,  Prince  of  Asturias.i 

"Bayonne,  16//^  April,  i8o8. 
"My  Brother, — I  have  received  the  letter  of  your 
Royal  Highness.  From  the  papers  of  the  king,  your 
father,  you  must  be  convinced  of  the  interest  I  have 
always  borne  you.  You  will  permit  me,  under  the  cir- 
cumstances, to  speak  frankly.  I  hoped,  on  arriving  at 
Madrid,  to  have  persuaded  my  illustrious  friend  to  have 
granted  some  necessary  reforms  in  his  States,  and  to  have 
given  some  satisfaction  to  public  opinion.  The  dismissal 
of  the  Prince  of  the  Peace  appeared  to  me  necessary  for 
his  happiness  and  that  of  his  subjects.  Affairs  in  the 
north  delayed  my  voyage.  The  events  of  Aranjuez 
occurred.  I  am  not  a  judge  of  what  took  place,  nor  of 
the  conduct  of  the  Prince  of  the  Peace ;  but  what  I  do 
know  is  that  it  is  dangerous  for  kings  to  accustom  people 
to  shed  blood,  and  to  take  justice  into  their  own  hands ; 
I  pray  God  that  your  Royal  Highness  may  not  one  day 
experience  this.  .  .  .  The  people  willingly  revenge  them- 
selves, for  the  homage  which  they  render  us.  ...  I  have 
often  expressed  the  desire  that  the  Prince  of  the  Peace 

'  If  Ferdinand  and  my  brother,  why  not  the  king? 


LETTER    TO    FERDINAND.  38 1 

should  be  removed  from  affairs;  the  friendship  of  King 
Charles,  however,  induced  me  to  remain  silent,  and  to  turn 
my  eyes  away  from  the  weakness  of  his  attachment. 
Wretched  men  that  we  are !  Weakness  and  error,  that  is 
our  device.  But  all  this  may  be  arranged.  Let  the  Prince 
of  the  Peace  be  exiled  from  Spain,  and  I  will  offer  him  a 
refuge  in  France.  As  for  the  abdication  of  Charles  IV. , 
it  took  place  at  a  moment  when  my  armies  covered  Spain, 
and,  were  I  to  acknowledge  it,  I  should  appear  in  the  eyes 
of  Europe  and  posterity  to  have  employed  all  these  troops 
merely  to  hurl  from  the  throne  my  ally  and  my  friend.  .  .  . 
If  the  abdication  of  King  Charles  were  not  forced  upon 
him  by  the  insurrection  of  Aranjuez,  I  shall  make  no 
difficulty  about  recognising  you  as  King  of  Spain.  I 
therefore  desire  to  talk  with  you  on  this  subject.  .  .  . 
When  King  Charles  informed  me  of  the  event  in  October 
last  I  was  painfully  affected,  and  I  think  that  I  then  con- 
tributed to  the  happy  issue  of  the  Escurial  affair.^  That 
your  Royal  Highness  was  in  the  wrong  is  proved  by  the 
letter  which  you  wrote  to  me.  King,  in  your  turn,  you 
will  know  how  sacred  are  the  rights  of  the  throne ;  any 
appeal  made  to  a  foreign  sovereign  by  a  hereditary  prince 
is  criminal.  The  marriage  of  your  Royal  Highness  with  a 
French  princess  I  hold  to  be  in  conformity  with  the 
interests  of  my  people,  and,  above  all,  a  circumstance 
which  would  attach  me  by  fresh  bonds  to  a  house  0/ 
which  I  have  had  nothing  to  complain  since  I  ascended  the 
throne.  Your  Royal  Highness  should  beware  of  excesses 
of  popular  emotions.  Some  of  my  isolated  soldiers  may 
be  assassinated,  but  the  result  would  be  the  ruin  of  Spain. 
.  .  .  Your  Royal  Highness  knows  my  most  intimate 
thoughts.  You  see  that  I  am  floating  between  various 
ideas  which  require  to  be  fixed.  You  can  be  certain, 
however,  that  I  shall  behave  towards  you  as  towards  your 

1  When  the  Prince  of  Asturias  had  been  thrown  into  prison  on  the 
charge  of  plotting  against  his  father. 


382     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

father.     Be  assured  that  my  desire  is  to  conciliate  every- 
thing, and   to  find  opportunities  for  proving  to  you  my 

affection  and  esteem. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  MARSHAL  BESSlfeRES,  AT  BuRGOS. 

"  Bayonne,  I'jth  April,  1808. 
"  My  Cousin, — King  Charles  and  the  Queen  left  the 
Escurial  on  the  14th,  and  they  should  have  arrived  at 
Burgos  on  the  i8th.  I  presume  that  you  rendered  them 
all  the  honours  imaginable.  You  will  escort  them,  with 
your  whole  division,  if  necessary,  in  order  to  clear 
Vittoria,  and  to  see  them  safe  on  the  road  to  Bayonne. 
You  will  find  inclosed  the  copy  of  a  letter  which  Savary 
is  taking  to  the  Prince  of  Asturias ;  if  the  Prince  comes 
to  Bayonne  it  will  be  well  and  good  ;  but  if  he  returns  to 
Burgos  you  must  arrest  him  and  send  him  here.  ...  If 
the  Prince  of  Asturias  has  passed  Burgos  on  his  way  to 
Madrid,  you  must  send  after  him,  and  have  him  arrested 
wherever  he  may  be  found,  for,  if  he  refuses  the  interview 
which  I  have  proposed,  that  will  be  a  sign  that  he  belongs 
to  the  English  party.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  vice-admiral  DECRiS. 

"Bayonne,  iSth  April,  1808. 
"Study  the  expedition  to  Algiers  as  regards  both  sea 
and  land.     One  foot  in  Africa  will  give  England  some- 
thing to   think   about.    .    .    .    After   having   studied   the 
expedition  to  Algiers,  study  that  to  Tunis.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

In  a  letter  to  King  Joseph  of  the  19th  April,  Napoleon 
wrote  : — 

"The  Infant  Don  Carlos  is  here.  He  has  several 
grandees  of  Spain  with  him.  The  Prince  of  Asturias,  who 
calls  himself  Ferdinand  VII.,  is  at  twenty  leagues  from 


FRENCH  TROOPS  IN  SPAIN.  383 

the  frontier  with  a  large  suite.  King  Charles  and  the 
Queen  are  on  the  road  here.  He  has  protested,  and  asked 
me  to  arbitrate.  My  troops  are  at  Madrid,  Barcelona,  and 
St.  Sebastian,  and  Burgos.  The  Spanish  army  is  not  for- 
midable. General  Dupont  is  at  Toledo.  I  have  100,000 
men  here  who  improve  every  day.  They  are  big  children, 
twenty  years  of  age,  with  .whom  I  have  reason  to  be 
satisfied.  ...  It  is  possible  that  I  may  write  to  you  in 
five  or  six  days  to  come  to  Bayonne.  You  will  leave  the 
command  of  the  troops  to  Marshal  Jourdan,  and  the 
Regency  to  whomever  you  like." 

Louis  had  refused  the  Spanish  crown,  and  rather  wished 
to  be  rid  of  the  Dutch  one. 

To  THE  GRAND  DUKE  OF  BERG. 

"Bayonne,  ■12nd April,  1808. 
"  I  approve  of  your  march  and  all  that  you  have  done. 
I  have  made  known  my  intentions  to  five  or  six  grandees 
who  accompany  the  Prince,  and  all  the  advantages  which 
Spain  will  derive  from  the  consolidation  of  its  indepen- 
dence and  integrity  under  the  domination  of  a  prince  of 
my  dynasty.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  THE  EMPRESS,  AT  Bordeaux. 

"Bayonne,  ^yd April,  1808. 
"  My  Friend, — Hortense  has  been  confined  of  a  son  ; 
this  gives  me  great  pleasure.  I  am  not  surprised  that  you 
should  have  said  nothing  about  it,  as  your  letter  is  dated 
the  2 1st,  and  she  was  brought  to  bed  on  the  night  of  the 
20th  [at  the  Tuileries].  You  can  leave  on  the  26th,  sleep 
at  Mont-de-Marson,  and  arrive  here  on  the  27th. 

"  Napoleon." 

This    was   the    child    who    was  destined    to    reign  as 
Napoleon  III. 


384  THE    CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  M.  DE  TALLEYRAND. 

"Bayonne,  7.1th  April,  1808. 

"I  have  received  your  different  letters  on  the  subject  of 
the  language  used  by  the  various  ambassadors  in  Paris. 
I  can  hardly  believe  that  Count  Tolstoy  made  use  of  the 
language  attributed  to  him  ;  it  is  a  Parisian  quolibet.  You 
might  reply  that  the  first  courier  from  Caulaincourt  brought 
the  news  of  the  rupture  of  the  armistice  of  Moldavia ; 
the  second  that  of  the  conquest  of  Finland ;  the  third 
that  of  the  despatch  of  fresh  troops  to  Moldavia.  But  the 
two  courts  are  on  the  best  terms.  I  can  have  quarrels  with 
Rome  and  with  Spain  ;  that  has  nothing  to  do  with 
Russia.  I  am  on  good  terms  with  every  one,  and  quite 
prepared  to  be  on  bad  terms  with  any  one  who  wishes  it. 
My  system  must  be  completed.  I  am  not  in  the  habit  ot 
remaining  half  way.  However,  ask  Count  Tolstoy  to 
dinner  now  and  then.  .  .  .  The  Prince  of  Austurias  is 
here.  I  treat  him  very  well.  I  accompany  him  to  the 
top  of  the  staircase,  and  receive  him  in  the  same  way; 
but  I  have  not  recognised  him.  The  King  and  the  Queen 
will  be  here  in  two  days.  The  Prince  of  the  Peace  is  to 
arrive  this  evening.  The  unfortunate  man  is  to  be  pitied. 
For  a  month  he  was  between  life  and  death.  During  that 
time  he  never  changed  his  shirt.  .  .  .  The  Spanish  nation 
exhibited  an  inhumanity  without  example.  .  .  .  Have  some 
articles  written,  not  to  justify  the  Prince  of  the  Peace,  but 
depicting  in  strokes  of  fire  the  misfortune  of  popular 
riots.  ...  I  am  continuing  my  military  dispositions  in 
Spain.  This  tragedy,  if  I  am  not  mistaken,  has  reached 
the  fifth  act ;  the  dino{lment  will  soon  appear. 

"  The  King  of  Prussia  is  a  hero  compared  to  the  Prince 
of  Asturias.  He  has  not  yet  said  a  word  to  me ;  he  is 
indifferent  to  everything  ;  very  material,  eats  four  times  a 
day,  and  has  no  idea  of  anything. 

"  NAPOLEON." 


THE    KING   OF   SPAIN.  385 

Even  Junot  was  accused  of  allowing  English  goods  to 
enter  Portugal,  and  on  the  2Sth  April  the  Emperor  wrote 
to  brother  Louis,  saying  : — 

"  I  send  you  a  list  of  the  persons  who  drive  a  contra- 
band trade  in  Holland,  and  who  infest  my  frontiers.  They 
indulge  in  veritable  hostilities  against  me.  I  cannot  permit 
this  scandal  any  longer.  .  ,  .  The  damage  which  they  do 
to  commerce  is  such  that  there  are  people  who  have  gained 
twenty  million  francs  in  these  frauds." 

To  CHARLES  IV.,  King  of  Spain. 

"  ChAteau  de  Marrach,  29//^  April,  1808. 
"  I  have  received  all  your  Majesty's  letters.  ...  I  have 
not  recognised,  and  never  will  recognise,  the  Prince  of 
Asturias  as  King  of  Spain  ;  I  have  had  him  officially 
informed  of  this.  I  look  forward  with  pleasure  to  seeing 
your  Majesty,  but  I  regret  to  hear  that  you  are  unwell. 
You  can  rely  upon  my  desire  to  be  agreeable  to  you,  and 
to  give  you  proofs  of  the  interest  and  friendship  with 
which  you  have  inspired  me. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  M.  DE  TALLEYRAND. 

"Bayonne,  ij/Afay,  1808. 

"  The  Spanish  ambassador  has  written  a  ridiculous 
letter  to  complain  that  the  papers  say  King  Charles  was 
forced  to  abdicate.  You  must  tell  him  that  I  have  seen 
the  king  and  the  queen,  who  received  their  son  very  badly  ; 
that  they  were  '  under  the  poinard '  for  several  hours,  and 
that  they  would  have  perished  if  the  king  had  refused  to 
sign  his  abdication.  .  .  .  The  Prince  of  Asturias  is  very 
stupid,  very  bad-hearted,  and  a  great  enemy  of  France. 
....  I  had  his  couriers  arrested,  and  found  upon  them 
letters  which  breathed  hatred  against  the  French;  he 
several  times  speaks  of  them  as  those  cursed  Frenchmen. 
....    The  king  and  queen   dine  with  me  to-day.     The 

VOL.  II.  C  C 


386     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Prince  of  the  Peace  resembles  a  bull ;  he  is  like  Daru. 
He  is  beginning  to  recover  his  senses  ;  he  has  been  treated 
with  unexampled  barbarity  ;  it  will  be  well  to  acquit  him 
of  all  lying  imputations,  but  to  leave  him  covered  with  a 
slight  coating  of  contempt. 

"  Napoleon." 

There  can  be  little  doubt  about  the  king  having  willingly 
abdicated,  although  he  afterwards  changed  his  mind,  pro- 
bably at  the  instigation  of  the  queen  and  the  Prince  of 
the  Peace.  Lord  Holland,  in  his  account  of  the  matter, 
says : — ■ 

"  Charles  IV.,  on  the  evening  of  the  day  he  abdicated, 
spoke  cheerfully  of  the  step  he  had  taken.  He  told  the 
diplomatic  corps  that  he  was  tired  of  business,  grown  old, 
and  that  it  was  fair  his  son  should  take  the  burden  of 
affairs  upon  him.  But  the  next  morning  his  tone  was 
entirely  altered,"  &c. 

"'As  my  habitual  infirmities  no  longer  permit  me  to 
bear  the  weight  of  the  government  of  my  kingdom,  and 
standing  in  need  of  a  milder  climate  and  private  life  for 
the  re-establishment  of  my  health,  I  have  determined, 
after  the  most  mature  deliberation,  to  abdicate  the  crown 
in  favour  of  my  well-beloved  son,  the  Prince  of  Asturias, 
and  I  desire  that  this,  my  free  and  spontaneous  act,  be 
fully  carried  into  execution.'  " 

On  the  following  day  the  king  informed  Murat  of  his 
resignation,  without  alleging  any  other  reasons  for  it  than 
those  given  above. 

To  M.  rOUCH^. 

"Bayonne,  1st  May,  1808. 
"You  have  seen  in  the  Moniteur  the  direction  which 
must  be  given  to  the  newspapers.     You  must  not,  however, 
go  so   far  as   to  praise  the  Prince  of  the   Peace,  whose 
administration  has  revolted  all  Spain.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 


BIRTH    OF    LOUIS    NAPOLEON.  387 

To  THE  GRAND  DUKE  OF  BERG. 

"  Bayot^ne,  2nd  May,  1&08. 

".  ...  It  is  probable  that  I  shall  send  you  my  act  of 
mediation  to-morrow.  But  it  is  necessary  that  the  Queen 
o*f  Etruria,  Don  Francisco,  and  above  all,  Don  Antonio, 
should  start  without  delay  for  Bayonne,  and  that  you  see 
that  the  crown  jewels  are  not  stolen.  ...  I  am  very  well 
pleased  with  King  Charles  and  the  queen.  They  are  very 
happy  here. 

"I  intend  the  King  of  Naples  to  reign  at  Madrid.  I 
wish  to  give  you  the  kingdom  of  Naples  or  that  of 
Portugal.  Reply  at  once  what  you  think  of  this,  for  it 
must  be  done  in  a  day.  In  the  meantime  you  will  remain 
lieutenant-general  of  the  kingdom.  You  will  say  that  you 
would  prefer  to  remain  with  me ;  that  is  impossible.  You 
have  a  large  family,  and  besides,  with  a  wife  like  yours, 
you  will  be  able  to  absent  yourself  should  war  require 
your  presence  with  me  ;  she  is  quite  capable  of  being  at 
the  head  of  a  Regency.  ...  If  you  could  induce  the 
inhabitants  of  Madrid  to  ask  for  the  King  of  Naples, 
that  would  please  me,  and  would  spare  their  amour- 
propre.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  THE  KING  of  HOLLAND. 

"  Bayonne,  3rd  May,  1808. 
"  I  congratulate  you  on  the  birth  of  a  son.     I  wish  the 
prince  to  be  called  Charles  Napoleon. 

"  Napoleon." 

The  child  was  christened  Charles  Louis  Napoleon. 

On  the  4th  May  Napoleon  was  able  to  send  to  Murat 
two  documents  signed  "  I,  the  king,"  in  which  he  virtually 
handed  over  the  reins  of  government  to  his  good  friend 
and  ally,  the  French  Eniperor, 

One   document  was    a    proclamation   to   the  Spanish 

c  c  2 


388  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

people,  the  other  a  letter  to  the  Supreme  Junta.    To  the 
people  his  Majesty  said  : — 

"  Those  who  speak  to  you  against  France  thirst  after 
your  blood  ;  they  are  the  enemies  of  your  nation  and  the 
agents  of  England.  .  .  .  Obey  the  authority  which  I  hold 
from  God  and  my  forefathers  ;  follow  my  example,  and  be 
convinced  that  the  Spaniards  can  find  prosperity  and  safety 
in  the  friendship  of  the  great  Emperor  alone,  who  is 
our  ally." 

,To  THE  GRAND  DUKE  OF  BERG. 

"Bayonne,  ^th  May,  1808. 
" .  .  .  .  The  Prince  of  Asturias  asked  for  an  interview 
yesterday  as  Majesty,  and  I  refused  it ;  he  then  asked  for 
one  as  Royal  Highness,  which  I  granted.  The  canon 
spoke  for  a  long  time.  .  .  .  You  must  send  away  the 
Infant  Don  Antonio  and  the  other  princes,  and  make 
your  authority  felt.  The  Junta  recognised  Charles  IV. ; 
that  prince  has  appointed  you  his  lieutenant,  and  he  must 
be  obeyed.  Let  it  be  understood  that  in  default  of  this 
the  greatest  misfortunes  will  occur.  .  .  .  See  that  the 
crown  jewels  are  not  stolen. 

"  Napoleon." 

to  the  grand  duke  of  berg. 

"  Bayonne,  ith  May,  1808. 
".  .  .  .  The  Prince  of  Asturias  is  still  here ;  he  can 
make  up  his  mind  to  nothing.  Sometimes  he  wishes  to 
recognise  his  father,  and  then  he  refuses.  .  .  .  Bessieres 
writes  to  me  that  the  idea  of  a  change  of  dynasty  had 
spread  through  Biscay  and  old  Castille.  Everywhere 
people  promise  to  remain  quiet.  ...  I  re-open  my  letter. 
Your  despatch  announcing  the  insurrection  at  Madrid 
arrived  at  four  o'clock.  I  am  glad  to  see  that  you  acted 
with  vigour.  On  receiving  your  letter  I  went  to  see  King 
Charles,  and  sent  for  the  two  princes.  The  king  and  the 
queen  spoke  with  the  greatest  indignation.    As  for  myself, 


THE    PRINCE    OF    ASTURIAS.  389 

I  told  them  that  if  before  midnight  they  had  not  recog- 
nised their  father  as  their  legitimate  sovereign,  they  should 
be  treated  as  rebels.  To-morrow  the  Prince  of  Asturias 
and  his  father  will  be  far  from  Bayonne.  I  have  proofs, 
by  intercepted  despatches,  that  the  insurrection  was  got 
up  by  Don  Antonio  and  the  Junta.  .  .  .  Administer  with 
vigour.  ...  If  there  are  any  Englishmen  at  Madrid  have 
them  arrested.  I  have  sent  into  Biscay.  No  one  will  stir. 
Catalonia  is  well  guarded.  You  command  the  Spanish 
troops ;  get  them  to  fraternise  with  the  French  troops. 
Let  the  Swiss  in  the  service  of  France  ask  the  Swiss  in 
the  service  of  Spain  to  eat  and  drink.  .  .  . 

"Napoleon." 

To  M.  DE  TALLEYRAND. 

"Bayonne,  (sth  May,  1808. 

".  .  .  .  I  may  tell  you  confidentially  that  I  intend  to 
give  King  Charles  Compi^gne  for  a  residence  for  life, 
together  with  the  castle  of  Chambord,  the  forest,  and  a 
pension  of  30,000,000  reals.  By  the  same  treaty  he  cedes 
me  his  rights  to  the  throne  of  Spain.  King  Charles  is  an 
excellent  man.  The  king  will  start  to-morrow,  and  will 
pass  a  week  at  Fontainebleau,  The  Prince  of  Asturias 
inspires  no  interest;  he  is  so  stupid  that  there  is  no 
drawing  a  word  from  him.  ...  I  look  upon  the  rough 
part  of  the  business  as  finished.  Some  agitations  may 
take  place,  but  the  lesson  given  to  Madrid,  and  since  then 
to.Burgos,  will  quickly  decide  matters.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  same  day  Murat  was  informed  that  the  Prince 
of  Asturias  had  renounced  the  crown  in  favour  of  his 
father.  This  he  did  in  the  most  grovelling  terms,  being 
perfectly  convinced  that  if  he  held  out  any  longer  he 
would  be  treated  like  the  Due  d'Enghien.  His  abdication 
Tyas  certainly  obtained  by  violence,  and  was  not  voluntary. 


39°     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

On  the  9th  May  Napoleon  sent  instructions  to  Mollien 
to  pay  King  Charles  30,000,000  of  reals  a  year  in  monthly 
instalments.  "  You  will  pay  each  of  the  Infants  400,000 
francs  (16,000/.)  a  year;  I  think  there  are  five  of  them." 
In  fact  the  whole  amount  to  be  paid  to  the  royal  exiles 
was  estimated  at  10,000,000  francs  (400,000/.).  "All  these 
sums,"  concluded  the  Emperor,  "  will  be  refunded  by 
Spain  ! " 

The  next  day  Napoleon  gave  fresh  instructions  to  his 
Minister  of  Finance,  who  was  told  to  draw  6,000,000  francs 
from  Portugal  to  meet  the  expenses  of  the  Spanish  army. 
This  sum  was  to  be  sent  through  Paris  in  order  "  to  favour 
commerce  and  to  re-establish  the  exchange  on  Lisbon  ! " 

M.  Thiers  quotes  the  following  strange  letter  on  the 
subject  of  Valengay,  which  does  not  appear  in  the  official 
correspondence  : — 

"I  desire  that  these  princes  be  received  without  any 
external  show,  but  honestly,  and  that  you  do  everything 
possible  to  amuse  them.  If  you  have  a  theatre  at  Valengay 
there  would  be  no  harm  in  sending  for  some  comedians. 
You  might  take  Madame  de  Talleyrand  and  four  or  five 
ladies  there.  If  the  Prince  of  Asturias  becomes  attached  to 
a  pretty  woman  there  will  be  no  harm,  especially  if  she 
can  be  depended  upon.  I  have  the  greatest  interest  that 
the  prince  should  not  commit  himself.  I  wish  him  there- 
fore to  be  amused  and  kept  occupied.  It  would  have  been 
good  policy  to  have  sent  him  to  Bitche  or  to  .some  state 
prison  ;  but  as  he  threw  himself  into  my  arms,  as  he  has 
promised  to  do  nothing  without  my  order,  and  as  every- 
thing is  going  on  in  Spain  as  I  desire,  I  have  determined 
to  send  him  into  the  country  and  to  surround  him  with 
pleasure  and  supervision.  Let  this  last  through  the  month 
of  May  and  a  part  of  June,  Spanish  affairs  will  then  have 
taken  a  decided  turn  and  I  shall  see  what  is  to  be  done. 
As  for  you,  your  mission  is  sufficiently  honourable.  To 
receive  three  illustrious  persons  in  order  to  amuse  them  is 
quite  in  character  both  with  the  nation  and  with  your  rank." 


JOSEPH,    KING    OF    SPAIN.  391 

And  this  was  the  malicious  way  in  which  M.  de  Talley- 
rand was  treated  for  having  vainly  endeavoured  to  impress 
upon  his  imperial  master  the  danger  and  folly  of  attaching 
Spain.  At  St.  Helena  Napoleon  said  that  it  would  have 
been  in  his  interest  to  have  had  Ferdinand  VII.  and  his 
brother  assassinated,  and  that  Talleyrand  advised  him  to 
get  rid  of  the  princes  in  that  manner  ! 

On  the  loth  Napoleon  also  wrote  to  Murat  saying : 
"The  Prince  of  Asturias,  the  Infant  Don  Carlos,  and  the 
Infant  Don  Antonio  start  to-morrow  for  Valengay.  King 
Charles,  the  Queen,  the  Queen  of  Etruria,  and  Don 
Francisco  leave  for  Fontainebleau.  When  you  receive 
this  letter  there  will  be  no  more  Spaniards  at  Bayonne. 
...  I  will  send  you  the  letter  in  which  King  Charles  cedes 
me  all  his  rights.  After  that  I  shall  allow  a  few  days  to 
pass  so  as  to  give  people  time  to  calm  down.  Then  I  shall 
issue  a  proclamation  to  the  Spaniards  announcing  that 
I  have  appointed  the  King  of  Naples  King  of  Spain.  .  .  . 
When  I  am  satisfied  with  the  state  of  public  opinion  I  will 
go  on  to  Madrid." 

Then  comes  a  bit  of  advice  similar  to  that  given  to 
Junot  before  he  entered  Lisbon  :  "  I  recommend  you 
to  push  delicacy  to  scrupulousness;  nothing  must  be  ab- 
stracted in  this  country,  neither  horses  nor  anything  else. 
In  fact  we  must  not  appear  to  have  come  here  to  eat  up 
the  country.  .  .  .  Send  some  one  to  Solano,  to  whom  you 
must  write  very  often." 

Napoleon  then  wrote  to  Junot  complaining  that  he  had 
sent  him  no  reports  :  "  I  have  no  list,"  he  said,  "  of  the 
diamonds,  furniture,  and  crown  property  found  in  Portugal. 
.  .  .  There  is  a  still  more  important  affair  ;  you  receive 
ships  which  pretend  that  they  come  from  America 
while  they  really  come  from  England.  Trade  is  carried 
on  between  England  and  Portugal.  .  .  .  You  ruin  France 
and  Holland.  .  .  .  You  render  the  conquest  of  Portugal 
useless.  ...  I  have  heard  with  pain  of  necklaces,  diamonds, 
and  other  baubles  sent  to  Paris.  .  .  ." 


392     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

The  same  day  his  Majesty  wrote  to  brother  Joseph 
telling  him  what  had  passed  at  Bayonne  ;  how  Charles  IV. 
had  first  abdicated  in  favour  of  Ferdinand  ;  how  Ferdi- 
nand had  abdicated  in  favour  of  his  father,  and  how 
Charles  IV.  had  abdicated  in  favour  of  Napoleon.  He 
added  : 

"The  nation  by  the  voice  of  the  supreme  council  of 
Castille  asks  me  for  a  king.  It  is  for  you  that  I  destine 
this  crown.  Spain  is  not  like  the  kingdom  of  Naples ; 
it  contains  11,000,000  inhabitants,  and  a  revenue  of 
1 50,000,000  francs,  without  counting  the  immense  colonial 
revenues  and  the  possession  of  '  all  the  Americas.'  It  is  a 
crown  which  installs  you  at  Madrid,  at  three  days  from 
France  and  which  covers  one  of  its  frontiers  {sic).  At 
Madrid  you  are  in  France.  Naples  is  at  the  end  of  the 
world.  .  .  ." 

And  Joseph  was  forced  to  accept  the  throne  of  Spain  as 
Louis  had  been  forced  to  accept  that  of  Holland.  He 
reluctantly  quitted  Naples,  and  with  the  idea  of  returning 
there  ;  but  he  had  to  deal  with  a  will  far  stronger  than  his 
own,  and  when  he  reached  Bayonne  he  found  himself  no 
more  able  to  refuse  the  proffered  throne  than  Charles  IV. 
and  Ferdinand  were  able  to  refuse  to  abdicate. 

Having  despatched  the  above  important  letters  and 
others  on  the  lOth,  his  Majesty  the  next  day  turned  his 
attention  to  naval  affairs,  and  wrote  no  less  than  eight 
letters  to  his  Minister  of  Marine  all  dated  the  nth  May. 
In  one  of  these  letters,  in  the  midst  of  a  quantity  of 
technical  matter  one  finds :  "  The  manner  in  which 
Bordeaux  is  allowed  to  be  blockaded  is  ridiculous.  It 
costs  the  King  of  England  only  one  frigate  to  cut  off  all 
communication  between  Spain  and  Portugal  and  Bordeaux. 
Another  frigate  intercepts  communication  between  Brest 
and  Bordeaux.    This  is  too  much  of  a  good  thing." 

And  in  fact  it  is  easy  to  understand  the  annoyance 
caused  by  these  two  frigates  to  the  organiser  of  the 
continental  blockade. 


CESSION    OF    SPAIN.  393 

In  addition  to  the  eight  letters  to  Admiral  Decr^s  the 
Emperor  wrote  four  to  Murat.  In  the  first  he  sent  him  a 
copy  of  the  letter  in  which  Charles  IV.  ceded  all  his  rights 
to  his  friend  and  ally.  In  the  second  he  said  :  "  There  is 
at  Madrid  a  large  quantity  of  maps  and  papei's  concerning 
a  voyage  in  Egypt,  Africa,  and  Asia  Minor,  made  since 
1803  by  a  Spaniard,  who  has  just  arrived  here,  and  who 
travelled  under  the  name  of  Ali-bey-el-Abassi.  These 
maps  and  papers  are  in  the  house  of  one  Amoros,  secretary 
to  the  king,  or  in  the  offices  of  the  Prince  of  the  Peace. 
Have  these  papers,  which  no  doubt  contain  useful  infor- 
mation, taken." 

In  the  third  letter  his  Majesty  said,  among  other 
things  :  "  Let  me  know  if  it  be  true  that  the  Spaniards 
have  at  Rio  Janeiro  a  dep6t  of  several  million  piastres." 
And — "  You  will  see  by  the  inclosed  treaty  which  I  have 
concluded  with  the  Prince  of  Asturias,  that  he  cedes  me 
all  his  rights." 

To  THE  INFANT  DON  FERDINAND,  Prince  of  Asturias. 

"Bayonne,  i\th  May,  1808. 
"  .  ...  The  treaty  which  has  been  ratified  having 
smoothed  all  difficulties  between  us,  I  adhere  to  the 
demand  made  by  you,  and,  as  soon  as  possible,  we  will 
conclude  the  marriage  which  you  desire  to  contract 
with  one  of  my  nieces.  I  hope  that  you  will  find 
happiness,  &c. 

"  Napoleon." 

And  to  Murat :  "  Information  on  which  I  can  place 
implicit  reliance  convinces  me  that  the  movement  which 
took  place  at  Madrid  was  ordered  by  the  Prince  of  Asturias 
and  by  his  friends.  '  Risk  any  extremity  rather  than  accept 
the  terms  of  the  Emperor ;  massacre  all  the  French,' 
those  were  the  orders  of  the  Prince." 

On  the  1 6th  May  we  find  in  a  letter  addressed  to  Murat 
a  list  of  the  Spanish  ships  now  at  the  orders  of  the 
Emperor,   or   so   he   thought — six    at    Toulon,   three    at 


394     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Carthagena,  twelve  at  Cadiz,  and  seven  at  Ferrol ;  only 
twenty-eight  in  all.  His  Majesty  desired  to  see  Mazerredo 
on  this  subject.  How  could  these  vessels  be  manned  and 
got  ready  for  sea  .' 

On  the  same  day  Napoleon  said  in  a  letter  to  Prince 
Eugene :  "  The  reports  which  you  send  me  are  laughable. 
I  cannot  even  see  how  many  men  are  detached  in  Spain. 
This  is  quite  ridiculous.  For  my  French  army  the 
minister  forwards  to  me  twice  a  month  more  than 
eighteen  volumes  in  i2mo  and  in  4to,  which  show  me  the 
exact  position  of  the  army.  .  .  ." 

To  M.  DE  CHAMPAGNY. 

"Bayonne,  \-]th  May,  1808.. 
"  Write  to  Laforest  saying  that  I  regret  the  weakness 
shown  by  my  ambassador  ;  that  he  should  enlighten  the 
Duke  of  Berg  and  not  pander  to  him  ;  act  as  a  counter- 
poise and  not  lead  him  to  commit  follies;  that  the  Junta 
and  the  council  of  Castille  are  sharper  than  my  lieutenant- 
general  ;  that  their  hesitation  in  demanding  a  king  arises 
from  the  fact  that  they  were  not  aware  of  the  renunciations 
of  King  Charles  and  the  Prince  of  Asturias  ;  that  there  is 
not  one  voice  in  favour  of  the  grand  duke  (iVTurat)  ;  that 
the  nation  is  still  in  a  state  of  hatred  and  humiliation  into 
which  recent  events  have  plunged  it ;  that  it  desires  the 
grand  duke  less  than  any  one.  .    .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  17th,  in  a  letter  to  Decr^s,  we  find  the  Emperor 
saying  :  "  There  is  not  much  news  from  India.  England 
is  in  great  penury  there,  and  the  arrival  of  an  expedition 
would  ruin  the  colony  from  top  to  bottom.  The  more  I 
reflect  upon  this  matter  the  less  inconvenience  I  see  in 
undertaking  the  expedition." 

And  two  days  afterwards,  in  a  letter  to  Murat,  his  Majesty 
wrote  :  "  I  tell  you  once  more  that  money  must  be  found 
for  the  armaments  of  Cadiz,  of  Carthagena,  and  of  Ferrol 


CROWN   JEWELS.  395 

Wiien  the  nation  learns  that   everything  is   in   motion  in 

these  ports  that  will   be   my  best   proclamation.     Besides, 

myself,  I  cannot  afford  to  waste  time ;  I  must  have  ships, 

for  I  intend  striking  a  heavy  blow  before  the  end  of  the 
season." 

In  a  further  letter  to  Murat,  dated  the  2ist,  we  see  that 

in  addition  to  forcing  our  blockading  squadrons  at  several 

points,  Napoleon  was  intent  upon  sending  troops  to  India 

and   to    Buenos   Ayres,  and   Brazil,   recapturing  Trinidad 

and  seizing  on  Tunis  and  Algiers. 

To  M.  DE  TALLEYRAND,  AT  Valencay. 

"Bayonne,  24/^  Ma^r,  1808. 
"Prince  Ferdinand,  in  writing  to   me,  calls  me   Cousin. 
Try  and  make  M.  de  San-Carlos   understand   that  this  is 
ridiculous,  and  that  he  ought  to  call  me  simply  Sire. 

"  Napoleon." 

We  see  that  as  early  as  May  Austria  was  beginning  to 
stir  once  more.  On  the  28th  of  that  month  the  Emperor 
wrote  to  Champagny  to  know  if  there  were  any  truth  in 
the  report  that  the  cabinet  of  Vienna  had  ordered  a  levy  of 
150,000  men.  The  French  ambassador  in  Austria  was  to 
protest  against  any  extraordinary  armament,  and  to  say 
that  Napoleon  would  consider  such  levy  directed  against 
him,  and  would  take  measures  in  consequence.  If  Count 
Andreossy  did  not  receive  satisfactory  explanations,  he 
was  at  once  to  leave  Vienna. 

After  ordering  Murat  more  than  once  to  obtain  money, 
Napoleon  had  to  write  to  Mollien  on  the  3rd  June,  direct- 
ing the  Bank- of  France  to  advance  1,000,000/.  to  the  Bank 
of  Spain  at  six  per  cent,  on  the  security  of  the  crown  jewels. 
There  were  partial  risings,  too,  in  various  parts  of  the 
country,  and  a  serious  one  at  Miranda,  which  Marshal 
Bessieres  was  to  put  down.  On  the  3rd  June  Napoleon 
wrote  to  the  commander  of  the  Imperial  Guard  a  letter  on 
this  subject,  in  which  he  said  :  "  I   am  led  to  believe  that 


39^     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

the  Bishop  of  Santander,  or  Santa  Cruz,  and  his  brother- 
in-law  Miranda,  are  at  the  head  of  this  revolt ;  it  seems  to 
me  extraordinary  that  men  of  sense  can  compromise  their 
position  in  this  way  ;  if  this  be  the  case  they  must  not  be 
spared."  Generals  Merle,  Verdier,  Lasalle,  and  Loison 
were  immediately  in  motion,  for,  as  Napoleon  wrote — 
"  Santander  must  be  crushed  and  the  Asturias  subdued." 
The  hornets'  nest  was  beginning  to  stir. 

To  THE  KING  OF  WESTPHALIA. 

"  I  see  with  pleasure  the  good  feeling  which  animates 
your  people.  The  immense  expense  which  I  am  obliged 
to  incur  in  order  to  reconstruct  my  fleets,  will  not  permit 
me  to  grant  your  demand.  The  province  of  Magdeburg  is 
the  richest  of  all,  and  it  must  pay  like  the  others.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

to  the  emperor  of  russia. 

"  Bayonne,  indjune,  1808. 

"  I  received  your  Majesty's  letter  of  the  28th  April,  and 
learned  with  pleasure  the  success  obtained  by  your  arms. 
The  capture  of  the  Swedish  flotilla  is  very  important,  and 
very  precious  for  your  Majesty. 

"  Spanish  affairs  will  detain  me  here  for  a  month  longer. 
Afterwards  I  shall  be  able  to  go  wherever  your  Majesty 
may  j  udge  necessary  for  an  interview,  so  as  to  conciliate 
the  different  interests  of  our  two  empires. 

"  Spain  changes  sovereigns.  I  keep  nothing  for  myself. 
The  grandeur  of  France  will  gain  nothing  with  the  excep- 
tion of  more  security  for  the  future.  In  a  few  days  I  will 
write  to  your  Majesty  on  all  these  matters.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

By  a  letter  of  the  4th  June,  addressed  to  Murat,  one  sees 
that  a  deputation  of  grandees  and  deputies  had  arrived  at 
Bayonne,  and   that  Napoleon  had  laid  before  them  the 


THE   JUNTA.  397 

proclamation  of  the  chief  of  the  rebels  of  Aragon,  and  that 
"  an  example  must  be  made  of  Saragossa." 

On  the  other  hand,  Napoleon  received  a  fulsome  letter 
of  submission  from  Cardinal  Louis  de  Bourbon,  Archbishop 
of  Toledo,  while  the  deputies  of  the  General  Junta  and  the 
Supreme  Junta  called  on  the  people  to  accept  the  new- 
order  of  things. 

To  M.  DE  TALLEYRAND. 

"  Bayonne,  (jth  June,  1808. 

"  The  King  of  Naples  arrived  here  yesterday.  He  has 
been  acknowledged  King  of  Spain,  and  is  about  to  leave 
for  Madrid.  He  has  already  received  the  oath  of  several 
grandees  of  Spain  who  are  here,  of  the  Council  of  Castille, 
the  Council  of  India,  of  the  Inquisition,  &c. 

"There  are  movements  in  several  provinces,  and  General 
Dupont,  with  15,000  men,  has  entered  Seville,  where  the 
standard  of  revolt  has  been  raised.  Saragossa  has  also 
revolted.  .  .  .  The  arrival  of  the  king  will  put  an  end 
to  all  these  disturbances,  and  will  restore  tranquillity. 
.  .  .  The  death  of  the  King  of  England  has  excited  great 
joy  here.  ...  "Napoleon." 

The  next  day  Napoleon  wrote  to  Murat,  saying — "  I 
suppose  that  you  have  marched  troops  against  Saragossa 
and  Valladolid.  I  expect  with  impatience  news  from 
Cordova,"  [where  Dupont  was]. 

And  on  the  13th,  in  a  letter  to  Decres,  he  expressed 
the  fear  that  "  the  effervescence  in  Spain,  unless  it  calms 
down  quickly,  will  extend  to  the  colonies,  and  then  I 
shall  require  ready-made  expeditions  to  seize  upon  some 
colonies." 

The  insurrection  did  extend  to  the  colonies. 

To  JOSEPH  NAPOLEON,  King  of  Spain,  at  Bavonne. 

"Bayonne,  ibth  June,  1808. 
" .  .  .  .  The  Junta  is  coming  to-morrow  with  an  address  ; 
prepare  your  answer.     You  must  speak  of  the  grief  caused 


398.    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

to  you  by  the  disturbances  in  Spain,  which  necessitate  the 
employment  of  force  to  repress  them  ;  say  that  you  long 
to  find  yourself  in  the  midst  of  your  new  subjects,  and 
begin  your  reign  by  some  acts  of  pardon  and  clemency.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  same  day  his  Majesty  informed  Murat  that 
General  Duhesme  had  marched  from  Barcelona  against 
the  rebels,  had  captured  their  guns,  killed  1,500  or  1,800, 
and  burned  six  large  villages.  "  General  Chabran  also 
burned  three  villages.  ...  A  great  number  of  Spanish 
officers,  priests,  and  monks,  were  found  among  the 
dead." 

To  GENERAL  CAULAINCOURT. 

"  Bayonne,  i(3tlt  June,  1808. 
"  Several  artistes  have  fled  from  Paris,  and  taken  refuge 
at  St.  Petersburg.     I  beg  that  you  will  ignore  this  bad 
conduct.     We  have  no  lack  of  ballet  girls  and  actresses  in 
Paris. 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  25th  June  the  Emperor  once  more  wrote  to 
Champagny  on  the  subject  of  Austria,  which  was  to  be 
informed  indirectly  that  the  Grand Arm^e  still  existed,  was 
300,000  strong,  all  Frenchmen,  and  could  be  easily  raised. 
Count  Andreossy  was  to  keep  a  sharp  look  out  on  all  the 
intrigues  between  Russia  and  Austria  on  the  subject  of  the 
Porte. 

In  a  letter  to  Decres,  the  Emperor  wrote  that  "the 
affairs  of  Spain  having  become  very  bad,  I  shall  not  be 
able  to  decide  before  the  15th  July  if  I  can  detach  any 
considerable  force  from  Europe  ;  "  and,  "  I  am  not  without 
some  anxiety  respecting  my  squadron  at  Cadiz,  General 
Solano  having  been  assassinated  near  that  place." 

On  the  7th  July  the  Emperor  conferred  titles  on  several 
persons  connected   with    King   Joseph.      In   announcing 


MARSHAL   JOURDAN.  599 

this,  he  added—"  As  for  Marshal  Jourdan,  I  fear  that 
were  I  to  give  him  so  high  a  title  as  Duke  of  Fleurus, 
and  a  settled  fortune,  that  he  would  want  to  return  to 
Paris.  You  must  allow  him  to  come  to  Madrid.  Tell  him 
that  I  have  ten  duchies  at  my  disposal,  and  thus  gain  a 
few  months.  He  will  serve  you  in  Spain,  and  will  get 
accustomed  to  it." 

To  THE  EMPEROR  OF  RUSSIA. 

"  Bayonne,  Zth  July,  1808. 
"  I  send  your  Majesty  the  constitution  which  the  Spanish 
Junta  has  drawn  up.  The  disorder  in  this  country  had 
reached  a  pitch  difficult  to  conceive.  ...  In  the  new 
situation  Spain  will,  in  reality,  be  more  independent  of 
me  than  ever.  ...  I  have  reason  to  be  satisfied  with  all 
persons  of  rank,  fortune,  and  education.  The  monks  alone 
who  occupy  half  the  territory,  foreseeing  the  destruction  of 
abuses,  and  the  numerous  agents  of  the  Inquisition,  fore- 
seeing the  end  of  their  existence,  agitate  the  country.  .  .  . 
If  I  had  considered  only  the  interest  of  France,  I  should 
have  extended  my  frontiers  at  the  expense  of  Spain; 
every  one  knows  that  the  ties  of  relationship  enter  for  very 
little  into  political  calculations,  and  become  null  after 
twenty  years.  Philip  V.  waged  war  against  his  grand- 
father. A  province  like  Catalonia  or  Navarre  added  to 
France  would  have  done  more  for  her  power  than  the 
change  which  has  taken  place,  which  is  really  useful  to 
Spain.  .  .  .  Austria  is  arming  with  all  her  might,  and 
appears  to  be  concentrating  troops  on  the  confines  of 
Servia  and  Hungary.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

In  some  military  notes  which  Napoleon  addressed  to 
Savary,  who  was  on  a  mission  at  Madrid,  his  Majesty  said — 
"  Should  General  Dupont  experience  a  check,  that  will  be 
of  little  consequence,  he  will  merely  have  to  recross  the 
mountains  ;  but  a  blow  struck  at  Marshal  Bessieres  would 


400     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

be  a  blow  aimed  at  the  heart  of  the  army,  and  would 
produce  tetanus.  This  is  why  it  is  unfortunate  t!tat  all 
my  orders  have  not  been  carried  out.  .  .  .  The  real  way  to 
reinforce  Dupont  is  not  to  send  him  troops,  but  to  send 
troops  to  Marshal  Bessi^res.  .  .  .  The  object  of  all  the 
efforts  of  the  army  should  be  to  hold  Madrid.  There 
lies  the  question.^  .  .  ." 

Writing  on  the  14th  July  to  King  Joseph  on  various 
military  measures,  the  Emperor  concluded  his  letter  thus — 
"  Be  gay  and  content  ;  take  care  of  your  health.  Troops 
are  arriving  here  from  all  sides." 

To  M.  BARBIER  {Librarian  of  the  Emperor). 

"Bayonne,  \TthJtily,  1808. 

"  The  Emperor  wants  a  portative  library  of  a  thousand 
volumes  in  l2mo.,  printed  in  good  type,  without  margin,  and 
composed  as  nearly  as  possible  of  40  volumes  on  religion, 
40  of  epics,  40  of  plays,  60  of  poetry,  100  of  novels,  60  of 
history,  the  remainder,  to  make  up  the  1,000,  of  historical 
memoirs. 

"  The  religious  works  are  to  be  the  Old  and  New- 
Testament,  the  Koran,  a  selection  from  the  works  of 
the  Fathers  of  the  Church,  works  respecting  the  Arians, 
Xalvinists,  a  Mythology,  &c. 

"  The  epics  are  to  be  Homer,  Lucan,  Tasso,  Telemachus, 
the  Henriade,  &c." 

Among  the  novels  were  to  be  the  masterpieces  of 
Fielding  and  Richardson. 

To  EUGENE  NAPOLEON,  Viceroy  of  Italy. 

"Bayonne,  i^thjuly,  1808. 
"  I  see   with   pleasure   that   you   have   made    Cardinal 
Gabrielli  go  to  Milan.     When  you  see  him  you  must  ask  . 

1  Napoleon  soon  discovered  his  error.     Holding  Madrid  did  not 
make  him  or  Joseph  master  of  an  inch  of  ground  outside  the  capital. 


THE    GOLDEN    FLEECE.  4OI 

him  if  he  will  take  the  oath  prescribed  by  the  Concordat. 
If  he  refuses  shut  him  up  in  a  monastery  and  sequestrate 
his  temporalities,  half  of  which  you  can  give  to  the 
hospitals,  and  the  other  half  to  repair  churches.  Let  all 
this  be  accomplished  without  noise,  and  see  that  not  a 
word  is  said  about  the  matter  in  any  newspaper. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  KING  JOSEPH, 

"Bayonne,  \-]th  July,  1808. 
"  I  have  just  received  your  letter  announcing  the  victory 
of  Medina  de  Rio  Seco.  This  victory  is  very  glorious. 
Make  known  your  satisfaction  to  Marshal  Bessieres  by 
sending  him  the  Golden  Fleece.^  This  is  the  most  impor- 
tant event  of  this  war,  and  gives  a  decided  colour  to  our 
affairs.     General  Dupont  must  now  be  supported.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  marshal  JOURDAN,  at  Naples. 

"Bayonne,  i^th  July,  i8o8. 
"  You   must   leave    for   Madrid    by   post,    passing  by 
Bayonne.     You   will  take  the  command   of  the  army  of 
Spain  under  the  King,  with  the  title  of  Major-General.  .  .  . 

"Napoleon." 

On-the  1 8th,  Napoleon,  elated  by  the  success  of  Marshal 
Bessieres,  said,  in  a  second  letter  to  King  Joseph  :  "  After 
the  victory  of  Medina  de  Rio  Seco,  General  Dupont  can 
turn  his  attention  to  the  destruction  of  General  Castanos." 

A  third  letter,  written  on  the  19th,  began  thus — 

"  I  see  with  pain  that  you  are  so  much  affected.     This 

was  the  misfortune  which   I   feared.     Troops  are  coming 

in  from  all  sides.     You  have  a  great  number  of  partisans 

in  Spain,  but  who   are  intimidated ;  they  are  all  honest 

1  When  the  Emperor's  letter  arrived  King  Joseph  had  been  driven 
from  Madrid,  and  Marshal  Bessiferes  never  obtained  his  order. 

VOL.   II,  ^  ° 


402     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

men.  I  none  the  less  consider  your  task  as  fine  and 
glorious.  The  victory  of  Marshal  Bessi^res,  who  totally 
defeated  Cuesta,  has  greatly  bettered  our  affairs.  .  .  .  You 
should  not  think  it  anything  extraordinary  to  conquer  a 
kingdom.  Philippe  V.  and  Henri  IV.  were  obliged  to 
conquer  theirs.  Be  gay,  do  not  allow  yourself  to  be 
affected,  and  do  not  doubt  that  things  will  finish  better 
and  more  quickly  than  you  think. 

"  Everything  is  going  on  well  at  Saragossa. 

"  Napoleon." 

No  wonder  that  Joseph  was  affected  when  he  dis- 
covered the  true  state  of  the  country.  In  July  he  wrote 
to  Napoleon  that  there  -was  not  a  single  Spaniard  in  his 
favour  with  the  exception  of  a  few  attached  to  his  house- 
hold. His  other  adherents,  frightened  by  the  unanimous 
opinion  of  their  compatriots,  had  hidden  themselves.  And 
"  To  maintain  the  prince,  condemned  to  reign  over  the 
Spaniards,  it  would  be  necessary  to  have  a  hundred 
thousand  scaffolds  permanently  established.". 

And  on  the  22nd  July — "  If  your  Majesty  would  write 
to  General  Caulaincourt  ^  that  you  are  acquainted  with  the 
pillage  of  the  churches  and  houses  of  Cuenca,  organised 
in  cold  blood,  you  would  do  well.  I  know  that  the  fact 
of  the  sacred  vases  having  been  put  up  to  auction  in 
Madrid  has  done  great  harm."  He  implored  his  brother 
to  recall  the  robbers,  adding,  "  I  have  for  enemies  a  nation 
of  brave  inhabitants,  exasperated  to  the  last  degree."  And, 
"  You  are  mistaken  to  suppose  that  the  honest  people  are 
more  in  my  favour  than  the  scamps." 

And  what  did  Napoleon  reply  on  the  31st  July — "The 
style  of  your  letter  does  not  please  me.  It  is  not  a  ques- 
tion of  dying,  but  of  living,  and  of  being  victorious  ;  you 
are  and  you  shall  be  so.  I  shall  find  in  Spain  the  columns 
of  Hercules,  but  not  the  limits  of  my  power.  .  .  .  Caulain- 
court acted  quite  right  at  Cuenca.     That  town  was  pillaged 

^  This  was  the  brother  of  the  ambassador  to  St.  Petersburg. 


AUSTRIA    ARMING. 


403 


in  accordance  with  the  laws  of  war,  as  it  was  taken  by 
assault.  .  .  .  Your  position  may  be  painful  as  a  king,  but 
it  is  brilliant  as  a  general." 

On  the  2 1  St  July  Napoleon  left  Bayonne,  and  on  the 
2Sth  he  wrote  to  King  Jerome  from  Toulouse,  saying — 

"  Austria  is  arming ;  she  denies  this  ;  she  is  therefore 
arming  against  us.  She  has  spread  the  rumour  that  I 
wish  to  deprive  her  of  some  provinces  ;  she  therefore 
wishes  to  excuse  a  measure  as  gratuitously  offensive  as  it 
is  insane  on  the  ground  of  legitimate  defence.  Our  rela- 
tions with  Austria,  since  the  peace  of  Presburg,  have  been 
constantly  friendly.  ...  Russia  is  no  less  astonished  at 
these  armaments  than  we  are.  .  .  Since  Austria  is  arming, 
we  must  arm.  Therefore  I  have  ordered  the  Grand  Army 
to  be  reinforced.  My  troops  are  concentrating  at  Strasburg, 
Mayence,  Wesel.  I  beg  that  your  Majesty  will  have  your 
contingent  ready.  If  there  be  a  means  of  avoiding  war, 
it  is  by  showing  Austria  that  we  are  ready  to  pick  up 
the  glove.  I  repeat  to  your  Majesty  that  there  is  no  cause 
of  difference  between  Austria  and  myself,  that  I  ask  her 
for  nothing,  and  that  I  am  arming  simply  because  she 
is  arming. 

"  Napoleon." 

Austria  in  fact  doubted  the  intentions  of  Napoleon  and 
the  Czar,  and  no  doubt  she  would  have  been  attacked  and 
despoiled  but  for  the  turn  taken  by  affairs  in  Spain. 

Prince  Metternich  had  just  written  home  that — 

"  Measures  on  the  part  of  Napoleon,  as  false  as  unfor- 
tunate in  their  execution,  deliver  us  from  the  embarrass- 
ment in  which  we  should  have  found  ourselves  but  for  the 
noble  effort  of  the  Spaniards." 

Russia  herself  had  afterwards  reason  to  appreciate  this 
"noble  effort." 

On  the  28th  the  Emperor  wrote  to  King  Joseph  saying 
that  an  English  Gazette  had  reported  the  capture  of  "  my 

D  D    2 


404  THE   CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

vessels  by  the  insurgents.  It  is  the  English  who  say 
this.  It  appears  that  everything  is  going  on  well  at 
Lisbon.  As  soon  as  General  Dupont  learned  the  victory 
of  Marshal  Bessieres,  I  hope  that  he  pushed  forward." 

And  on  the  ist  August,  writing  from  Bordeaux,  to 
his  brother,  he  said — 

"  The  report  of  the  officer  of  cuirassiers  who  brought 
me  your  letter  makes  me  perceive  that  the  corps  of  Dupont 
is  about  to  be  attacked  and  obliged  to  retreat.  That  is 
past  all  conception.  No  matter  what  reverse  you  may 
hear  of,  do  not  be  uneasy ;  you  will  soon  have  over 
100,000  men.  .  .  .  You  shall  reign,  and  you  will  have 
conquered  your  subjects  in  order  to  be  their  father. 
Good  kings  have  passed  through  this  school.  .  .  .  Above 
all  health,  gaiety,  that  is  to  say,  strength  of  mind. 

"  Napoleon." 

Several  days  before  the  above  letter  was  written  Dupont 
had  been  forced  to  lay  down  his  arms  with  some  20,000 
men.  The  consequences  of  this  disaster  were  terrible  to 
the  French,  and  would  have  been  worse  had  Castauos 
followed  up  his  blow.  Joseph  was  forced  to  leave  Madrid  ; 
Admiral  Rosily  was  obliged  to  surrender  the  remnant  of 
the  French  fleet  which  had  managed  to  escape  destruction 
at  Trafalgar,  and  had  ever  since  been  lying  at  Cadiz.  A 
great  impulse  was  given  to  what  Napoleon  called  the 
insurrection  in  Spain,  the  siege  of  Saragossa  had  to  be 
raised,  and  Pius  VII.  was  emboldened  to  protest  against 
the  acts  of  the  despoiler,  and  Austria  to  push  on  her 
armaments  with  increased  vigour. 

If  the  conduct  of  Dupont  has  been  generally  blamed  by 
most  military  critics,  it  is  not  less  certain  that  Napoleon 
himself  was  in  a  measure  responsible  for  the  disaster  by 
constantly  refusing  that  general  reinforcements  until  it  was 
too  late,  and  this  in  spite  of  the  earnest  entreaties  of 
Savary,  who,  without  orders,  had  despatched  him  Gobert's 


DUPONT  S    DISASTER.  405 

division.  Napoleon  had  constantly  insisted  that  the  best 
way  to  reinforce  Dupont  was  to  send  troops  to  Bessieres. 
Once  Bessieres  safe,  Napoleon  then  turned  his  attention  to 
Dupont  and  realised  the  danger  which  threatened  him,  a 
fact  which  certainly  removed  a  good  deal  of  responsibility 
from  the  shoulders  of  that  general.  The  Emperor  acknow- 
ledged that  he  had  been  placed  in  a  critical  position.  On 
the  2ist  July,  that  is  to  say,  the  day  after  the  capitula- 
tion of  Baylen  was  signed.  Napoleon  wrote  "  The  battle 
of  Medina  de  Rio  Seco  has  placed  the  aifairs  of  the  army 
in  a  better  situation.  Marshal  Bessieres  no  longer  gives 
any  uneasiness  ;  all  care  must  now  be  turned  to  the  side 
of  General  Dupont."  And,  "  The  only  important  point 
to-day  is  General  Dupont.  If  the  enemy  manages  to  seize 
upon  the  defiles  of  the  Sierra  Morena,  it  will  be  difficult 
to  drive  him  out ;  General  Dupont  must  be  reinforced  so 
as  to  have  25,000  men." 

According  to  Lanfrey,  Napoleon  was  alone  to  blame  for 
not  allowing  Dupont  to  recross  the  Sierra  Morena.  How- 
ever, it  is  certain  that  Dupont  might  have  done  better, 
especially  if  he  had  sacrificed  some  of  his  ill-gotten 
plunder.  His  force  is  said  to  have  resembled  a  detach- 
ment guarding  an  immense  convoy,  so  heavily  was  it 
encumbered  with  500  baggage  waggons.^    As  Comte  Miot 

1  Referring  to  Dupont's  position  on  the  i8th.  Lord  Londonderry,  in 
his  Story  of  the  Penmsular  War,  says :  "  As  Dupont  carried  along 
with  him  vast  quantities  of  waggons,  his  march  was  necessarily  slow 
and  straggling.  Though  the  head  of  his  column  quitted  its  ground  at 
ten  o'clock,  dawn  was  beginning  to  appear  when  the  last  sections 
moved  off;  and  when  the  moment  of  trial  came  the  former  were  found 
to  be  at  nearly  three  leagues  distance  from  the  latter.  It  was  well  for 
the  Spaniards  that  Dupont  had  deemed  it  expedient  to  bestow  so 
much  care  on  the  preservation  of  his  plunder.  Had  the  French  moved 
in  compact  order  their  enemies  could  hardly  have  withstood  the 
shock  ....  The  French  fought  as  an  army  always  fights  which  is 
taken  in  detail,  and  one  part  was  utterly  destroyed  before  the  other 
could  render  assistance."  The  next  day  Dupont  attacked,  but  "  he 
found  the  Spaniards  superior  in  numbers,  in  position,  in  quantity  and 
weight  of  cannon,  and  the  French,  though  they  performed  prodigies  of 


406     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

de  Melito  says,  Cordova  had  been  sacked,  the  churches, 
convents,  and  pubHc  offices  pillaged,  the  inhabitants  des- 
poiled, and  some  of  them  massacred.  Dupont  himself 
was  accused  of  having  taken  10,000,000  reals.  One  of 
the  most  damaging  accusations  brought  against  him  was 
that  while  trying  to  carry  off  the  Cordova  plunder  he  left 
his  sick  and  wounded  behind  him.  Those  critics  who 
excuse  Dupont  point  out  that  at  Baylen  he  was  sick  and 
wounded,  and  that  his  army,  composed  of  mere  lads,  was 
exhausted  from  heat  and  thirst.  At  St.  Helena,  Napoleon 
himself  declared  that  Dupont  had  been  more  unfortunate 
than  guilty. 

On  learning  the  fate  of  Dupont,  Napoleon  wrote  thus  to 
War  Minister  Clarke  on  the  3rd  August : — 

"  I  send  you  the  reports  for  yourself  alone ;  read  them 
map  in  hand,  and  you  will  see  if  since  the  world  existed 
there  has  been  anything  so  stupid,  so  foolish,  and  so 
cowardly.  Mack,  Hohenlohe,  &c.,  are  now  justified.  It 
is  perfectly  clear  from  General  Dupont's  own  report  that 
all  that  happened  was  the  result  of  the  most  inconceivable 
incapacity.  He  seemed  to  do  all  very  well  at  the  head  of 
a  division ;  he  has  done  horridly  as  a  chief.  When  this 
fatal  blow  occurred  everything  was  prospering  in  Spain  ; 
.  .  .  the  siege  of  Saragossa  was  going  on  well.  This  loss 
of  20,000  picked  men  without  causing  the  enemy  any 
considerable  loss,  and  the  moral  influence  which  it  will 
exercise  on  that  nation,  have  induced  the  King  of  Spain 
to  fall  back  in  the  direction  of  France.  I  do  not  suppose 
that  it  will  be  necessary  to  make  any  great  preparations  at 
Rochefort  [where  the  prisoners  taken  at  Baylen  were  to 
be  sent],  because  the  English  will  never  permit  these  idiots 

valour,  were  foiled  in  every  effort.    At  last  it  was  felt  by  all  the  officers 
present  that  the  case  was  hopeless.  .  .  ." 

There  was,  after  all,  not  very  much  difference  between  the  Baylen 
and  the  Cintra  affairs  except  in  their  execution.  Had  the  Spaniards 
stuck  to  their  terms,  and  allowed  Dupont  and  his  troops  to  return  to 
France,  the  probability  is  that  Castanos  would  have  hanged,  and  that 
the  French  general  would  not  have  remained  long  in  disgrace. 


REINFORCEMENTS    TO    SPAIN.  407 

to  pass,  and  because  the  Spaniards  will  never  restore  their 
arms  to  men  who  did  not  fight.  ...  I  wish  to  know  what 
tribunals  should  judge  these  generals,  and  what  penalty 
the  law  inflicts  for  such  a  crime.  ..." 

And  to  King  Joseph  :  "  The  knowledge  that  you  have 
been  called  upon  to  deal  with  events  for  which  neither 
your  habits  nor  your  natural  character  suit  you,  afflicts 
me,  my  friend.  Dupont  has  stained  our  flag.  What 
incapacity !  What  cowardice !  These  men  will  be  cap- 
tured by  the  English.  Events  of  this  nature  render  my 
presence  in  Paris  necessary.  Germany,  Poland,  Italy,  &c., 
are  all  connected.  My  grief  is  really  great  to  think  that  I 
cannot  be  with  you  at  this  moment  in  the  midst  of  my 
soldiers.  ...  I  am  sending  Ney  to  Spain.  He  is  brave, 
zealous,  and,  above  all,  has  a  good  heart.  You  shall  have 
100,000  men,  and  Spain  shall  be  conquered  by  the  autumn 
...  I  think  that,  as  far  as  your  private  taste  is  concerned, 
you  do  not  care  to  reign  over  the  Spaniards.  .  .  .  Tell  me 
that  you  are  gay,  in  good  health,  and  performing  the 
duties  of  a  soldier.  You  have  a  capital  opportunity  for 
studying  them.  I  have  written  to  the  queen  to  go  to 
Paris." 

In  another  letter,  written  on  the  9th  from  Nantes,  the 
Emperor  said  to  Joseph  :  "  I  can  but  repeat,  once  for  all, 
that  nearly  the  whole  of  the  Grand  Army  is  on  the  march, 
and  that  between  this  and  the  autumn  Spain  will  be 
inundated  with  troops.  You  must  try  and  hold  the  line 
of  the  Douro  in  order  to  keep  up  communications  with 
Portugal.  The  English  are  not  of  much  account  ;  they 
never  have  a  quarter  of  the  troops  they  announce.  Lord 
Wellesley  has  not  4,000  men.  Besides,  he  is  going,  I 
think,  to  Portugal." 

To  M.  DE  CHAMPAGNY. 

"  Nantes,  loth  August,  1808. 
"...  I  have  received   an    extraordinary   courier   from 
Caulaincourt,  with  a  letter  of  the  20th  July,  in  which  the 


408     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Emperor  Alexander  informs  me  that  in  the  event  of  a  war 
with  Austria  he  will  aid  me ;  he  shows  a  good  deal  of 
anxiety  with  regard  to  affairs  in  Spain.  The  step  taken 
by  that  prince  is  full  of  good  feeling.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

to  the  prince  of  neuchatel  (berthier). 

"St,  Cloud,  15/^  August,  1808. 
"You  will  find  inclosed  the  copy  of  two  letters  from 
Spanish  officers  which  have  been  intercepted.  Send  them 
to  the  Prince  of  Ponte-Corvo  (Bernadotte),  and  tell  him 
that  I  suppose  he  has  taken  steps  to  break  up  the  Spanish 
corps,  or  to  send  it  to  a  distance  from  the  coast.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

The  Spanish  troops  in  North  Germany,  which  Charles 
IV.  had  been  obliged  to  furnish  to  his  dear  friend  and  ally 
in  1807,  no  sooner  heard  of  what  had  happened  in  Spain 
than  they  swore  fidelity  to  their  country  ;  by  a  well- 
contrived  plan  between  Admiral  Keats  and  General 
Romana,  10,000  Spanish  troops,  stationed  at  Funen, 
Langland,  Zealand,  and  Jutland,  managed  to  get  on 
board  the  British  fleet,  and  were  eventually  landed  at 
Corunna. 

Napoleon  first  caused  it  to  be  stated  in  Paris  that 
Romana's  corps,  on  learning  what  had  happened  in  Spain, 
had  come  forward  voluntarily,  and  had  sworn  allegiance  to 
King  Joseph.  In  his  reply  to  General  Morla  at  Madrid  he 
said,  to  prove  his  generosity,  that  he  had  preferred  allowing 
the  Spanish  troops  in  his  service  to  escape  on  board  the 
English  ships  to  having  them  disarmed. 

Lord  Holland  says  that  Romana  had  a  strong  predilec- 
tion for  everything  English,  that  he  rescued  his  army  from 
Denmark  with  great  address,  and  was  always  a  favourite 
with  the  soldiery  because  he  cheerfully  shared  their 
hardships,  and  sincerely  partook  of  their  antipathy  to 
the  French. 


MURAT    SENT    TO    NAPLES,  409 

In  a  letter  to  the  Viceroy  of  Italy,  dated  the  17th,  the 
Emperor  wrote :  "  The  affairs  of  Spain  are  becoming 
serious ;  the  English  have  disembarked  over  40,000  men 
in  that  country." 

To  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"  St.  Cloud,  2t,th  August,  i8o8. 
"I  send  you  the  examination  of  Villoutreys,  which 
throws  a  light  upon  the  horrible  affair  of  General  Dupont. 
You  will  see  that  Vedel  and  Gobert  were  not  in  the  affair, 
and  that  those  cowards  accepted  the  capitulation  in  order 
to  save  their  baggage.  Good  God  !  Frenchmen  capable 
of  such  cowardice ! 

"  Napoleon." 

It  turned  out  that  poor  Gobert  was  slain  in  action  I 

In  a  note  on  Spanish  affairs  dated  the  31st  August  we 
find  this  observation :  "  In  war  men  are  nothing ;  it  is  a 
man  that  is  all.  Up  to  the  present  we  have  found  these 
examples  only  in  the  history  of  our  enemies  ;  it  is  un- 
fortunate that  we  cannot  find  them  in  ours  to-day." 

Murat  having  accepted  the  throne  of  the  two  Sicilies, 
the  Emperor  wrote  to  him,  urging  him  to  go  to  Naples  as 
soon  as  possible,  as  he  felt  uneasy  with  regard  to  the 
tranquillity  of  that  country. 

In  a  message  to  the  Senate  of  the  4th  September  his 
Majesty  made  this  declaration :  "  I  am  determined  to 
push  on  the  affairs  of  Spain  with  the  greatest  activity, 
and  to  destroy  the  armies  which  England  has  landed  in 
that  country.  .  .  .  My  alliance  with  the  Emperor  of 
Russia  leaves  England  no  hope  for  the  success  of  her 
plans.  I  believe  in  the  peace  of  the  Continent,  but  as 
my  neighbours  are  increasing  their  armies,  it  is  my  duty 
to  increase  mine.  ...  I  impose  with  confidence  new 
sacrifices  ^  on  my  people." 

^  These  new  sacrifices  meant  a  levy  of  160,000  men  ! 


4IO  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON, 

To  MADAME  LA  ROCHEFOUCAULD. 

"  St.  Cloud,  bth  September,  1808. 
"  General  Marescot  having  dishonoured  himself  by 
affixing  his  name  to  an  infamous  capitulation,  has  obliged 
me  to  deprive  him  of  his  employment;  under  these  cir- 
cumstances it  is  impossible  for  Madame  Marescot  to 
remain  a  lady  in  waiting,  no  matter  how  innocent  she 
may  be. 

"  Napoleon." 

The  crime  of  General  Marescot,  who  was  in  no  way 
responsible  for  the  disaster  of  Baylen,  was  having  affixed 
his  signature  to  the  capitulation,  and  thus  lent  the 
sanction  of  his  name  to  that  act.  He  paid  dearly  for 
this  piece  of  generosity. 

To  THE  EMPEROR  OF  RUSSIA. 

"  St.  Cloud,  ^th  September,  1808. 
"  General  Caulaincourt  informs  me  that  your  Majesty 
will  leave  for  Erfurth  on  the  12th.  I  send  Marshal  the 
Due  de  Montebello  (Lannes)  to  meet  your  Majesty  on  the 
Vistula,  in  order  to  express,  a  few  days  in  advance,  the 
pleasure  it  will  afford  me  to  meet  you. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  marshal  SOULT,  at  Stettin. 

"St.  Cloud,  \oth  September,  1808. 
"You  will  see  by  the  papers  how  they  speak  of  the 
letter  of  Stein.  I  have  demanded  his  dismissal  from  the 
Ministry,  without  which  the  King  of  Prussia  shall  not  be 
allowed  to  return  home.  In  addition,  I  have  sequestered 
his  property  in  Westphalia. 

"Austria  is  far  from  wishing  to  go  to  war.  ...  I  am 
sure  of  Russia.  .  .  .  You  must  announce  that  there  will 
be  no  war  with  Austria,  because  I  do  not  wish  it ;  speak 
of  her  armaments  with  contempt  as  the  result  of  fear.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 


STEIN    BANISHED.  4II 

Napoleon  did  not  gain  much  by  insisting  that  Stein, 
like  Hardenberg,  should  be  removed.  Scharnhorst  carried 
out  those  military  reforms  which  brought  about  the  re- 
generation of  Prussia,  and  the  seeds  of  the  Tugendbund 
were  too  widely  sown  to  perish  when  their  protector  was 
driven  into  exile.  Stein,  after  spending  some  time  in 
Austria,  took  refuge  at  St.  Petersburg,  and  is  said  to  have 
powerfully  contributed  towards  inducing  the  Czar  to  join 
the  coalition  formed  against  France  in  18 12.  Stein,  in 
fact,  was  made  a  more  bitter  and  a  more  dangerous  enemy 
than  ever. 

On  the  14th  Napoleon  wrote  to  brother  Jerome  thus  : — 

"  Sir,  my  Brother, — The  Emperor  of  Russia  and  I 
are  going  to  meet  at  Erfurth  on  the  27th  to  discuss  the 
state  of  affairs  in  Europe,  and  to  take  measures  for  putting 
an  end  to  the  troubles  of  the  world,  and  to  re-establish 
general  tranquillity.  Knowing  the  interest  which  your 
Majesty  takes  in  all  that  concerns  me,  I  have  thought  it 
fit  to  inform  you  myself  of  this  event. 

"Napoleon." 

Similar  letters  were  addressed  to  the  kings  of  Wirtem- 
burg,  Bavaria,  Saxony,  and  other  vassals. 

To  THE  KING  OF  PRUSSIA,  AT  Berlin. 

"St.  Cloud,  \\th  September,  1808. 
"  I  reply  to  your  Majesty's  letter  of  the  3rd.  I  am  as 
pleased  as  you  are  that  all  our  business  is  terminated.  I 
desire  the  old  relations  which  existed  between  your 
Majesty  and  myself  to  be  re-established,  and  the  recol- 
lection of  the  tempests  which  marked  the  epoch  of  our 
separation  to  be  effaced  from  my  mind.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

With  Spain  in  such  a  ferment,  and  Austria  arming,  the 
Emperor  was  anxious  to  keep  Prussia  quiet  by  means  of  a 
few  concessions  and  soft  words. 


412  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  THE  QUEEN  OF  PRUSSIA. 

"  St.  Cloud,  14M  September,  1808. 
"  Madam,  my  Sister, — I  am  delighted  with  the  return 
of  your  Majesty  to  Berlin,  which  realises  my  dearest  wishes. 
It  will  depend,  only  on  the  king  and  your  Majesty  for  our 
countries  to  resume  the  sentiments  which  existed  previous 
to  late  events.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

to  the  king  of  spain,  at  miranda. 

"St.  Cloud,  17M  September,  1808. 
"  I  do  not  reply  to  your  letter  in  which  you  display  bad 
temper ;  it  is  a  principle  upon  which  I  have  acted  with 
you  for  some  time.  You  have  too  much  intelligence  not 
to  understand  that  this  is  the  only  thing,  which  I  can  do 
when  you  write  to  me  thus.  .  .  . 

"Napoleon." 

In  fact,  the  letters  which  Joseph  wrote  were  even  more 
doleful  than  those  of  Louis,  filled  with  the  same  kind  of 
remonstrances,  and  not  at  all  to  the  taste  of  the  Imperial 
and  imperious  brother. 

PROCLAMATION. 

"  Soldiers, — You  have  triumphed  on  the  banks  of  the 
Danube  and  of  the  Vistula  ;  you  have  passed  through 
Germany  by  forced  marches.  To-day  I  make  you  march 
through  France  without  giving  you  a  moment's  repose. 

"  Soldiers,  I  have  need  of  you.^    The  hideous  presence  of 

1  Prince  Metternich  (vol.  ii.  p.  242)  wrote  home  on  the  subject  of 
this  proclamation  :  "  It  is  no  longer  the  nation  which  fights.  The 
present  war  is  the  war  of  Napoleon — it  is  not  even  that  of  the  army.  .  .  . 
He  wished  to  win  over  the  army  by  flinging  himself  into  its  arms ; 
accustomed  to  conquer  under  him,  the  presence  of  the  chief  of  the 
State  is  no  doubt  necessary  to  his  troops ;  but  the  sovereign  who 
declares  to  his  people  that  his  army  is  equally  necessary  to  him  reveals 
a  terrible  secret — he  is  no  longer  the  father  of  his  people,  he  is  the 
chief  of  his  army." 


THE  TREATY  OF  ERFURTH.         413 

the  leopard  (England)  defiles  the  continents  of  Spain  and 
Portugal ;  at  your  aspect  let  him  fly  away  in  terror.  Let 
us  carry  our  triumphant  eagles  to  the  pillars  of  Hercules ; 
there  also  we  have  insults  to  avenge. 

"  Soldiers,  you  have  surpassed  the  renown  of  modern 
armies,  but  have  you  equalled  the  glories  of  the  armies  of 
Rome,  who  in  the  same  campaign  triumphed  on  the  Rhine, 
the  Euphrates,  in  Illyria,  and  on  the  Tagus  ? 

"  A  long  peace  and  durable  prosperity  will  be  the  price 
of  your  labours.  .  .  . 
"St.  Cloud,  18M  September,  1808." 

On  the  27th  September  Napoleon  announced  his  arrival 
at  Erfurth  to  Cambac6r^s,  adding — 

"  The  King  of  Saxony  came  here  yesterday,  and  a 
number  of  princes  will  soon  arrive." 

The  treaty  of  Erfurth  ^  may  be  said  to  have  completed 
and  confirmed  the  treaty  of  Tilsit.  Prince  Metternich 
relates  in  his  Memoirs  that  he  wished  to  accompany  the 
Emperor  to  Erfurth,  but  that  his  demand  was  refused- 
"  In  fact,"  says  Prince  Metternich,  "  this  journey  was  under- 
taken with  the  explicit  view,  on  the  part  of  Napoleon,  of 
inducing  Russia  to  adopt  active  measures  against  Austria. 
.  .  .  Talleyrand,  on  the  contrary,  endeavoured  to  bring 
about  more  cordial  relations  between  us.  .  .  .  On  the  first 

^  By  the  treaty  of  Erfurth  it  was  stipulated  that  France  should 
make  common  cause  with  Russia  should  Austria  oppose  the  occupa- 
tion of  the  Principalities,  and  that  Russia  should  make  common  cause 
with  France  should  Austria  go  to  war  with  Napoleon.  Russia  was  to 
recognise  the  new  state  of  affairs  in  Spain,  to  which  she  joyfully 
consented,  seeing  that  this  new  state  of  affairs  tied  the  hands  of 
France,  and  made  Napoleon,  whose  good  faith  the  Czar  had  reason  to 
doubt,  more  pliant.  At  Erfurth,  too.  Napoleon  instructed  Talleyrand 
to  make  overtures  to  the  Czar  for  the  hand  of  his  sister  Catherine. 
Alexander  eluded  this  awkward  demand  by  saying  that  it  would  first 
of  all  be  necessary  to  overcome  the  repugnance  of  his  mother  to  such 
an  alliance.  He  expressed  himself  highly  flattered,  and  hoped  that  it 
would  some  day  be  possible  to  arrange  the  matter.  This  alliance 
would  have  saved  Moscow. 


414    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

day  of  his  arrival  he  went  to  see  the  Emperor  Alexander, 
and  addressed  to  him  these  memorable  words  :  '  Sire,  what 
have  you  come  to  do  here  ?  It  is  for  you  to  save  Europe 
and  the  only  way  of  doing  this  will  be  to  resist  Napoleon. 
The  French  are  a  civilised  people,  their  sovereign  is  not ; 
the  sovereign  of  Russia  is  civilised,  his  people  are  not. 
It  is  then  for  the  sovereign  of  Russia  to  be  the  ally  of  the 
French  people.' "  Talleyrand  afterwards  said  to  Prince 
Metternich  in  Paris  that  "  nothing  but  an  intimate  alliance 
between  Austria  and  Russia  can  save  what  remains  of  the 
independence  of  Europe." 

The  fact  is,  that  a  great  many  of  the  intimate  advisers 
of  Napoleon  were  tired  of  war,  and  were  beginning  to 
think  more  of  their  country  than  of  their  master ;  and  the 
same  was  the  case  with  not  a  few  of  the  marshals,  who 
wanted  to  enjoy  their  wealth  and  their  honours. 

On  the  2nd  October  we  have  the  first  mention  of  the 
convention  of  Cintra  in  a  letter  written  to  General  Clarke, 
which  concluded  thus  : — 

"  As  soon  as  the  Due  d'Abrantes  (Junot)  and  the  other 
officers  have  disembarked,  you  will  inform  them  that  I 
have  heard  of  the  convention,  but  that  I  do  not  know  if  I 
should  approve  of  it.  However,  there  is  nothing  in  this 
convention  contrary  to  honour,  since  the  troops  did  not 
lay  down  their  arms  and  returned  with  their  standards.  .  . . 

"  Napoleon." 

The  French  Emperor,  though  displeased  with  Junot, 
was  not  so  dissatisfied  as  England  was  with  the  con- 
vention of  Cintra.  What  Napoleon  probably  most  felt 
was  the  surrender  of  the  Russian  fleet  in  the  Tagus,  which, 
after  what  took  place  at  Copenhagen  and  at  Cadiz,  must 
have  completely  destroyed  his  hopes  of  being  able  to 
meet  England  once  more  at  sea.  The  English  general 
thought  himself  justified  in  granting  favourable  terms  to 
Junot,  and  getting  him  and  his  20,000  men  out  of  Portugal, 


CONVENTION    OF    CINTRA,  415 

because  they  might  have  offered  a  prolonged  resistance  in 
Lisbon,  Elvas,  and  Almeida. 

Napoleon,  on  his  side,  blamed  Junot  for  not  having 
entrenched  himself,  and  waited  for  reinforcements;  and 
he  was  about  to  bring  his  lieutenant  to  a  court-martial, 
when,  as  he  said,  "  The  English  got  the  start  of  me  by 
sending  their  generals  to  one,  and  thus  saved  me  the 
pain  of  punishing  an  old  friend."  It  was  the  case  of 
Calder  and  Villeneuve  over  again. 

It  is  not  said  that  Napoleon  blamed  Junot  for  his 
rapacity  in  Portugal,  and  for  not  obeying  his  instructions 
to  act  with  a  delicacy  equal  to  his  own.  What  that 
rapacity  was  may  be  imagined  from  the  fact  that  Junot 
had  the  presumption  to  ask  for  five  vessels  to  convey  his 
plunder  to  France.  He  even  seized  upon  two  carriages 
belonging  to  the  Duke  of  Sussex,  and  restored  them  only 
on  the  threat  of  being  detained  as  a  hostage. 

To  THE  EMPRESS. 

"Erfurth,  (^th  October,  1808. 
"  My  Friend, — I  have  received  your  letter.     I  see  with 
pleasure  that  you  are  in  good  health.     I  have  just  been 
shooting  over  the  battle-field  of  Jena.     We  breakfasted  at 
the  spot  where  I  bivouacked  for  the  night. 

"  I  was  present  at  the  ball  of  Weimar.      The  Emperor 
Alexander  danced,  but  not  I  ;  forty  years  are  forty  years. 
"  My  health  is  good  at  bottom  in  spite  of  a  little  ailing. 

"Napoleon." 

On  the  1 2th  October  the  convention  of  Erfurth  was 
concluded.  It  is  mentioned  in  Article  V.  that  the  recog- 
nition of  Finland,  Moldavia,  and  Wallachia  forming  part 
of  the  Russian  Empire,  is  the  absolute  condition  upon 
which  peace  was  to  be  concluded  with  England.  The 
new  order  of  things  established  in  Spain  was  also  to  be 
recognised  by  England.     Russia  declared  that  she  could 


41 6    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

recognise  the  integrity  of  the  Ottoman  Porte  only  on 
the  condition  of  annexing  Moldavia  and  Wallachia.  The 
article  on  this  subject  was  to  be  kept  secret. 

To  THE  KING  OF  HOLLAND. 

"Erfurth,  \2th  October,  1808. 
" ....  I  have  no  Englishmen  in  my  service,  and  an 
Englishman  of  the  Windham  faction  alone  ought  to  be 
received  in  Holland.  All  the  Frenchmen,  either  in  your 
service,  or  merchants,  complain  of  your  ministry.  None 
of  the  blockade  laws  are  observed ;  more  than  a  hundred 
ships  pass  every  month  between  England  and  Holland.  . . . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  THE  KING  OF  SPAIN. 

"Erfurth,  i^th  October,  1808. 
"  I  have  concluded  all  my  affairs  with  the  Emperor  of 
Russia.  I  start  to-morrow  for  Paris,  and  I  shall  be  at 
Bayonne  before  a  month.  Send  me  a  report  on  the  exact 
situation  of  the  army.  .  .  .  The  war  may  be  brought  to  a 
close  by  a  single  manoeuvre  skilfully  combined,  but  I  must 
be  there  for  that. 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  14th  Napoleon  wrote  to  the  Czar  saying  that  he 
had  diminished  the  contribution  levied  upon  Prussia  by 
20,000,000  fr.,  and  to  the  Emperor  of  Austria  declaring 
that  he  never  supposed  for  a  moment  that  hostihties  would 
be  resumed  between  France  and  Austria.  His  Majesty 
was  asked  not  to  believe  any  malignant  rumours  touching 
the  danger  which  was  said  to  threaten  his  monarchy,  and 
was  informed  that — "  With  a  straightforward  and  simple 
conduct  your  Majesty  will  render  your  people  happy,  and 
will  yourself  enjoy  that  repose  which  you  must  stand 
in  need  of  after  so  many  troubles.  .  .  .  The  best  policy 
to-day  is  simplicity  and  truth.  Confide  your  anxieties  to 
me,  and  I  will  dissipate  them  at  once." 


LISBON    THREATENED.  417 

On  the  19th  Napoleon  delivered  judgment  on  the  Con- 
vention of  Cintra.  He  wrote  to  Junot  that  there  was 
nothing  dishonourable  in  what  he  had  done — "  You  bring 
back  my  troops,  my  eagles,  and  my  guns,"  he  added,  "  I 
had,  however,  hoped  that  you  would  have  done  better.  .  .  . 
This  Convention,  you  have  gained  it,  by  your  courage,  not 
by  your  plans,  and  the  English  are  quite  right  to  blame 
the  general  who  signed  it."  Then  after  scolding  Junot,  and 
pointing  out  his  errors,  Napoleon  added — "  To-day  I  have 
publicly  approved  of  your  conduct ;  I  write  this  to  you  in 
confidence  and  for  you  alone."  And  further  on — "  A  man 
like  you  ought  to  die  or  to  return  to  Paris  master  of 
Lisbon.  Besides,  you  shall  form  the  advanced  guard,  and 
I  shall  be  in  your  rear.  Before  the  end  of  the  year  I  desire 
to  re-establish  you  myself  in  Lisbon." 

When  Junot  received  this  letter  he  was  at  La  Rochelle 
in  command  of  the  eighth  corps  of  the  army  of  Spain. 
Napoleon  did  not  get  to  Madrid  until  December,  and  never 
got  to  Lisbon. 

At  the  opening  of  the  Legislative  Body  on  the  2Sth 
October,  Napoleon  said  among  other  things — "A  portion  of 
my  army  is  marching  against  the  forces  which  England  has 
disembarked  in  Spain.  It  is  a  peculiar  gift  of  that  Provi- 
dence which  has  constantly  protected  our  arms,  that 
passion  has  so  blinded  the  English  that  they  renounce  the 
protection  of  the  seas,  and  at  last  present  their  armies  on 
the  Continent.  In  two  days  I  shall  start  to  place  myself 
at  the  head  of  the  army,  and  with  the  aid  of  God,  I 
shall  crown  the  King  of  Spain  in  Madrid,  and  plant  my 
eagles  on  the  forts  of  Lisbon." 

To  GENERAL  LACU^E. 

"  Paris,  2gM  October,  i8o8. 
"  I  have  received  your  letter.     A  man  who  works  as  you 
do  requires  a   home.      I    shall    see    your    marriage  with 
pleasure,   and  I   hope   that    you  will    soon  have  children 
worthy  of  you.  "  Napoleon." 

VOL.    II.  E   E 


41 S  T?IE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  THE  KING  OF  SPAIN. 

"Bayonne,  yd  November,  1808. 
"  I  have  just  arrived  here.   Your  troops  are  too  scattered. 
I  recommend  you  to  write  to  us  twice  a  day  so  that  I  may 
know  where  my  corps  are.     Having  ridden  at  full  gallop 
across  the  Landes  I  am  tired. 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  4th  the  Emperor  wrote  another  letter  to  Joseph, 
saying  that  he  was  at  Tolosa,  that  he  would  arrive  the 
next  night  at  Vittoria,  and  that  he  had  dictated  his  orders 
to  Moncey,  Ney,  and  Berthier. 

A  series  of  defeats  now  overtook  the  Spanish  arms. 
Castanos  was  beaten  at  Logrono,  Blake  at  Durango,  and 
Regnosa  and  the  Count  of  Belvidere  at  Burgos,  and  other 
■reverses  soon  followed. 

On  the  nth  November  Napoleon  entered  Burgos,  where 
he  remained  for  several  days  directing  operations  and  dic- 
tating many  letters.  To  General  Dejean  he  wrote—"  Your 
clothing  department  is  composed  of  idiots.  Your  Paris 
contractors  are  swindlers  like  those  of  Bordeaux.  I  spend 
a  great  deal  of  money  to  be  badly  served.  The  fact  is 
that  there  is  a  great  deal  of  embezzling." 

And  to  Murat,  King  of  the  two  Sicilies,  who  had  managed 
to  take  Capri,  and  capture  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  and  his 
garrison — "  Before  building  schools  and  other  establish- 
ments of  that  sort  which  can  be  done  in  time,  have  my 
troops  paid  the  arrears  which  are  due  to  them." 

At  Burgos  scenes  of  the  most  terrible  description  took 
place  under  the  eyes  of  the  Emperor,  who  was  either 
unwilling  or  unable  to  put  a  stop  to  them.  The  following 
description  is  borrowed  from  the  pages  of  Count  Miot  de 
Melito,  who  was  attached  to  King  Joseph  : 

"  The  houses  were  nearly  all  deserted  and  pillaged,  the 

furniture  broken    and  lying   in    pieces    in  the  mud  ;  one 

■  quarter  was  on  fire ;  an  unbridled  soldiery  was  smashing 

in  doors  and  windows;  the  churches  were  despoiled  and 


THE    SACK    OF    BURGOS.  419 

the  streets  encumbered  with  dead  and  dying ;  in  fact  all 
the  horrors  of  a  town  taken  by  assault,  and  yet  Burgos  had 
not  been  defended!  The  cathedral,  one  of  the  finest 
monuments  of  Gothic  architecture,  was  spared  merely 
because  the  gates  were  kept  closed.  But  the  Chartreuse 
and  the  principal  convents  were  sacked ;  that  of  Huelgas, 
the  richest  and  most  noble  of  Old  Castile,  was  converted 
into  a  stable  ;  the  tombs  in  the  chapel  and  cloister  were 
torn  open  in  search  of  treasures,  and  the  bodies  of  the 
women  they  inclosed,  dragged  in  the  dust,  were  abandoned 
on  the  pavement  which  was  covered  with  bones  and  shreds 
of  winding  sheets." 

No  wonder  that  King  Joseph,  sick  in  body  and  mind, 
shut  himself  up  in  his  quarters,  and  talked  about  renouncing 
his  throne. 

In  a  letter  to  the  Minister  of  the  Interior  Napoleon 
wrote  on  the  19th  November— "  The  Duke  of  Infantado 
and  the  grandees  of  Spain  possess  half  the  kingdom  of 
Naples,  and  it  is  not  too  much  to  value  their  property  in 
that  country  at  200,000,000  francs.  In  addition  to  this  they 
have  possessions  in  Belgium,  Piedmont  and  Italy,  which  it 
is  my  intention  to  sequestrate.  This  is  merely  a  first 
idea."  As  a  fact,  this  first  idea  had  been  preceded  by  a 
decree  of  proscription  which  ordered  that  ten  of  the  most 
wealthy  grandees  of  Spain  should  be  tried  by  court-martial, 
condemned,  and  executed,  and  have  their  properties 
confiscated.  This  act  of  proscription  his  Majesty  called 
"decree  of  amnesty"  because  the  Spanish  people  were 
informed  that  all  those  persons  who  would  swear  allegiance 
on  the  Holy  Sacrament  within  a  month  after  the  Emperor's 
entry  into  Madrid  would  receive  a  full  and  free  pardon.^ 

1  These  and  other  decrees  so  affected  Joseph  that  on  the  8th  of 
December  he  wrote  to  his  brother,  saying:— "I  blush  in  presence 
of  my  pretended  subjects.  I  implore  your  Majesty  to  receive  my 
renunciation  of  all  the  rights  which  you  have  given  me  to  the  throne 
of  Spain.  I  shall  always  prefer  honour  and  probity  to  power  pur- 
chased at  such  a  price." 

E   E   2 


420     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

It  is  rather  remarkable  that  several  bulletins  issued 
between  the  i6th  November  and  the  4th  December,  hold- 
ing up  the  Spaniards  to  ridicule  and  contempt,  should 
have  been  omitted  from  the  "  Correspondence."  In  one 
of  these  bulletins  his  Majesty  showed  the  value  at  which 
he  rated  the  intelligence  of  the  French  by  treating  them 
to  such  nonsense  as  this. 

After  drawing  attention  to  the  lies  circulated  by  the 
monks  respecting  the  total  defeat  of  the  French  army,  and 
the  capture  of  the  Imperial  Guard,  his  Majesty  went  on 
to  say — "  The  reign  of  the  Inquisition  is  over ;  those 
revolutionary  tribunals  will  no  longer  torment  any  country 
in  Europe ;  in  Spain  as  in  Rome  the  Inquisition  shall  be 
abolished,  and  the  fearful  spectacle  of  the  auto  da  _/^  shall 
not  be  renewed.  This  shall  be  operated  in  spite  of  the 
religious  zeal  of  the  English  ;  in  spite  of  the  aUiance  they 
have  contracted  with  lying  monks  who  have  made  the 
Virgin  Del  Pillar  and  all  the  saints  of  Valladolid  speak. 
England  has  for  allies,  monopoly,  the  Inquisition,  and  the 
Franciscans.  Everything  suits  her  purpose  provided  she 
can  spread  dissension  among  nations,  and  steep  the  Con- 
tinent in  blood." 

Having  shifted  his  quarters  to  Aranda,  his  Majesty  wrote 
thence  to  Cambacer^s  on  the  26th  November,  saying : 

"  At  the  Madeleine  I  have  erected  a  monument  to  the 
glory  of  the  Grand  Army.  The  Legislative  Body  must 
erect  a  kind  of  Temple  of  Janus  on  the  heights  of 
Montmartre.  In  this  temple  the  first  solemn  publications 
of  peace  will  be  made.  ...  It  will  not  cost  less  than 
40,000,000  francs.  The  Legislative  Body  must  present 
me  with  a  petition  soliciting  a  law  by  which  each  member 
of  the  electoral  colleges  (they  are  about  40,000)  must  be 
invited  to  subscribe  from  1,000  to  3,000,  according  to 
his  fortune.  .    .  ." 

Had  this  scheme  been  carried  out  the  temple  would  not 
have  been  closed  under  the  Empire.  After  the  disastrous 
war  with  Germany  in  1870  and  1871,  the  French  Catholics 


THE    TEMPLE   OF   JANUS.  42  I 

determined  to  erect  on  the  same  heights  of  Montmartre, 
not  a  temple  to  a  heathen  divinity,  but  a  temple  to  the 
true  God  on  the  part  of  penitent  France,  and  dedicated 
to  the  Sacred  Heart. 


To  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"Aranda,  26/A  November,  1808. 
"The  battle  of  Tudela  forms  the  pendant  to  that  of 
Espinosa.  The  army  of  Andalusia,  commanded  by 
Castanos ;  that  of  Aragon,  commanded  by  Palafox ;  those 
of  Valentia  and  New  Castile,  are  destroyed  and  dispersed. 
Their  guns,  baggage,  and  a  great  number  of  prisoners 
have  been  taken.^  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

And  on  the  30th  the  Emperor  was  able  to  announce  to 
King  Joseph  the  victory  of  Somo-Sierra,  in  which  the 
Polish  lancers  of  the  Guard  carried  a  Spanish  battery 
which  defended  the  pass.  The  road  to  Madrid  was  now 
open,  and  on  the  2nd  December  Napoleon  issued  his  first 
bulletin  to  the  army  of  Spain  dated  in  that  capital.  Two 
days  afterwards  came  four  decrees.  The  first  abolished 
all  feudal  rights.  The  second  abolished  the  Inquisition. 
The  third  reduced  the  number  of  religious  houses.  The 
fourth  abolished  the  custom-houses  between  the  various 
provinces. 

^  It  is  related  by  Lord  Holland  that  Ferdinand  had  the  baseness  to 
write  to  Napoleon  in  order  to  congratulate  him  on  the  victory  of 
Tudela,  and  that  "  he  renewed  at  the  same  time  his  solicitation  for  a 
matrimonial  alliance  with  the  House  of  Bonaparte.  Many  of  the 
imperial  councillors  were  for  printing  the  letter  in  the  Moniteur,  with 
the  hope  of  disgusting  the  enthusiastic  partisans  of  that  prince,  but 
the  Emperor  observed  that  not  only  the  knowledge  of  the  transaction 
might  be  inconvenient  hereafter,  but  the  immediate  object  of  the 
publication  would  be  defeated  by  the  very  baseness  they  hoped  to 
expose.  It  was  so  bad  that  it  would  be  disbelieved  and  imputed  as  a 
forgery  to  him,  the  Emperor.  He  suppressed  it." — fieminiscenfes, 
p.  115. 


42  2     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

On  the  5th  December  the  Emperor  issued  his  second 
bulletin,  in  which  he  gave  a  description  of  the  capitulation 
of  Madrid,  which,  once  the  Retiro  had  been  taken,  could 
not  well  be  defended.  When  General  Morla  appeared 
before  him  in  order  to  treat,  Napoleon  reproached  him 
bitterly  with  the  violation  of  the  capitulation  of  Baylen.^ 
"  What  have  the  English  done,"  he  said,  "  who  are  far 
from  piquing  themselves  on  being  strict  observers  of  the 
law  of  nations  ?  They  complained  of  the  Convention  of 
Cintra,  but  they  carried  it  into  execution.  To  violate 
military  conventions  is  to  renounce  civihsation,  and  to 
place  yourselves  on  a  level  with  the  Bedouins  of  the 
desert.  ..." 

Napoleon,  following  his  usual  method,  then  tried  to 
create  discord  between  the  Spaniards  and  the  English.  At 
the  conclusion  of  his  bulletin  he  said :  "  The  conduct  of 
the  English  is  shameful !  On  the  20th  they  had  6,000 
men  at  the  Escurial.  They  talked  of  nothing  less  than  of 
crossing  the  Pyrenees  and  establishing  themselves  on  the 
Garonne.  Their  troops  are  superb  and  well  disciplined. 
The  confidence  which  they  inspired  in  the  Spaniards  was 
inconceivable.  Some  hoped  that  this  English  division 
would  go  to  Somo-Sierra,  others  that  it  would  help  to 
defend  the  capital  of  so  dear  an  ally.  None  of  you  knew 
the  English.  No  sooner  had  they  learned  that  the 
Emperor  was  at  Somo-Sierra  than  they  retreated  in  the 
direction  of  the  sea." 

^  When  Dupont  complained  that  the  terms  of  the  capitulation  had 
been  violated.  General  Morla  replied — "  What  right  have  you  to  claim 
the  execution  of  a  treaty  concluded  in  favour  of  an  army  which 
entered  Spain  on  the  pretence  of  friendship,  who  imprisoned  our  king 
and  his  family,  sacked  his  palaces,  assassinated  and  robbed  his 
subjects,  ravaged  his  country,  and  usurped  his  crown  ?  If  your 
Excellence  desires  to  avoid  drawing  down  upon  yourself  more  and 
more  the  just  indignation  of  the  people,  endeavour  by  your  conduct  to 
palliate  the  sensation  caused  by  the  horrors  committed  at  Cordova.  . ." 

Napoleon,  on  gaining  possession  of  Madrid,  at  once  proceeded  to 
violate  the  terms  upon  which  it  had  opened  its  gates. 


NAPOLEON    AT    MADRID.  423 

Then  followed  an  imaginary  conversation  between  a 
French  officer  and  a  Spaniard,  in  which  the  former 
proved  that  the  English  always  deserted  their  friends, 
and  that  they  had  already  betrayed  Spain. 

On  the  7th  Napoleon  issued  a  proclamation  to  the 
Spaniards,  informing  them  that  they  had  been  led  astray 
by  perfidious  men.  "  The  defeat  of  your  armies,"  he  said, 
"has  been  the  affair  of  a  few  marches.  I  entered  Madrid. 
The  laws  of  war  authorised  me  to  make  a  great  example, 
and  to  wash  out  in  blood  the  insults  offered  to  me  and  to 
my  nation.  I  listened  to  the  voice  of  clemency.  A  few 
men,  the  authors  of  all  your  troubles,  shall  alone  be 
punished.  I  shall  soon  drive  from  the  Peninsula  that 
English  army  which  has  been  sent  to  Spain,  not  to  help 
you,  but  to  inspire  you  with  false  confidence  and  to 
lead  you  astray.  ....  Spaniards,  your  destinies  are  in 
my  hands.  Reject  the  poison  which  the  English  has 
spread  among  you :  let  your  king  be  certain  of  your 
love  and  your  confidence,  and  you  will  be  more  power- 
ful and  more  happy  than  ever.  I  have  destroyed  all 
that  was  opposed  to  your  prosperity  and  greatness ; 
I  have  broken  the  fetters  which  weighed  upon  the 
people ;  a  liberal  constitution  gives  you,  instead  of  an 
absolute,  a  tempered  and  constitutional  monarchy.  It 
depends  upon  you  that  this  constitution  shall  become 
law.  But  if  all  my  efforts  prove  useless,  and  if  you  do 
not  respond  to  my  confidence,  it  will  only  remain  for 
me  to  treat  you  as  conquered  provinces,  and  to  find 
my  brother  another  throne.  I  shall  then  place  the 
crown  of  Spain  on  my  own  head,  and  I  shall  know 
how  to  make  the  wicked  tremble,  for  God  has  given 
me  the  power  and  the  will  necessary  to  surmount  all 
obstacles." 

Having  been  compHmented  by  the  Corr^gidor  of  Madrid, 
Napoleon  gave  a  list  of  the  benefits  he  had  already  con- 
ferred upon  Spain,  and  those  which  would  be  the  reward  of 
due  submission  to  his  will.     He  said,  too,  "  The  Bourbons 


424  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

can  no  longer  reign  in  Europe.     The  divisions  in  the  royal 
family  were  brought  about  by  the  English!' 

On  the  1 2th  December  Napoleon  directed  Berthier  to 
send  various  newspapers  published  in  Madrid  to  Blake, 
Romana,  "and  others,"  by  a  Spanish  officer  who  had 
come  in  with  a  flag  of  truce.  Several  thousand  copies  of 
the  Madrid  Gazette  were  also  to  be  distributed  through 
the  country.  These  newspapers  could  have  exercised  but 
little  influence  on  the  minds  of  the  people  and  Spanish- 
born  generals,  but  with  Blake  it  may  have  been  different. 
Few  of  the  people  could  read,  and  they  trusted  entirely  to 
their  priests.  Of  General  Blake,  Lord  Holland  says  that, 
of  Irish  extraction,  he  was  greatly  prejudiced  against  the 
English,  and  "  fomented  in  Spaniards  the  ill-timed  jealousy 
of  their  allies  which  long  impeded  and  nearly  counteracted 
all  success  against  the  common  enemy." 

ORDER  TO  THE  ARMY. 

"Chamartin,  i2th  December,  1808. 
"The  Emperor  is  displeased  with  the  disorders  com- 
mitted. Pillage  destroys  everything,  even  the  army  which 
indulges  in  it.  The  peasants  desert  ;  this  has  the  double 
inconvenience  of  making  irreconcilable  enemies  who  re- 
venge themselves  on  isolated  soldiers  and  who  go  to  swell 
the  ranks  of  our  enemies  by  degrees  as  we  destroy  them  ; 
it  deprives  us  of  information  so  necessary  in  making  war, 
and  of  all  means  of  subsistence.  The  peasants  who  came 
to  market  have  been  frightened  away  by  the  troops,  who 
stopped,  plundered,  and  beat  them.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 


This  order  of  the  day  was  of  about  as  much  avail  as  the 
instructions  to  Junot,  and  came  well  after  the  Burgos, 
Cordova,  and  Cuenca  affairs. 

In  a  letter  to  the  Minister  of  Justice  of  the  14th 
December,  the  Emperor  wrote  that  it  was  his  intention  to 


THE   CLERGY    AND    WAR.  425 

have  Generals  Dupont,  Marescot,  Chabert,  and  Vedel 
brought  before  the  high  court,  and  this  without  delay. 

In  a  letter  written  from  Madrid  on  Dec.  iSth  to  Murat, 
King  of  Naples,  one  finds  the  following  paragraphs  : — 

"  You  do  not  second  me  in  the  war  with  England.  That 
Power  drives  a  public  trade  with  you.  The  result  is  that 
you  will  never  get  Sicily." 

"  I  must  say  that  I  am  extremely  hurt  at  your  perpetual 
declamations  against  the  king  your  predecessor  (brother 
Joseph),  who  had  all  the  thorns  while  you  have  merely  to 
reap  the  fruit.  ..." 

On  the  next  day  the  Emperor  wrote  to  the  Viceroy  of 
Italy,  who  was  instructed  to  have  prayers  offered  up  and 
Te  Deums  sung  through  Italy  in  honour  of  the  victories 
in  Spain.  The  bishops  were  to  implore  the  Almighty, 
"  from  whom  everything  emanates,  to  continue  to  bless  our 
arms,  and  to  remove  from  the  Continent  the  malignant  in- 
fluence of  the  English,  who  are  the  enemies  of  all  religion 
and  of  the  repose  and  tranquillity  of  nations." 

In  his  Right  of  War  Voltaire  complained  that  the 
clergy  in  his  day  did  not  lift  up  their  voices  against  war, 
"  which  unites  all  that  is  perfidious  and  cowardly,  the 
most  infamous  robbery  on  the  part  of  contractors,  and  of 
brigandage,  pillage,  &c.,  &c.  On  the  contrary,  these  good 
priests  bless  the  standards  of  murder,  and  for  money  sing 
Jewish  songs  when  the  earth  is  inundated  with  blood." 
And  so  it  was  in  1808. 

On  the  2 1st  December  Napoleon  wrote  to  his  War 
Minister  saying  that  his  army  was  148,000  men  short,  and 
telling  him  to  prepare  a  decree  for  the  calling  out  of 
80,000  conscripts  of  the  year  1810!  He  then  found  time 
to  busy  himself  with  public  works  in  Paris. 

To  M.  CRETET  {Minister  of  the  Interior,  Paris). 

"Madrid,  21st December,  1808. 
"  I    see    by   the   papers    that  you   have   laid   the   first 
stone  of  the  fountain  of  the  Bastile.     I  suppose  that  the 


426     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

elephant  will  be  in  the  middle  of  a  large  basin  filled  with 
water,  that  he  will  be  very  fine  and  of  such  dimensions 
that  one  will  be  able  to  enter  the  tower  on  his  back.  See 
how  the  ancients  placed  their  towers  and  what  use  they 
made  of  the  elephants.  Send  me  a  plan  of  this  fountain. 
Have  the  plan  of  a  fountain  made  to  represent  a  handsome 
trireme,  that  of  Demetrius  for  example,  which  must  have 
the  same  dimensions  as  the  ancient  triremes.  .  .  Not  only 
must  the  architects  make  researches  for  the  construction 
of  these  fountains,  but  they  must  come  to  an  understand- 
ing with  the  antiquaries  and  the  savants,  so  that  the 
elephant  ^  and  the  galley  may  exactly  represent  those  used 
by  the  ancients. 

"  Napoleon." 

to  the  empress  josephine. 

"  Madrid,  22nd  December,  1808. 

"  I  am  just  starting  to  manoeuvre  against  the  English, 
who  appear  to  have  received  reinforcements.  The  weather 
in  fine,  my  health  is  good  ;  have  no  anxiety. 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  same  day  his  Majesty  sent  the  following  note  to 
Paris  for  publication  to  tranquillise  the  public  : — 

"  The  English  have  at  last  given  signs  of  life  ;  it  appears 
that  they  are  abandoning  Portugal  to  take  up  another  line 
of  operations.  They  have  marched  on  Valladohd.  For 
the  last  three  days  we  have  been  manoeuvring  to  get  to 
their  rear.  Interesting  events  may  soon  happen.  If  the 
English  do  not  fall  back  on  the  sea  and  do  not  outstrip  us 
it  will  be  difficult  for  them  to  escape,  and  they  will  pay 
dearly  for  the  enterprise  they  have  dared  to  undertake  on 
the  Continent." 

^  Although  Haroun  al  Raschid  made  a  present  of  an  elephant  to 
Charlemagne,  and  the  King  of  Portugal  gave  one  to  Louis  XIV.,  it 
was  only  very  recently  that  those  animals  were  familiarly  known  in 
France. 


THE    ENGLISH    RETREATING.  427 

To  THE  EMPRESS  JOSEPHINE. 

"Benavento,  z\st  December,  1808. 
"  My  Friend, — I  have  been  pursuing  the  English  for 
several  days,  but  they  fly  terrified.     They  have  abandoned 
the  debris  of  Romana's  army  so  as  not  to  lose  half  a  day. 
Over  a  hundred  baggage  waggons  have  been  taken. 

"  Napoleon." 


CHAPTER  VI. 

THE     YEAR     1809. 

The  year  1809  was  destined  to  witness  many  important 
events.  In  January  Napoleon,  baulked  of  his  prey  in 
Spain  by  the  hasty  retreat  of  Sir  John  Moore  in  a  very 
bad  temper,  began  to  prepare  for  another  war  with 
Austria,  which  he  had  rendered  inevitable  by  a  series  of 
humiliations  inflicted  on  the  Court  of  Vienna.  What 
Austria  had  to  complain  of  was  not  only  the  treaty 
of  Presburg,  which  she  had  been  forced  to  sign,  but  the 
policy  which  had  followed  that  treaty.  All  the  vassals  of 
France  on  her  frontiers  had  been  called  to  arms ;  she  was 
subjected  to  continual  threats,  she  was  forced  to  accept 
the  Continental  Blockade,  she  saw  Prussia,  Spain,  Tuscany, 
the  Papal  States,  Portugal,  Moldavia  and  Wallachia, 
disposed  of  without  any  reference  to  her ;  she  had  been 
excluded  from  the  Conference  of  Erfurth,  and  Napoleon 
had  called  on  her  to  acknowledge  his  brother  Joseph  as 
King  of  Spain.  In  March  Prince  Metternich,  who  had 
long  before  warned  his  Court  of  what  was  coming,  told 
M.  de  Champagny  that  the  measures  adopted  by  Napoleon 
had  forced  Austria  to  place  her  armies  on  a  war  footing. 
War  now  became  necessary,  for  neither  country  could 
stand  the  tremendous  strain  on  their  resources  caused  by 
these  armaments.  Austria  required  peace  and  security, 
and  France  required  more  plunder,  as  the  Spanish  business 


NAPOLEON    AND    THE     ARCHDUKE    CHARLES.      429 

was  bringing  no  funds  into  the  Imperial  Exchequer. 
Shortly  afterwards  the  Archduke  Charles  issued  a  stirring 
address  to  his  troops,  which  was  a  virtual  declaration  of 
war,  'and  on  the  loth  of  April  the  Austrians  crossed  the 
Inn,  five  days  before  Napoleon  expected  them  to  move, 
while  he  was  still  in  Paris,  and  before  he  had  concentrated 
his  forces.  Had  the  Archduke  Charles  acted  with  vigour 
and  rapidity  he  might  have  taken  advantage  of  the  gap  of 
thirty  leagues  which  separated  Davoust  and  Massena,  and 
have  beaten  the  French  in  detail ;  but  he  had  hardly 
accomplished  anything  when  Napoleon  appeared  on  the 
scene  of  action,  repaired  the  blunders  of  his  lieutenants, 
and  by  a  series  of  brilliant  manoeuvres  cut  the  archduke's 
army  in  two,  and  reached  Vienna  before  him.  Then 
followed  the  desperate  battles  of  Aspern  and  Essling, 
in  which  Napoleon  was  foiled  in  his  attempt  to  cross 
the  Danube  and  carry  the  Austrian  position.  Prince 
Metternich,  who  had  been  detained  as  a  prisoner,  and  who 
was  at  this  moment  at  Strasburg  about  to  be  exchanged, 
says  in  the  Memoirs,  that  on  his  arrival  the  Empress,  who 
had  accompanied  Napoleon  as  far  as  that  city,  sent  for  him, 
told  him  that  the  Emperor  had  been  defeated,  and  that  in 
all  probability  he  would  meet  him  on  the  road  returning 
to  France.  Had  Napoleon  followed  the  advice  of  his 
marshals  he  would  have  retreated,  but  he  was  of  sterner 
stuff,  and  his  tenacity  was  rewarded  by  the  victory  of 
Wagram.  Again,  the  French  owed  their  escape  to  the 
Archduke  Charles,  who  seemed  perfectly  paralysed  in  the 
presence  of  Napoleon,  and  who  took  no  advantage  of 
his  victory.  Writing  about  Aspern  and  Essling,  Lanfrey 
says — 

"Night  approached  and  the  archduke  ordered  fighting 
to  cease.  With  another  effort  he  would  probably  have 
tumbled  the  French  army  into  the  Danube.  But  that 
Prince  was  deficient  in  obstinacy ;  he  made  war  with  all 
the  nonchalance  of  a  great  noble  ;  he  prided  himself  upon 
an  excessive  courtesy,  and  he  appeared  to  consider  that  it 


430     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

would  have  been  ungenerous  to  push  his  advantage 
further."  And  with  regard  to  the  second  day's  fighting — 
"  The  Archduke  Charles  showed  himself  as  gallant  a 
soldier,  a  brilliant  general,  on  this  day  ;  but  it  was  not  in 
his  power  to  repair  the  fault  of  the  previous  evening." 

After  Wagram  came  negotiations  for  peace,  which 
Austria  dragged  out  in  the  hope  that  Russia  might  yet 
interfere  in  the  question  of  Galicia.  At  first  Napoleon 
refused  to  abate  his  demands,  but  in  the  end  he  consented 
to  reduce  the  war  indemnity,  and  this  concession  is  said 
to  have  been  due  to  the  attempt  of  Staabs  to  assassinate 
him  on  the  I2th  October.  On  the  15th  the  Emperor  left 
Vienna,  declaring  that  peace  had  been  concluded.  This 
was  not  the  case,  but  the  joy  that  the  announcement 
caused  was  so  great  that  the  Austrian  government  had  to 
accept  it. 

The  conduct  of  Russia  during  these  events  requires  a 
few  words.  The  Czar  had  good  reason  to  doubt  the 
sincerity  of  Napoleon  ;  both  Austria  and  England 
implored  him  to  join  the  common  cause;  the  Emperor 
Francis  had  sent  Prince  Schwartzenberg  to  St.  Petersburg 
to  demand  the  hand  of  the  Czar's  sister  for  an  archduke! 
the  King  and  Queen  of  Prussia  too  had  paid  Alexander  a 
visit,  and  would  have  gladly  joined  him  ;  Blucher  declared 
himself  able  to  raise  an  army  of  1 50,000  men  ;  all  Ger- 
many was  ripe  for  revolt ;  Turkey  had  broken  off"  relations 
with  France,  and  Spain  was  giving  plenty  of  occupation 
to  200,000  men.  In  addition  to  this  the  French  alliance 
was  extremely  unpopular  in  Russia.  The  Czar  was  in  fact 
the  arbiter  of  Europe,  but  although  he  was  several  times 
on  the  point  of  quarrelling  with  Napoleon,  he  was  too  much 
afraid  of  losing  Finland  and  the  Danubian  principalities  to 
act  boldly.  He  determined  therefore  to  remain  a  passive 
spectator  of  events,  to  concentrate  an  army  corps  on  the 
Galician  frontier,  and  to  keep  Prussia  quiet.  He  reaped 
his  reward. 

In  1809  Napoleon  at  last  seized  on   the  Papal  States 


THE    ENGLISH    IN    SPAIN.  43 1 

and  was  excommunicated.  His  Holiness  was  arrested 
and  taken  to  Grenoble ;  but  the  excitement  caused  by  his 
presence  in  France  was  so  great  that  he  was  sent  back  to 
Savona.  This  event  was  kept  as  secret  as  possible  in 
France,  where  it  was  generally  supposed  that  Pius  VH. 
had  excommunicated  the  Emperor  from  the  balcony  of 
the  Quirinal,  that  he  had  then  rushed  through  the  streets, 
crucifix  in  hand,  exciting  the  people  against  the  French, 
and  that  the  Vatican  had  been  carried  by  assault. 

Along  the  road  from  Grenoble  to  Savona  the  greatest 
enthusiasm  prevailed,  the  journey  was  one  long  ovation, 
the  people  crowded  round  the  pontiff's  carriage  to  implore 
his  blessing,  and  the  villages  through  which  he  passed 
were  decorated  with  flags.  The  authorities  were  in  the 
greatest  alarm  lest  he  should  be  torn  from  their  clutches. 
No  wonder  that  strict  orders  were  given  to  keep  these 
matters  secret,  and  that  it  was  found  necessary  to  circulate 
such  a  lying  official  report  as  this — 

"  The  Pope  did  everything  to  render  his  presence  at  Rome 
useless,  and  some  of  his  partisans  might,  in  spite  of  him, 
render  it  dangerous.  He  quitted  Rome  on  the  6th  July, 
unknown  to  the  Emperor,  and  went  to  Savona,  where  his 
Majesty  caused  him  to  be  received,  treated,  and  estab- 
lished with  all  the  respect  due  to  his  misfortunes."  ^ 

Sir  Arthur  Wellesley  landed  in  Spain  on  the  22nd 
April;  on  the  12th  May  he  crossed  the  Douro  and  beat 
Soult,  and  in  July  he  beat  King  Joseph  and  Marshal 
Victor  at  Talavera,  a  battle  which  Jomini  says  "  at  once 
restored  the  reputation  of  the  British  army,  which  had 
been  declining."  In  fact,  22,000  British  troops  had  fought 
on  two  successive  days,  and  had  finally  defeated  45,000 
Frenchmen.  It  is  true  that  we  had  on  our  side  the  army 
of  Cuesta,  which  was  held  in  check  by  10,000  Frenchmen, 
which  did  little  or  nothing  in  the  way  of  fighting,  and 
after  the  battle  behaved  shamefully. 

^  Vide  VEgUse  Romaine  et  le  Premier  Empire,  vol.  iii.  p.  Hi- 
Comte  d'Haussonville. 


432     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

The  spell  of  French  invincibility  was  now  completely 
broken  ;  they  had  experienced  such  reverses  as  Maida, 
Baylen,  Vimers,  the  Douro,  and  Talavera.  Flushing  had 
been  captured,  as  also  Martinique,  Guadeloup,  the  Isle  of 
Bourbon,  and  the  Ionian  islands.  In  1809  Lord  Cochrane 
burned  French  ships  in  the  Basque  Roads,  and  Lord 
CoUingwood  destroyed  a  French  squadron  on  its  way  to 
relieve  Barcelona.  In  the  Tyrol,  Lefebvre  had  suffered  a 
severe  defeat  at  the  hands  of  Hofer ;  and  the  Duke  of 
Brunswick,  after  taking  Dresden  and  Leipsic  from 
Napoleon's  allies,  had,  like  Romana,  managed  to  get  on 
board  an  English  squadron  with  2,000  of  his  men. 

It  is  true,  however,  that  if  Lord  Chatham  and  Sir 
Richard  Strachan  took  Flushing,  and  greatly  alarmed 
France,  they  did  not  take  Antwerp  as  Napoleon  feared 
they  would,  and  that  the  fatal  Walcheren  expedition  cost 
England  a  great  many  thousand  pounds  sterling  and  many 
thousand  valuable  lives,  and  came  all  too  late  to  relieve 
our  faithful  Austrian  allies  of  the  pressure  brought  upon 
them,  or  to  have  any  influence  on  the  terms  imposed  by 
Napoleon  on  the  Court  of  Vienna. 

-  With  respect  to  our  military  and  naval  forces  for  this  year, 
Alison  says  that  the  British  fleet  in  1809  consisted  of 
240  ships  of  the  line,  and  nearly  1,100  smaller  vessels  ; 
that  this  force  blockaded  every  hostile  harbour  in  Europe, 
chased  the  Toulon  squadron  ashore  at  the  mouth  of  the 
Rhone,  burned  the  Brest  fleet  amid  the  shallows  of  the 
Basque  Roads,  drove  the  Russian  navy  under  the  cannon 
of  Cronstadt,  and  dealt  a  redoubtable  blow  at  the  fleet 
in  the  Scheldt.  With  100,000  regular  troops  England 
maintained  her  vast  colonial  possessions ;  with  190,000 
more  she  kept  her  70,000,000  subjects  in  India  in  sub- 
jection ;  with  400,000  militia  she  provided  for  the  safety 
of  the  British  isles,  while  another  100,000  gallant  soldiers 
were  available  for  carrying  on  war  on  the  continent. 

As  for  French  poHcy,  it  was  shaped  almost  entirely  by 
hatred  of  England,  and  a  persistent  desire  to  ruin  her  by 


CANDLEMAS.  433 

means  of  that  continental  blockade  which  was  weighing 
so  heavily  on  all  the  countries  of  Europe,  which  caused 
great  distress  in  the  manufacturing  towns  of  France,  and 
was  so  bitterly  felt  by  consumers,  or  would-be  consumers. 


To  COMTE  DE  CHAMPAGNY. 

"Benavente,  1st  January,  1809. 
"  It  is  the  custom  of  the  pope  to  send  tapers  to  different 
powers.  You  must  write  to  my  agent  at  Rome  that  I  will 
not  accept  one.  The  King  of  Spain,  too,  does  not  want 
one.  Write  to  Naples  and  to  Holland  to  refuse  them. 
They  must  not  be  received,  because  the  papal  court  had 
the  insolence  not  to  offer  any  last  year.  This  is  the  course 
I  wish  to  be  taken  as  concerns  me.  My  chargi  d'affaires 
will  make  known  that  at  Candlemas  I  receive  tapers 
blessed  by  my  cure,  that  it  is  neither  the  purple  nor  power 
which  gives  a  value  to  those  kind  of  things.  There  may 
be  popes  as  well  as  cur^s  in  hell ;  therefore  the  taper 
blessed  by  my  ciiri  may  be  quite  as  holy  as  that  of  the 
pope.  I  will  not  receive  those  given  by  the  pope,  and  all 
the  princes  of  my  family  should  follow  my  example. 

"  Napoleon." 

The  Emperor  was  becoming  more  and  more  irritated 
with  the  pope,  who,  on  his  side,  was  driven  to  despair,  and 
was  becoming  reckless. 

On  the  2nd  January,  referring  to  the  retreat  of  the 
English,  Napoleon  wrote  to  King  Joseph,  saying :  "  It  is 
probable  that  by  this  time  half  the  English  army  is  in  our 
power ;  this  is  the  opinion  of  the  English  themselves.  As 
for  Romana,  his  corps  has  been  entirely  destroyed.  .  .  . 
Have  guns  fired  in  honour  of  our  successes  over  the 
English." 

The  above-mentioned  letter  was  written  from  Astorga, 
beyond  which  town  the  Emperor  did  not  like  to  continue 
his  pursuit  of  Sir  John  Moore,  being  convinced  that  he 

VOL.  n.  F  F 


434     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

would  not  be  able  to  overtake  him.     For  this,  and  perhaps 
for  other  reasons,  he  determined  to  return  to  France. 

Lanfrey  is  of  opinion  that  the  real  motive  which  induced 
Napoleon  to  leave  Spain  was  exasperation  at  not  having 
been  able  to  subdue  that  country  in  three  months,  when 
it  had  taken  him  only  a  week  to  break  the  resistance  of 
Prussia.  However,  the  motives  alleged  were,  that  Austria 
was  arming,  that  Fouche  and  Talleyrand,  who  had  been 
at  daggers  drawn,  had  become  bosom  friends,  and  that  a 
conspiracy  against  Napoleon  was  being  hatched  in  Paris 
under  the  auspices  of  those  two  ministers,  and  with  the 
connivance  of  Murat,  King  of  Naples.  It  appears,  how- 
ever, that  there  were  no  extraordinary  armaments  going 
on  in  Austria  at  that  moment,-  and  that  the  conspirators 
had  done  nothing  more  than  take  council  as  to  what  should 
be  done  in  the  event  of  Napoleon  losing  his  life  in 
Spain. 

The  Emperor  hurried  back  to  Paris  with  a  speed  which 
seems  to  show  that  he  apprehended  danger  at  home.  He 
accomplished  the  journey  in  a  week  ;  he  left  Valladolid 
on  the  19th  January,  and  he  entered  the  Tuileries  on  the 
23rd,  and  in  very  bad  humour,  the  weight  of  which  fell 
upon  Talleyrand,  who  was  accused  of  being  responsible 
for  the  war  with  Spain,  and  of  having  advised  the  execution 
of  the  Due  d'Enghien  in  writing.  Talleyrand  lost  his  key 
of  grand  chamberlain,  and  Madame  de  Chevreuse  was 
banished  forty  leagues  from  Paris. 

In  another  letter,  dated  the  6th  January,  and  addressed 
to  King  Joseph,  the  Emperor  said — "  I  have  no  hope  that 
Europe  will  be  pacified  this  year.  I  have  so  little  hope  of 
this,  that  I  yesterday  signed  a  decree  to  raise  100,000  men. 
The  hatred  of  England,  and  events  at  Constantinople, 
show  that  the  hour  of  repose  and  tranquillity  has  not  yet 
struck.  As  for  you,  it  seems  to  me  that  your  kingdom  is 
being    pacified.      The   provinces  of  Leon,    Asturias,    and 

^  Napoleon  to  Prince  Eugene,  26th  January,  1809 — "Austria  is  not 
making  any  movements,  but  we  must  be  on  the  alert." 


ADVICE   TO    JOSEPH.  4.35 

New  Castile  demand  repose.  I  hope  Galicia  will  be 
pacified  as  soon  as  the  English  abandon  that  country. 
Saragossa  cannot  fail  to  surrender  soon,  and  General 
St.  Cyr,  with  30,000  men,  should  be  able  to  settle  matters 
in  Catalonia." 

To  PRINCE  EUGENE. 

"  Valladolid,  Uh  January,  1809. 
"  My  Son, — Battaglia,  who  has  just  arrived,  tells  me  that 
Augusta  has  given  us  another  princess.     I  hope  that  the 
next  time  she  will  give  you  a  boy. 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  9th  January  the  Emperor  addressed  two  letters 
to  the  King  of  Spain.  In  the  first  he  said — "  Take  all 
your  measures  for  your  entry  into  Madrid.  Try  and  let 
it  be  solemn,  and  that  you  may  be  well  received  by  the 
inhabitants.  Summon  all  the  councils  afterwards,  and 
let  your  ministers  set  to  work  to  administer  the  country 
well." 

In  the  second  letter  the  Emperor  gave  a  description  of 
the  flight  of  the  English  army  and  the  capture  of  a  convoy 
laden  with  money.  "  The  English,"  he  added,  "  fly  in  the 
most  fearful  disorder.  The  granges  in  the  villages  of 
Galicia  are  filled  with  Englishmen,  hung  by  the  peasants 
in  revenge  for  the  terrible  way  in  which  they  pillage."  .  .  . 
Before  leaving  Spain,  Napoleon  addressed  to  his  brother 
Joseph  a  series  of  military  and  political  instructions  which 
certainly  do  not  redound  to  his  honour.  Several  of  the 
letters  in  which  they  are  contained  are  altogether  omitted 
from  the  Correspondence,  but  they  are  to  be  found  in  their 
place  in  the  Memoirs  of  King  Joseph.  Writing  from 
Valladolid  on  the  loth  January,  Napoleon  complained 
that  he  was  not  satisfied  with  the  police  arrangements  in 
Madrid. 

"  Belliard,"  he  added,  "  is  too  mild  ;  with  the  Spaniards  one 
must  be  severe.  I  have  had  fifteen  of  the  worst  characters 
arrested,  and  I  am  going  to  have  them  shot.     Have  thirty 

F  F  2 


43^     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

arrested  at  Madrid.  When  treated  with  kindness  this 
canaille  considers  itself  invulnerable.  When  a  few  of  them 
have  been  hung  they  begin  to  get  tired  of  the  game,  and 
become  as  humble  and  submissive  as  they  should  be." 

On  the  1 2th,  Belliard,  having  evidently  commenced  to 
obey  orders,  Napoleon  addressed  a  second  letter  to  King 
Joseph,  in  which  he  said  : — 

"  The  operation  performed  by  Belliard  is  excellent.  You 
must  hang  twenty  of  the  worst  characters  in  Madrid.  To- 
morrow I  am  going  to  have  seventeen  men,  well  known  for 
their  excesses,  hung.  If  Madrid  be  not  freed  of  a  hundred 
of  these  ringleaders,  nothing  will  have  been  done.  Out  of 
the  hundred  have  twelve  or  fifteen  shot,  and  send  the 
remainder  to  the  galleys.  I  did  not  obtain  tranquillity  in 
France,  and  restore  confidence,  until  I  had  arrested  200 
ringleaders  and  assassins,  and  transported  them.  Since 
then  the  tone  of  the  capital  has  entirely  changed." 

And  on  the  i6th  his  Majesty  wrote  once  more  to  Joseph, 
saying  : — 

"The  court  of  the  Alcades  at  Madrid  has  acquitted, 
or  only  condemned  to  prison,  some  thirty  scamps  whom 
Belliard  arrested.  A  military  commission  must  be  ap- 
pointed to  judge  them  again,  and  to  have  the  guilty  shot. 
Here,  every  possible  effort  was  made  to  obtain  pardon  for 
the  bandits  who  were  condemned.  I  refused  ;  I  had  them 
hung,  and  I  have  learned  that  those  who  implored  their 
pardon  were  inwardly  very  pleased  that  I  did  not  listen 
to  them.  I  consider  it  necessary,  especially  in  the  first 
moments,  for  your  government  to  show  a  little  vigour 
against  this  canaille.  The  canaille  loves  and  esteems  only 
those  whom  it  fears,  and  the  fear  of  the  canaille  can  alone 
make  you  loved  and  esteemed  by  all  the  nation." 

At  the  same  time  Joseph  was  recommended  to  take 
from  the  convents  and  confiscated  houses  some  fifty 
masterpieces  of  the  Spanish  school,  which  pictures  were 
wanting  to  the  museum  in  Paris.  After  the  sanguinary 
came  the  predatory  instincts. 


1709    AND    1809.  437 

In  a  letter  of  the  nth  January  to  war  minister  Clarke, 
the  Emperor  said  : — 

"  I  am  going  to  call  up  fresh  conscripts.  Some  of  the 
army  corps  are  still  weak  and  will  receive  a  good  many. 
You  will  understand  that  if  the  conscripts  of  the  last  levy 
are  without  clothing  when  the  fresh  conscripts  arrive  at 
their  depdts,  it  would  be  just  as  well  as  if  I  raised  no 
conscripts  at  all,  and  this  would  much  annoy  me." 

On  the  nth  January,  Napoleon,  in  a  long  letter  to 
Joseph,  in  which  he  expressed  regret  at  not  being  able 
to  go  beyond  Astorga,  said  : — 

"  Have  a  dozen  individuals  at  Madrid  hung  ;  scamps 
are  not  wanting  there." 

And  the  next  day  the  war  minister  was  directed  to 
publish  further  documents  on  the  Baylen  affair,  but  not 
to  say  anything  about  Morla's   calumnies. 

To  COMTE  FOUCH^. 

"  Valladolid,  13M  January,  1809. 
"We  are  in  1809.  I  think  it  would  be  well  to  have 
some  articles  written,  comparing  the  misfortunes  which 
afflicted  France  in  1709  with  the  prosperity  of  the  country 
in  1809.  .  .  .  Louis  XIV.  occupied  himself  with  building 
Versailles  and  hunting  lodges.  Now  Paris  is  being  im- 
proved from  water-works  to  palaces,  from  markets  to  the 
Temple  of  Victory  and  the  Bourse.  ...  In  1709  the  Edict 
of  Nantes  was  revoked  and  the  Protestants  persecuted  ; 
Marshal  Villars  threw  away  his  talents  in  the  Cevennes  ; 
P^re  Lachaise  tyrannised  over  the  conscience  of  the  old 
king.  In  1809  the  altars  are  re-established  and  religions 
tolerated.  As  regards  morals,  the  bishops  no  longer  go 
to  ...  .  nor  wait  in  ante-rooms,  but  remain  in  their 
dioceses.  .  .  .  "NAPOLEON." 

And  the  next  day  his  Majesty  informed  his  minister  of 
police  that  the  Sire  St.  Simon  had  been  condemned  to 
death,  adding  : — 


438     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

"  His  affair  is  before  the  privy  council.  Have  him 
transferred  to  the  castle  of  Lourdes  or  Joux,  as  his  affair 
will  probably  drag  on  for  a  long  time,  and  as  it  is  my  in- 
tention to  commute  his  penalty  into  one  of  imprisonment." 

On  the  15th  January  Napoleon  thus  began  a  letter  to 
the  Viceroy  of  Italy  : — 

"  My  Son, — The  news  which  reaches  me  from  all  sides 
shows  me  that  Austria  is  stirring.  Russia  is  as  indignant 
as  I  am  at  all  these  fanfaronnades." 

And  to  the  King  of  Spain  : — 

"  Circumstances  will  oblige  me  to  go  to  Paris  for  twenty 
days.  Should  nothing  hinder  me,  I  shall  return  here 
towards  the  end  of  February.  .  .  .  The  major-general 
will  acquaint  you  with  my  plans  for  entering  Portugal  by 
way  of  Oporto  and  Galicia  at  the  same  time.  .  .  .  You 
must  not  think  of  Valentia  until  you  take  Saragossa.  .  .  . 
I  have  left  the  command  of  the  provinces  of  Leon,  Old 
Castile,  Biscay,  and  Santander  to  Marshal  Bessieres.  .  .  . 
Pay  attention  to  the  newspapers,  and  have  articles  written 
to  show  that  the  Spanish  people  are  submissive  and 
submit.  .  .  .  The  court  of  Vienna  has  behaved  very  badly 
and  may  repent  of  it.  Do  not  be  uneasy.  I  have  forces 
enough,  without  touching  my  army  in  Spain,  to  go  to 
Vienna  in  a  month. 

"  I  have  very  few  cavalry  generals.  I  beg  you  will  send 
me  General  Montbrun,  whose  gallantry  I  esteem,  and  who 
may  be  useful  to  me.  He  must  not  know  why  I  want  him. 
Should  I  require  other  generals  I  shall  write  for  them. 
You  must  make  it  believed  in  the  army  that  I  intend  to 
return  in  twenty-five  days.  Besides,  my  very  presence 
in  Paris  will  cause  Austria  to  enter  into  nothingness,  and 
I  shall  be  back  before  the  end  of  October.  I  shall  be  in 
Paris  in  five  days.  I  shall  ride  as  far  as  Bordeaux  day 
and  night.  During  that  time  things  will  calm  down  in 
Spain.  ...  I  think  that  as  soon  as  Saragossa  surrenders 
you  can  send  for  the  queen  and  your  children.  ...  I 
consider  it   useful  for  the  general  affairs  of  Europe  that 


RETREAT    OF    SIR    JOHN    MOORE.  439 

the  queen  should  go  to  Marracq  after  the  carnival.  The 
preparations  for  her  departure  will  create  a  good 
effect.i  .  .  ." 

On  the  same  day  Napoleon  wrote  letters  to  the  Kings 
of  Westphalia,  Saxony,  Bavaria,  and  Wirtemberg,  to  the 
Grand  Dukes  of  Baden  and  Hesse  Darmstadt,  and  to 
the  Prince  Primate  of  the  Confederation  of  the  Rhine, 
complaining  of  the  extravagant,  the  inexplicable  conduct 
of  Austria,  who  was  rushing  to  destruction,  announcing  his 
victories  in  Spain,  and  calling  upon  his  vassals  to  prepare 
their  contingents.  He  declared  that  he  would  enter 
Austria  himself  at  the  head  of  400,000  Frenchmen. 

To  VICE-ADMIRAL  COMTE  DECR^S. 

"Paris,  7.0th  January,  1809. 
"  You  must  order  thirty  rounds  of  cannon  to  be  fired  on 
all  the  coasts  where  there  are  British  cruisers,  in  honour  of 
our  victory  over  the  English  and  their  expulsion  from 
Spain.  You  must  give  the  same  orders  to  my  squadrons, 
and  announce  that  an  English  army  of  40,000  men,  com- 
manded by  Generals  Moore  and  Baird,  which  had  formed 
a  junction  with  the  Spanish  army,  was  pursued  for  150 
leagues ;  that   we  have  killed   2,000,   and  captured  7,000 

men.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  13th  the  Emperor  had  estimated  the  British 
force  at  15,000  men,  which  he  said  was  far  from  30,000, 
and  he  had  directed  the  expedition  "which  covered 
England  with  shame,"  to  be  turned  into  ridicule.^ 

1  As  fate  would  have  it,  the  Queen  of  Spain  and  her  children  never 
crossed  the  Pyrenees,  and  it  vcas  not  until  Joseph  had  been  forced  to 
seek  refuge  in  France  that  this  royal  couple  again  met. 

2  Napier  in  his  History  of  the  Peninsular  War  (book  iv.  chap,  vi.), 
quotes  the  opinions  of  Soult,  Wellington,  and  Napoleon,  on  the  retreat 
of  Sir  John  Moore.  According  to  Soult  the  British  commander  took 
every  advantage  offered  by  the  country  for  opposing  an  active  and 


44°     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

On  the  2nd  February,  Napoleon  addressed  this  short 
note  to  Fouch6 — "Send  me  a  report  on  Bourmont  and 
how  he  conducted  himself  in  Portugal." 

To  KING  JEROME. 

"■'Pkm%,Tth  February,  \Zo<). 
"...  Your  demand  for  money  is  an  indiscreet  request 
at  a  moment  when   I  have  to  meet  enormous  expenses, 
when  my  armies  of  Spain  bring  me  in  nothing,  and  when 
I  have  to  pay  other  armies. 

"  Diminish  your  luxury  by  half.  Reduce  your  civil  list 
in  order  to  augment  your  military  establishment.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

to  the  emperor  of  russia. 

"Paris,  i/s^th  February,  i8og. 
"  Count  Romanzoff  is  returning  to  your  Imperial 
Majesty.  No  one  was  more  fitted  than  this  minister  by 
his  talents  and  consummate  prudence  to  realise  what  we 
conceived  for  the  happiness  of  the  world.  I  hope  that  he 
will  enjoy  the  confidence  of  your  Majesty  when  circum- 
stances permit  us  to  renew  this  affair.     Since  my  return 

vigorous  resistance,  and  he  ended  by  falling  in  a  battle  which  should 
for  ever  honour  his  memory.  Napoleon  afterwards,  more  than  once, 
declared  that  if  Sir  John  Moore  committed  a  few  trifling  errors,  they 
were  to  be  attributed  to  the  position  in  which  he  found  himself  placed 
and  that  the  talent  and  firmness  of  that  officer  had  alone  saved  the 
English  army. 

Napoleon  at  the  time  tried  to  make  out  that  Romana  considered 
that  he  had  been  betrayed  by  the  English.  If  so,  it  may  be  asked, 
why  did  the  Spanish  general  set  up  a  statue  to  Sir  John  Moore,  with 
this  inscription  : 

"A  la  Gloria 

Del  General  Inglos  Moore, 

Y  sus  valientes  Compatriotas, 

La  Espagna  Agradecida." 

On  the  other  side  : — 

"Memoria  del  Dia,  i6  de  Enero,  1809." 


THE    EX-KING   AND    QUEEN    OF    SPAIN.  44 1 

from  Spain  I  have  conversed  daily  with  Count  Romanzoflf. 
We  had  some  little  discussions  on  the  subject  of  Prussia. 
I  shall  treat  that  country  perfectly  well  if  its  sovereigns 
will  listen  to  the  advice  and  good  lessons  given  to  them  by 
your  Majesty.  Permit  me  to  refer  you  to  Count  Romanzoff 
on  the  subject  of  our  position  with  Austria,  and  the  neces- 
sity of  remaining  tranquil  upon  that  side,  so  that  we  may 
finish  with  England.  ...  «  Napoleon." 

In  a  long  letter  dated  the  21st  February,  Napoleon  gave 
the  King  of  Saxony  a  sketch  of  the  situation.  He  said, 
among  other  things — "  Austria  is  being  dragged  to  her 
ruin.  Her  understanding  with  England  becomes  more  and 
more  clear.  England  has  made  peace  with  the  Porte 
through  the  good  offices  of  Austria,  and  the  English  have 
been  received  in  triumph  at  Constantinople  by  the  inter- 
nuncio, which  has  very  much  annoyed  the  Emperor  of 
Russia  and  myself.  .  .  ." 

To  KING  CHARLES  IV. 

"  Paris,  25M  February,  1809. 
"  Sir,  my  Brother, — I  thank  you  for  the  interest  you 
have  taken  in  my  happy  return  to  my  capital,  and  I  have 
received  with  pleasure  your  congratulations  on  the  new 
victories  of  my  armies.  I  should  have  liked  to  hear  at 
the  same  time  that  your  Majesty  was  in  good  health. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  QUEEN  LOUISA. 

"  Paris,  ■Z'^th  February,  1809. 
"Madam,  my  Sister, — The  interest  which  you  are 
good  enough  to  take  in  the  success  of  my  arms  in  Spain 
is  most  agreeable  to  me,  and  I  thank  you  for  the  senti- 
ments you  express  on  that  occasion.  I  am  sorry  to  learn 
that  the  health  of  the  king  is  not  good,  but  I  think  with 
you  that  the  return  of  spring  and  the  waters  of  Geroux 
will  have  a  salutary  effect.  "  Napoleon." 


442  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF   NAPOLEON. 

This  was  on  a  par  with  Ferdinand  congratulating  the 
French  Emperor  on  the  victory  of  Yudela.  Our  James  II. 
manifested  a  very  different  spirit  when  Admiral  Russel, 
by  defeating  the  French  fleet  at  the  Hague,  destroyed 
the  exiled  monarch's  last  chance  of  recovering  his  crown. 
One  can  well  imagine  all  the  scorn  Napoleon  must  have 
felt  for  these  drivelling  Bourbons. 

A  curious  letter  which  Joseph  wrote  to  his  brother  at 
this  period,  shows  that  there  was  not  much  reason  for 
congratulation.  No  wonder  the  Emperor  soon  gave  up 
replying  to  such  unpleasant  missives. 

JOSEPH  TO  NAPOLEON. 

"  \t)th  February,  1809. 
"  I  see  with  regret  that  you  listen  to  persons  who  are 
interested  in  deceiving  you.  ...  I  have  not  a  farthing  to 
give  to  any  one.  .  .  .  My  guard  wear  the  same  tunics 
which  were  served  out  to  them  four  years  ago.  ...  I  am 
thwarted  by  a  number  of  persons  who  are  vexed  that  I 
did  not  adopt  their  system.  I  am  accused  of  being  too 
lenient.  Were  I  to  be  severe  now,  and  to  hand  them  over 
to  the  tribunals,  they  would  be  dishonoured.  You  have 
sequestrated  the  property  of  ten  families.  This  measure 
has  been  extended.  There  are  2,000  servants  of  seques- 
trated people  in  the  streets  asking  for  charity ;  the  boldest 
try  to  rob  and  assassinate  my  officers.  ,  .  .  Heaven  has 
accorded  me  everything  necessary  to  overcome  difficulties, 
but  not  to  support  insults.  ...  I  am  King  of  Spain  merely 
by  the  force  of  your  arms.  I  might  become  king  by  the 
love  of  the  Spaniards  ;  but  for  that  I  must  be  allowed  to 
govern  after  my  fashion.  Every  animal  has  his  instinct 
which  he  should  follow.  ...  A  Spaniard  has  communi- 
cated to  me  an  order  which  he  received  to  give  an  exact 
account  of  my  conduct  every  day  to  Marshal  Duroc.  It 
is  complained  that  I  have  recalled  five  counsellors  from 
Castile.  Why  .-'  Because  their  houses  were  pillaged  in 
their  absence.  .  .  ." 


SARAGOSSA  SURRENDERS.  443 

On  the  2nd  March  the  Emperor  directed  the  minister 
of  war  to  write  to  General  Mathieu-Dumas  to  inspect  the 
Portuguese  regiments  lying  at  Grenoble  in  order  to  see  if 
they  could  be  employed  in  a  war  in  Germany. 

To  THE  VICEROY  OF  ITALY. 

"Paris,  ■^rd March,  1809. 
"  My  Son, — Cesarotti  has  left  behind  him  a  history  of 
the  popes  ;  ask  for  information  about  that  work,  and  if  it 
tends  to  make  known  the  harm  which  popes  have  done 
to  religion  and  to  Christianity,  have  it  published  without 
delay. 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  next  day  the  Emperor  wrote  to  his  vassals  in 
Germany  once  more  saying  that  the  news  from  Vienna 
was  of  such  a  character  that  it  was  necessary  to  prepare 
their  contingents  without  delay. 

To  KING  LOUIS  OF  HOLLAND. 

"Paris,  Uh  March,  1809. 
"  I  hasten  to  inform    you    that   I    have    deemed  fit  to 
create  the  Prince  Napoleon   Louis,  your  son.  Grand  Duke 

of  Berg. 

"  Napoleon." 

King  Louis  was  much  vexed  at  this  creation,  made 
without  consulting  him,  and  by  which  his  son  became  an 
independent  prince. 

On  the  20th  February,  Saragossa  fell  after  a  resistance 
so  heroic  as  to  render  the  name  of  that  unfortunate  city 
for  ever  memorable.  It  is  a  stain  upon  the  character  of 
Marshal  Lannes  who  at  last  took  the  place,  that  he  at  once 
violated  the  terms  of  the  capitulation,  and  had  two  of 
Saragossa's  most  gallant  defenders  executed.  An  attempt 
was  afterwards  made  to  prove  that  there  was  no  capitula- 
tion ;  but  King  Joseph  writing  to  Napoleon  on  the  27th 


444     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

February,  said  that  he  had  received  the  act  of  capitula- 
tion which  was  pubhshed  in  the  Madrid  Gazette.  In  reply 
to  this  letter,  Napoleon  wrote,  on  the  i  ith  March — "  My 
brother,  I  have  read  the  article  in  the  Madrid  Gazette 
giving  an  account  of  the  taking  of  Saragossa.  In  it 
those  who  defended  that  city  are  praised.  Of  a  truth  this 
is  strange  policy !  There  is  certainly  not  a  Frenchman 
who  has  not  the  greatest  contempt  for  the  defenders  of 
Saragossa."  And  consequently  the  Moniteur  had  orders 
to  run  down  Palafox,  who  was  overwhelmed  with  abuse 
and  accused  of  cowardice — Palafox,  who  was  found  dying 
in  Saragossa,  who  was  sent  a  prisoner  to  France,  and 
thrown  into  Vincennes  where  he  remained  till  the  fall  of 
the  Empire.  The  only  wonder  is  that  his  life  was 
spared. 

To  KING  JOSEPH  OF  SPAIN. 

"Paris,  iSth  March,  1809. 
"  I  cannot  understand   how  it  comes  that  the  pay  is  in 
arrear.      I   have,    however,   a    good    deal    of  money    at 
Bayonne.     How  is  it  that  the  paymaster  does  not  forward 
it .?     He  must  be  a  dolt. 

"  Everything  betokens  war.     Russia  is  with   us  against 
England,  Spain  (so  called),  Austria,  and  Turkey. 

"  Napoleon." 

to  comte  de  champagny. 

"La  Malmaison,  i\si March,  1809. 

"...  Write  to  Caulaincourt  and  let  him  know  the  true 

state  of   affairs.      You  will    send    him    the  proclamation 

of  Prince  Charles,  which  is  a  sort  of  declaration  of  war, 

and  you  will   inclose  the  four  last  despatches  which  you 

have  received  from  Munich  and  Vienna.     You  must  tell 

Caulaincourt  that  the  Russian  chargd  d'affaires  at  Vienna 

ought  to  receive  orders  to  leave  that  capital  should  the 

Austrian  troops  leave  their  territory.  .  .   . 

"  Napoleon." 


ROME    THREATENED.  445 

To  KING  LOUIS  OF  HOLLAND. 

"  La  Malmaison,  2ist  March,  1809. 
"  I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  6th.  War  appears 
imminent.  The  best  thing  you  can  do  is  to  assemble  as 
many  troops  as  possible,  so  as  to  be  able  to  defend  your 
country,  and  to  be  of  some  use  to  the  common  cause.  This 
is  the  first  time  that  you  have  asked  my  advice.  Had  you 
asked  it  sooner  I  should  have  counselled  you  not  to 
disband  your  army  ;  I  should  have  repeated  that  nothing 
was  terminated  in  Europe,  and  that  while  you  were  dis- 
arming I  was  calling  up  more  conscripts  and  reinforcing 
my  army  by  150,000  men.  .  .  .  Austria  has  received 
subsidies  from  England,  and  thinks  that  she  can  attack 
me  because  my  troops  are  in  Spain.  .  .  .  She  is  rushing 
to  destruction.     However,  hold  your  troops  ready. 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  20th  March  the  Emperor  addressed  page  after 
page  of  instructions  to  Berthier  for  the  march  on  Vienna. 

Writing  to  General  Clarke  on  the  1st  April,  the  Emperor 
sent  orders  for  the  concentration  of  his  troops  in  Spain, 
where  for  the  moment  he  intended  to  content  himself  with 
holding  Madrid  and  keeping  communications  open  between 
that  capital  and  Bayonne.  Although  the  total  destruction 
of  Romana  had  been  several  times  announced,  the  attention 
of  King  Joseph  was  to  be  called  to  the  fact  that  if  Romana 
continued  any  longer  to  hold  his  own  between  Galicia, 
Portugal,  and  Old  Castile,  mischief  might  ensue  ;  that  if 
Romana  were  not  destroyed,  the  English  might  land  at 
Vigo  and  seriously  compromise  Marshal  Ney. 

To  MURAT,  King  of  Naples. 

"  Paris,  5M  April,  1809. 
"  I  have  given  orders  for  Roman  affairs  to  be  settled  and 
for  that  nest  of  insurrection  to  be  destroyed.     The  corre- 
spondence between  the  agents  of  the  court  of  Rome  and 


446     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

the  English  prove  that  the  pope  is  using  his  influence  to 
excite  the  Italians.  On  the  receipt  of  this  letter  despatch 
some  columns  to  the  frontier,  to  march  afterwards  with  the 
rapidity  of  lightning  on  Rome.  I  have  given  the  same 
orders  in  Tuscany.  Let  Salicetti  remain  in  Rome  to 
advise  General  MioUis,  who  is  to  organise  a  new  govern- 
ment. You  can  give  assurances  that  the  pope  shall  remain 
a  bishop,  and  will  no  longer  meddle  with  temporal  affairs. 

"  Napoleon." 

Sister  Eliza,  who  was  now  Grand  Duchess  of  Tuscany, 
was  no  more  allowed  the  absolute  control  of  that  country 
than  other  members  of  the  family  the  control  of  the 
countries  over  which  they  were  supposed  to  rule.  In 
March  Napoleon  sent  his  sister  a  present  of  one  Dubois, 
a  police  inspector,  who  was  to  reside  in  Florence,  and  in 
April  she  was  informed  that  the  isle  of  Elba,  which  was  in 
her  government,  would  form  part  of  the  twenty-ninth 
military  division.  On  the  6th  April  the  Emperor  thus 
addressed  the  grand  duchess : — 

"  My  Sister, — Take  care  that  no  kind  of  gambling  be 
permitted  at  Florence.  I  do  not  allow  any  either  at  Turin 
or  in  any  portion  of  the  empire  ;  it  causes  the  ruin  of 
families  and  sets  a  bad  example.  I  tolerate  it  only  in 
Paris,  because  in  that  immense  city  it  cannot  be  prevented, 
and  because  it  is  turned  to  account  by  the  police.  But  I 
will  not  permit  gambling  in  any  other  portion  of  my 
empire." 

To  MARSHAL  BERNADOTTE,  at  Dresden. 

"Paris,  ith  April,  1809 
"  I  have  received  your  letter.  The  unfortunate  King  of 
Sweden  finished  as  every  one  thought  he  would.  The 
major-general  has  no  doubt  informed  you  of  the  extent 
of  your  command,  and  what  you  are  to  do  in  the  event 
of  hostilities  which  will  break  out  without  a  declaration 
of  war.  "  Napoleon." 


A   TELEGRAPHIC    DESPATCH.  447 

On  the  loth  April,  writing  to  King  Joseph,  the  Emperor 
said  that  the  King  of  Sweden  had  been  deposed,  and  that 
the  Duke  of  Sundumania  had  sued  for  peace.  .  .  .  Sweden 
was  obliged  in  the  end  to  consent  to  very  large  territorial 
sacrifices  and  to  adopt  the  continental  system.  The  king 
had  been  superseded  by  his  uncle  for  wishing  to  go  on  with 
a  hopeless  war. 

To  MARSHAL  BERTHIER,  at  Augsburg. 

"Paris,  12th  April,  1809. 
"  It  appears  from  a  letter  by  Otto  that  the  Austrians 
have  crossed  the  Inn  and  declared  war.  I  presume  that 
you  are  at  Augsburg,  and  that  you  have  centralised  all 
my  army  on  the  Lech.  ...  I  shall  be  at  Strasburg  on 
the  14th. 

"  Napoleon." 

Berthier  did  not  get  to  Augsburg  until  the  i6th,  a 
matter  which  sadly  compromised  the  campaign. 

In  Prince  Metternich's  Memoirs  we  find  the  following, 
which  strongly  contrasts  with  the  dilatory  way  in  which 
things  were  conducted  in  Austria  where  there  were  no 
telegraphs.  Poor  Josephine  little  thought,  as  she  stepped 
into  the  carriage,  that  the  result  of  the  campaign  just 
opened  would  be  her  divorce,  and  the  marriage  of 
Napoleon  with  the  Archduchess  Marie  Louise,  then  lying 
ill  at  Vienna. 

METTERNICH  TO  STADION. 

"  Paris,  i%th  April,  1809. 
"  The  Emperor,  warned  by  telegraph  at  10  p.m.  on  the 
1 2th  April  of  the  crossing  of  the  Inn  by  the  Austrian  army, 
five  hours  afterwards  was  on  the  road  to  Strasburg,  which 
he  reached  on  the  15th.  The  Empress,  aroused  by  the 
noise  in  the  apartments  of  the  Emperor,  went  up  stairs  and 
implored  permission  to  accompany  him ;  her  Majesty  set 
out,  followed  by  a  single  lady's  maid.  .  ,  ." 


448 


THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 


On  the  1 5th  the  Emperor  wrote  from  Strasburg  to  his 
foreign  minister,  telling  him  to  have  articles  written  in 
the  papers  showing  the  base  conduct  of  Austria  in  at- 
tacking France  when  she  declared  that  she  desired  to 
remain  on  the  defensive,  and  before  the  legations  had  been 
recalled.  He  was  to  see  that  Prince  Metternich  did  not 
escape. 

On  the  17th  Napoleon  was  at  Donauworth,  where  he 
issued  the  following  proclamation  to  the  army  : — 

"  Soldiers !  the  territory  of  the  Confederation  has  been 
violated.  The  Austrian  general  wishes  us  to  fly  at  the 
sight  of  his  arms,  and  that  we  should  abandon  our  allies. 
I  arrive  in  the  midst  of  you  with  the  rapidity  of  the 
eagle.^ 

"  Soldiers  !  I  was  surrounded  by  you  when  the  sovereign 
of  Austria  came  to  my  bivouac  in  Moravia.     You  heard 


Strength  of  Rival  Forces. 
French. 


Lannes 

Davoust 
Massena 
Lefebvre 
Angereau 
Bernadotte    .. 
King  Jerome 
Bessiferes 
The  Guard   .. 
Army  of  Italy 


Archduke  John   ...     . 
Archduke  Ferdinand  , 
Archduke  Charles 
Two  detachments 


Austrians . 


50,000  men 

60,000 

J* 

50,000 

» 

40,000 

» 

20,000 

J) 

50,000 

jj 

12,000 

j» 

20,000 

» 

22,000 

jj 

100,000 

31 

424,000 

J» 

50,000  men. 

40,000 

Jl 

180,000 

J> 

20,000 

J» 

290,000 

» 

The  militia  in  Hungary  and  round  Vienna,  150,000. 


THE    CAMPAIGN    OPENS.  449 

him  implore  my  clemency  and  swear  eternal  friendship. 
Conquerors  in  three  wars,  Austria  owes  everything  to  our 
generosity;  three  times  she  has  perjured  herself!  Our 
past  successes  are  a  certain  guarantee  of  the  victory  which 
awaits  us.  Let  us  march  then,  and  at  our  sight  the  enemy 
will  recognise  its  conquerors." 

To  MARSHAL  MASSENA. 

"  VoHBURG,  10th  Ap-il;  1809. 
"  The  reports  received  this  morning  show  that  the  enemy 
is  retreating  as  fast  as  he  can.  The  battle-field  is  covered 
with  dead.  ...  I  am  about  to  get  on  horseback  in  order 
to  examine  the  situation,  to  attack  the  enemy  if  he  occupies 
certain  positions,  and  to  pursue  him  if  he  is  falling  back.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

to  the  king  of  saxony. 

"ROHE,  z\st  April,  1809. 
"  I  wrote  to  your  Majesty  from  the  field  of  battle.  The 
days  of  the  19th  and  20th  were  for  the  Austrian  army  what 
the  day  of  Jena  was  for  the  Prussians.  ...  If  you  have 
not  left  Dresden  I  think  you  can  remain  there  in  security. 
I  shall  shortly  be  in  Vienna.  God  has  been  pleased  to 
grant  a  startling  protection  to  the  justice  of  my  cause,  and 
to  punish  the  ingratitude  and  perfidy  of  the  court  of 
Austria. 

"  Napoleon." 

In  a  proclamation  to  the  army  it  was  declared  that  all 
the  corps  of  the  Austrian  army  were  crushed  ;  that  twenty 
generals  had  been  killed  or  wounded  ;  one  archduke  killed, 
and  two  wounded,  and  30,000  prisoners  captured. 

Napoleon  had  gained  some  decisive  advantages,  and  had 
entirely  repaired  the  blunders  of  his  lieutenants,  but  still 
his  bulletin  was  a  tissue  of  exaggerations. 

In  another  proclamation,  dated  from  Ratisbon,  24th 
April,  the  Emperor  said — 

vol.  II.  G  G 


45°     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

"  Soldiers  !  You  have  justified  my  expectations.  You 
have  made  up  for  numbers  by  your  bravery.  You  have 
gloriously  shown  the  difference  which  exists  between  the 
soldiers  of  Caisar  and  the  armed  mob  of  Xerxes.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

In  his  first  bulletin  to  the  army  of  Germany,  the  Emperor 
related  the  successes  gained  at  Thann,  Abensberg,Landshut, 
Echmul,  and  Ratisbon.  There  was,  however,  one  gloomy 
spot  in  the  picture,  Prince  Eugene  and  his  Italians  had 
been  beaten.  On  the  30th,  Napoleon,  in  a  long  letter  to 
his. stepson,  said — "War  is  a  serious  game  in  which  one 
may  compromise  the  reputation  of  one's  country.  ...  I 
know  that  in  Italy  you  affected  to  despise  Massena  ;  if  I 
had  sent  him  there,  what  has  happened  would  never  have 
occurred.  Massena  has  military  talents  before  which  one 
must  bow  the  head ;  one  must  forget  his  defects,  for  all 
men  have  some.  I  ought  to  have  sent  Massena  to  Italy, 
and  have  given  you  the  command  of  the  cavalry  under  him. 
....  If  circumstances  become  pressing,  you  should  write 
to  the  King  of  Naples  [Murat]  to  join  the  army.  He 
might  hand  over  the  government  to  the  queen.  .  .  ." 

To  THE  EMPRESS  JOSEPHINE. 

"  EnnS,  kth  May,  1809. 
"  My  Friend, — I  have  received  your  letter.  The  bullet 
which  touched  me  did  not  wound  me.  It  barely  shaved 
the  tendon  Achilles.  My  health  is  very  good ;  you  are 
wrong  to  feel  uneasy.  My  affairs  are  going  on  well 
here,  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

Napoleon  had  not  been  wounded  since  the  siege  of 
Toulon,  when  he  received  a  slight  prod  from  a  British 
bayonet. 


VIKNNA    CAPTURED.  45  I 

To  PRINCE  CAMBAC^RES. 

"  SCHCENBRUNN,  12/,%  May,  1809. 

My  Cousin,— We  have  entered  Vienna.  The  order  of 
the  day  will  acquaint  you  with  the  state  of  affairs ;  you  can 
have  it  printed  and  read  in  all  the  theatres. 

"  Napoleon." 

to  comte  de  champagny. 

"  SCHCENBRUNN,  12th  May,  1809. 

""  We  are  masters  of  Vienna.  As  you  are  at  Munich, 
come  on  here,  but  do  not  allow  it  to  be  supposed  that  there 
is  any  question  of  peace.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

The  next  day  Napoleon  wrote  to  his  Minister  of  Foreign 
Affairs,  saying — "  You  must  give  orders  for  Prince  Metter- 
nlch  to  be  escorted  here  by  the  gendarmeiy,  so  that  he 
may  be  exchanged  against  the  French  legation,  which  was 
arrested  and  sent  to  Pesth. 

In  the  seventh  bulletin  the  Emperor  gave  an  account  of 
the  capitulation  of  Vienna.  A  month  after  the  Austrian 
army  passed  the  Inn,  he  was  at  the  gates  of  the  capital 
which  was  commanded  by  the  Archduke  Maximilian,  a 
presumptuous  young  prince,  who  had  opened  registers  to 
receive  the  names  of  the  inhabitants  who  wished  to  defend 
the  city.  Only  thirty  individuals  inscribed  their  names  ; 
all  the  others  refused  with  indignation.  .  .  .  The  Due  de 
Montebellp  (Lannes)  sent  an  aide-de-camp  to  summon 
the  city  to"  surrender,  but  some  butchers  and  other  low 
ruffians,  satellites  of  the  archduke,  fell  upon  him  and 
wounded  him.  The  archduke  ordered  the  wretch  who 
committed  this  crime  to  be  taken  through  the  city  in 
triumph,  mounted  on  the  horse  of  the  French  officer.  .  .  . 
During  the  bombardment  the  archduke  lost  his  head. 
As  weak  and  pusillanimous  as  he  had  been  arrogant,  he 
was  the  first  to  fly.      It   was    only  by  the   flight   of  the 

G  G  2 


452     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

archduke  that  the   respectable  General  O'Reilly  learned 
that  he  was  invested  with  the  command  of  the  place.  .  ,  . 
In  a  proclamation  to  the  army  of  the  same  date,  Na- 
poleon said  that — 

"  The  princes  of  the  House  of  Lorraine  have  aban- 
doned their  capital,  not  like  honourable  soldiers  yielding 
to  circumstances  and  the  reverses  of  war,  but  like 
perjurers  pursued  by  remorse.  In  flying  from  Vienna, 
their  adieux  to  the  inhabitants  were  murder  and  confla- 
gration ;  like  Medea,  they  strangled  their  children  with 
their  own  hands.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 


An  order  of  the  day,  dated  the  14th  May,  opened  thus  : 
— "  The  Emperor  is  sorry  to  see  the  disorders  committed 
in  the  rear  of  the  army ;  they  are  such  as  to  attract  his 
whole  attention.  Bad  men  endeavour  to  dishonour  the 
army,  and  instead  of  serving  with  their  colours  and  against 
the  enemy,  they  remain  in  the  rear,  where  they  commit  all 
kinds  of  excesses,  and  even  crimes."  And  his  Majesty  had 
to  form  a  military  commission  for  each  column  to  punish 
maurauders. 

On  the  same  day  another  letter  was  addressed  to  the 
librarian  Barbier,  who  had  forwarded  to  his  Majesty  a 
number  of  works,  which  he  found  useless.  Instead  of  an 
^neide  and  a  Milton  in  verse,  he  asked  for  those  works 
in  prose  ;  a  Tacitus  in  French,  the  Memoirs  of  de  Rets,  a 
selection  of  Madame  de  Sevigne's  Letters,  a  Gibbon,  a 
Tasso  in  Italian  and  French,  a  Camoenis,  Diodorus  Siculus, 
a  poem  called  La  Pitii  and  Gil  Bias. 

On  the  15th  May  Napoleon  addressed  a  proclamation 
to  the  Hungarians,  in  which  he  said — "  I  have  entered  the 
capital  of  Austria,  and  am  on  your  frontiers.  It  is  the 
Emperor  of  Austria,  and  not  the  King  of  Hungary,  who 
declared  war  against  me ;  by  your  constitution  he  could 
not   do   so  without  your    consent.  .  .  .  Hungarians,   the 


PAPAL   STATES    ANNEXED.  453 

moment  has  come  for  you  to  recover  your  independence. 
I  offer  you  peace,  the  integrity  of  your  territory.  &c.,  &c." 

On  the  17th  May,  Champagny  was  directed  to  draw  up 
a  note  for  the  senate,  proving  that  when  Charlemagne 
made  the  popes  temporal  sovereigns,  he  intended  them  to 
remain  vassals  of  the  empire,  and  that  now  they  refuse 
even  to  form  part  of  it ;  that  Charlemagne,  in  his  gene- 
rosity towards  the  popes,  had  in  view  the  welfare  of 
Christianity,  and  that  to-day  they  form  alliances  with 
Protestants  and  the  enemies  of  Christianity,  .  .  .  that  the 
chief  of  the  Catholic  religion  negotiates  with  Protestants, 
whereas  by  the  laws  of  the  Church  he  ought  to  excom- 
municate them.  (There  is  a  prayer  to  this  effect,  which 
is  recited  at  Rome.) 

And  after  a  long  letter  in  the  usual  tone  of  menace 
and  invective,  mixed  up  with  historical  precedents,  there 
came  a  decree. 

Art.  I.  The  Papal  States  are  united  to  the  French 
Empire. 

Art.  2.  The  city  of  Rome,  so  celebrated  as  the  first 
seat  of  Christianity,  is  declared  a  free  and  imperial  city. 

Art.  3.  The  remains  of  the  monuments  raised  by  the 
Romans,  shall  be  preserved  and  kept  in  repair  at  our 
expense. 

Art.  4.  The  public  debt  is  converted  into  an  imperial 
debt,  and  the  Pope  was  not  only  to  enjoy  a  revenue  of 
80,000/.  a  year,  but  was  to  pay  no  taxes,  &c. 

On  the  same  day  Napoleon  wrote  to  his  Minister  of 
Finance  on  the  subject  of  the  organisation  and  administra- 
tion of  the  Papal  States.  The  decrees  were  to  be  kept  a 
secret.  Among  other  things  his  Majesty  said — "  You 
must  see  that  the  Pope  is  treated  with  the  greatest 
respect.  You  must  leave  him  his  furniture,  his  pictures, 
his  jewels,  and  such  palaces  and  property  as  he  wishes 
to  keep.  But  you  must  tolerate  no  opposition.  It  is  not 
my  intention  to  derive  any  pecuniary  benefit  out  of  Rome. 
....  I  shall  have  a  palace  there.  .  .  .  The  tribunals  must 


454    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

be  organised  at  once,  as  well  as  the  marine.  You  must 
arrange  with  the  War  Minister  respecting  the  organisation 
of  the  artillery  and  engineers,  and  all  that  concerns  the 
army." 

On  the  1 8th  the  Emperor  wrote  a  long  note  on  connect- 
ing the  Louvre  with  the  Tuileries,  a  work  carried  out  by 
Napoleon  III.  He  remarked  in  this  note  that — "The 
court  resides  very  little  in  Paris.  The  Tuileries  and  the 
Louvre  arranged  will  suffice  to  lodge  the  sovereigns  of 
France  and  the  foreign  sovereigns  who  may  visit  them." 

As  a  fact,  the  palace  of  the  Tuileries,  from  the  time  of 
its  construction  to  the  time  of  its  destruction,  was  seldom 
inhabited  by  the  court.  The  Bourbons  all  disliked  Paris, 
and  built  Versailles,  while  Napoleon  infinitely  preferred 
St.  Cloud  or  Fontainebleau,  where  he  could  stroll  about 
the  grounds. 

To  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"  Ebersdorf,  19M  May,  1809. 

"You  have  greatly  alarmed  Paris  about  the  affairs  of 
Prussia.  Even  if  it  were  true  that  she  had  attacked  us, 
Prussia  is  of  no  consequence,  and  could  be  easily  subdued. 

.  .  You  have  not  shown  yourself  sufficiently  prudent  in 
this  matter.  It  creates  a  bad  effect  when,  a  power  thinks 
that  I  am  not  in  a  position  to  fight.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  same  day,  in  his  ninth  bulletin  to  the  army,  the 
Emperor  explained  the  position  of  the  two  hostile  forces, 
and  said  that  he  was  throwing  a  bridge  across  the  Danube 
two  leagues  below  Vienna.  On  the  23rd  May  he  issued 
another  bulletin^  in  which  he  described  the  desperate 
fighting  at  Essling  and  Aspern.  It  was  all  over,  he  said, 
with  the  Austrian  army  when  he  learned  that  his  bridges 
across  the  Danube  had  been  carried  away.  "  The  enemy 
was  in  the  most  terrible  disorder  when  he  learned  that  the 
bridges  were  broken."     "  The  French  remained  masters  of 


LAST    WORDS    OF    MARSHAL   LANNES.  455 

the  field."  The  loss  of  the  enemy  he  set  down  at  12,000  i 
his  own  at  1,100  killed  and  3,000  wounded.  A  touching 
description  was  then  given  of  the  death  of  Marshal  Lannes, 
who  had  his  legs  carried  away  by  a  round-shot.  On  seeing 
the  Emperor  he  threw  his  arms  round  his  neck,  exclaiming 
— "  In  an  hour  you  will  have  lost  one  who  dies  with  the 
glory,  and  in  the  conviction  of  having  been,  and  of  being, 
your  best  friend."  The  fighting  had  lasted  for  two  days, 
and  although  the  French  were  obliged  to  retreat  to  the  isle 
of  Loban,  Napoleon  claimed  the  victory. 

According  to  the  Archduke  Charles,  the  Austrians  lost 
over  20,000  men  in  killed  and  wounded,  while  7,000 
Frenchmen  were  buried  on  the  field  of  battle,  and  30,000 
were  taken  into  hospital  at  Vienna. 

It  was  the  custom  of  Napoleon,  as  before  remarked,  to 
place  in  the  mouth  of  each  officer  of  distinction  who  fell  on 
the  field  of  battle  some  last  words  flattering  to  himself 
Lanfrey,  in  his  History  of  Napoleon,  thinks  it  far  more 
likely  that  Lannes,  instead  of  pronouncing  the  words 
attributed  to  him  in  the  bulletin,  upbraided  the  Emperor 
for  his  ambition,  and  for  gambling  away  the  lives  of  those 
who  served  him.  This  was  the  tale  which  the  friends  of 
Lannes  told  the  doctor  who  embalmed  him ;  and  it  gathers 
probability,  not  only  from  the  fact  of  the  habitual  mis- 
representions  of  Napoleon,  but  because  it  is  well  known 
that  at  the  epoch  in  question  most  of  the  imperial 
marshals  were  tired  of  constantly  fighting,  and  wished  to 
enjoy  their  hardly-earned,  if  ill-gotten,  spoils. 

To  THE  EMPRESS,  AT  Strasburg. 

"  Ebersdorf,  27/;%  May,  1809. 
"  I  send  you  a  page  to  say  that  Eugene  has  joined  me 
with  all  his  army,  that  he  has  perfectly  fulfilled  his  mission, 
and  has  almost  entirely  destroyed  the  army  opposed  to 

him.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 


45^     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

On  the  31st  the  Emperor  sent  Fouch^  a  letter  in  which 
he  said — 


"  The  Danube  is  still  rising.  I  am  busy  on  the 
left  bank  constructing  impregnable  works.  ...  I  am  not 
yet  sufficiently  sure  of  my  bridges  to  attack  and  overthrow 
the  army  of  Prince  Charles.  ...  I  have  formed  my 
junction  with  the  army  of  Italy,  which  obtained  some 
great  successes  on  the  road.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

In  his  fourteenth  bulletin,  dated  the  1st  June,  Napoleon 
was  able  to  announce  that  his  bridges  were  complete.  He 
also  said — "  Vienna  is  tranquil.  There  is  an  abundance  of 
bread  and  wine,  but  meat,  which  was  drawn  from  Hun- 
gary, is  scarce.  Contrary  to  all  political  reasons  and  all 
motives  of  humanitj'-,  the  enemy  do  all  that  is  possible  to 
starve  their  countrymen.  .  .  .  This  is  far  from  the  conduct 
of  our  Henri  IV.,  who  fed  Paris  while  he  was  besieging  it."  ^ 

On  the  3rd  June  the  War  Minister  was  directed  to  write 
to  the  King  of  Spain,  saying  that  the  Emperor  could  not 
understand  his  inactivity,  and  calling  upon  him  not  to 
allow  Marshal  Soult  to  be  overwhelmed. 

Writing  to  General  Clarke  on  the  7th  June,  Napoleon 
complained  bitterly  of  Marshal  Jourdan,  and  said  that  he 
could  foresee  catastrophes.  "  The  English,"  he  added, 
"have  been  allowed  time  to  re-form  an  army  at  Lisbon. 
The  staff  has  been  guilty  of  the  culpable  negligence  of 
leaving  Soult  three  months  without  communications.  .  .  . 
The  indolence  of  the  staff  in  Spain  is  such  that  it  remained 
for  months  without  any  communication  with  Marshal  Ney. 
...  It  is  difficult  to  conceive  such  incapacity.  .  .  .  An 
army  is  nothing  without  a  head,  and  it  must  be  ad- 
mitted that  there  is  none  in  Spain.  .  .  .  The  English  alone 

'  In  another  bulletin,  written  at  the  end  of  the  month,  it  is  said — 
"Vienna  is  abundantly  supplied  with  meat." 


DEATH    OF    SCHILL.  457 

are  redoubtable.  Alone,  if  the  army  be  not  better 
commanded,  they  will,  before  long,  bring  about  a 
catastrophe."  .  .  . 

On  the  9th  June  the  Emperor  wrote  to  King  Jerome  to 
reassure  him  on  the  subject  of  an  apprehended  attack  on 
the  part  of  the  English,  the  Duke  of  Brunswick,  and  the 
raids  of  "that  brigand  Schill."  In  this  letter  Napoleon 
said — 

"Before  making  a  movement  one  must  see  clear. 
.  .  .  Experience  will  teach  you  to  distinguish  between 
rumours  spread  by  the  enemy  and  facts.  Never,  during 
the  sixteen  years  that  I  have  commanded,  have  I  given  a 
counter  order  to  a  regiment,  because  I  always  wait  until  an 
affair  is  ripe,  and  that  I  can  understand  it  before  beginning 
operations.  .  .  .  Exercise  your  troops  ;  make  yourself  loved 
for  your  economy,  order,  and  a  certain  good  nature,  which 
is  the  character  of  the  Germans." 

Writing  again  to  his  brother  on  the  I2tli,  the  Emperor 
said — "  I  have  not  yet  received  your  account  of  the  death 
of  Schill,  and  the  capture  of  his  band." 

On  the  1 2th  June  Napoleon  gave  orders  for  the  corps  of 
Marmont,  Soult,  and  Ney  to  operate  together  and  to  drive 
the  English  into  the  sea.  The  command  of  this  force  of 
50,000  or  60,000  men  was  given  to  Soult.  If  the  junction 
could  be  rapidly  formed  it  was  the  opinion  of  the  Emperor 
that  the  English  might  be  exterminated  and  the  affairs  of 
Spain  brought  to  a  close. 

To  THE  EMPRESS. 

"  SCHCENBRUNN,  \(ith  Jutie,  1809. 

"  I  send  you  a  page  to  announce  that  on  the  14th,  the 
anniversary  of  Marengo,  Eugene  gained  a  battle  over  the 
Archduke  John,  captured  3,000  men,  several  guns,  four 
colours,  and  pursued  the  enemy  a  long  distance  on  the 
road  to  Buda. 

"  Napoleon." 


458  THE   CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"  ScHCENBRUNN,  I'jth  June,  1809, 

"  I  reply  to  your  letter  concerning  Carnot  and  the 
unfortunate  state  of  his  affairs.  If  he  had  merely  helped 
to  relieve  Manberige  he  would  have  been  entitled  to  my 
gratitude  and  interest.  As  Minister  of  War  he  has  a  right 
to  a  pension.  ...  I  shall  make  no  difficulty  about  em- 
ploying him  as  he  wishes.  Let  me  know  the  nature  of  his 
embarrassments,  and  what  must  be  done  to  get  him  out 
of  them. 

"  Napoleon." 


Carnot,  entirely  ruined,  had  applied  to  General  Clarke 
for  employment  in  the  army. 

On  the  2ist  the  Emperor  found  time  to  write  a  few  lines 
on  the  subject  of  Spain  to  his  War  Minister.  In  a  post- 
script his  Majesty  said — "  It  appears  that  the  English  are 
being  reinforced  in  Portugal.  It  is  from  thence  that  evil 
will  come  if  they  do  not  manoeuvre  well  at  Madrid." 

In  a  letter  to  the  King  of  Bavaria,  of  the  22nd  June,  the 
Emperor  said  that  he  had  heard  of  a  good  many  pamph- 
lets being  circulated  at  Nuremberg.  And  this  in  spite  of 
the  execution  ef  the  unfortunate  Palm  ! 

Writing  to  General  Clarke  on  the  27th,  the  Emperor 
said — 

"You  announce  the  departure  of   forty-eight  artillery 

cadets,  and  only  fifty  remain.   ...  All  my  staffs  here  are 

empty,  and  I  shall  be  obliged,  in  default  of  officers,  to  take 

the  senior  sergeants,  who  are  not  worth  them.  ...  It  was 

useless  to  speak  in  the  Moniieur  of  the  artillery  broken  and 

lost :  that  was  good  only  to  excite  our  numerous  enemies 

against  us. 

"  Napoleon." 


RUSSIANS   AND   AUSTRIANS.  459 

To  COMTE  FOUCH^. 

"  SCHCENBRUNN,  30/A  June,  1809. 
"  See  who  it  is  influences  the  Prussian  ambassador.  It 
is  impossible  to  conceive  the  stupidities  and  the  infamies 
which  he  sends  to  his  court.  Is  this  man  a  fool,  or  cunning, 
or  is  he  the  sport  of  some  Paris  intriguer  .''  He  writes  to 
Berlin  that  my  affairs  are  in  a  desperate  condition,  and  that 
the  discontent  in  France  is  at  its  height ;  and  all  this  in 
order  to  prevent  Prussia  from  paying  me.  This  man  must 
be  a  fool  or  very  malevolent. 

'■  Napoleon." 


On  the  2nd  July  appeared  the  order  for  passing  the 
Danube  dated  from  Ik  Napoleon,  and  the  next  day,  in  the 
twenty-fourth  bulletin  the  Emperor  wrote  : — "  At  last  the 
Danube  no  longer  exists  for  the  French  army  ;  General 
Bertrand  has  executed  works  which  excite  astonishment 
and  which  inspire  admiration.  .  .  .  Now  that  the  passage 
of  the  Danube  is  assured,  the  fate  of  the  Austrian  monarchy 
will  be  decided  in  one  affair.  .  .  .  Prince  Gargarine,  aide- 
de-camp  to  the  Czar  has  arrived.  He  brought  the  news  of 
the  march  of  the  Russian  army  in  Galicia." 

As  a  matter  of  fact  the  Russians  did  nothing.  As 
Napoleon  complained  they  allowed  the  Archduke  Fer- 
dinand to  take  Warsaw  under  their  eyes,  while  General 
Gortschakoff  actually  wrote  a  letter  to  the  Austrian  prince 
congratulating  him  on  his  success. 

To  THE  EMPRESS  JOSEPHINE. 

"  Ebersdorf,  Tth  July,  1809. 
"  I  send  a  page  to  give  you  the  good  news  of  the  victory 
which  I  gained  at  Enzersdorf  on  the   5th,  and   that   of 
Wagram  gained  on  the  6th. 

"  The  army  of  the  enemy  is  flying  in  disorder.  Every- 
thing is  going  on  according  to  my  wishes.     Eugene  is  well. 


460    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Prince  Aldobrandini  is  slightly  wounded  ;  Bessieres  had 
his  thigh  grazed  by  a  round-shot.  Lasalle  was  killed.  My 
losses  were  heavy,  but  the  victory  was  decisive  and  com- 
plete. We  have  taken  over  a  hundred  guns,  twelve 
colours,  and  a  large  number  of  prisoners.  I  am  burned  by 
the  sun.  Adieu,  my  friend,  I  embrace  you.  A  grea 
many  things  to  Hortense. 

"  Napoleon." 


According  to  Savary,  Jomini,  and  other  authorities,  the 
Austrians  did  not  fl)'  in  disorder,  but  fell  back  unmolested, 
leaving  behind  them  no  other  trophies  than  a  few  thousand 
wounded  men  and  some  dismounted  guns.  In  his  twenty- 
fifth  bulletin,  written  upon  the  8th  July,  Napoleon  set 
down  the  Austrians  at  60,000  men ;  he  captured,  he  said, 
20,000  prisoners,  ten  flags,  and  forty  guns  ! 

In  a  letter  to  General  Clarke  of  the  8th  July,  Napoleon 
said  : — "  As  for  Spanish  affairs,  write  to  Madrid  that  the 
coup  de  Jarnac  wWl  come  from  the  English  unless  matters 
be  better  managed.  I  tremble  lest  the  English  debouchant 
from  Portugal  by  Abrantes  should  surprise  the  King  at 
Madrid  by  concealing  their  movements." 

On  the  9th  July  Napoleon  wrote  a  friendly  letter  to  the 
Czar  announcing  his  victory  over  the  Austrians  and  at  the 
same  time  orders  were  sent  to  Caulaincourt  to  complain  of 
the  traitorous  conduct  of  Prince  Galitzen  in  refusing  to 
succour  Sandomir,  an  act  which  made  Napoleon  doubt  the 
sincerity  of  the  Russian  alliance. 

On  the  13th  July  a  suspension  of  arms  was  agreed  upon, 
and  the  same  day  the  Emperor  wrote  a  circular  to  the 
French  bishops,  ordering  thanksgivings  for  his  victories 
and  referring  to  his  quarrels  with  the  Pope.  He  said : — 
"  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  although  sprung  from  the  blood 
of  David,  did  not  desire  any  temporal  power  ;  He  wished 
on  the  contrary  that  Csesar  should  be  obeyed  in  matters 
concerning  this  world.     He  was  animated  only  by  His  great 


BULL   OF   EXCOMMUNICATION.  46 1 

object  the  redemption  and  salvation  of  souls.  The  heir  to  the 
power  of  Csesar,  we  are  resolved  to  maintain  the  independ- 
ence of  our  throne  and  the  integrity  of  our  rights." 

To  THE  MINISTER  OF  PUBLIC  WORSHIP. 

"  SCHCENBRUNN,  I'^th  July,  1809. 
"The  bull  of  excommunication  is  so  ridiculous  a  docu- 
ment that  it  does  not  deserve  attention.  What  does 
deserve  attention  is  to  provide  for  the  vacant  sees.  It  is 
necessary  to  know  what  the  Pope  intends  doing  ...  if  he 
does  not  confirm  the  bishops  according  to  the  terms  of 
the  concordat  he  will  create  a  schism  in  the  Church.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 


The  excommunication  had  long  been  drawn  up,  but 
Pius  VII.  was  afraid  to  fulminate  it  until  at  last  persuaded 
to  do  so  by  Cardinal  Pacca.  He  then  declared  that  "  The 
dark  designs  of  the  enemies  of  the  apostolic  see  have  at 
length  been  accomplished." 

"After  the  violent  and  unjust  spoliation  of  the  fairest 
and  most  considerable  portion  of  our  dominions  .  .  .  • 
we  find  ourselves  entirely  stripped  of  our  temporal 
sovereignty.  .    .  . 

"We  reject  with  the  firmest  resolution  any  allowance 
which  the  Emperor  of  the  French  may  intend  to  assign 
us,"  &c.,  &c. 

Afterwards  followed  the  excommunication — 

"  By  the  authority  of  God  Almighty  and  of  St.  Paul  and 
of  St.  Peter,  we  declare  you,  and  all  your  co-operators,  in 
the  act  of  violence  which  you  are  executing,  to  have  in- 
curred the  same  excommunication  which  in  our  apostolic 
letters  we  declared  to  have  been  incurred  by  all  those  who, 
on  the  invasion  of  this  city  on  the  2nd  February  last  year^ 
were  guilty  of  acts  of  violence."  .  .  . 


462  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  THE  KING  OF  DENMARK. 

"  SCHCENBRUNN,  l^tk  July,  1809, 

"  I  have  received  your  Majesty's  letter  of  the  6th.  I  had 
anticipated  it  by  thanking  you  for  the  proof  you  gave  me 
of  your  friendship  by  sending  troops  against  Schill.  I  was 
much  pleased  with  this  attention  on  the  part  of  your 
Majesty,  as  also  with  the  good  conduct  and  gallantry 
displayed  by  the  Danish  troops.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

to  king  louis  of  holland. 

"  SCHCENBRUNN,  \Ttk  July,  1809. 
"  You  complain  of  an  article  in  a  newspaper ;  it  is 
France  which  has  reason  to  complain  of  the  ill-feeling 
■which  reigns  in  Holland.  It  would  be  easy  for  me  to 
name  all  the  Dutch  houses  which  are  the  trumpeters  of 
England.  Your  custom-house  regulations  are  badly 
'executed,  and  all  the  correspondence  of  England  with  the 
Continent  passes  through  Holland.  It  may  not  be  your 
fault,  but  it  is  not  the  less  true  that  Holland  is  an  English 
province. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  COMTE  FOUCHE. 

"SCHCENBRUNN,  I'ith  July,  1809. 

"  I  have  received  at  the  same  time  the  two  inclosed 
letters  from  General  Miollis.  I  am  sorry  that  the  Pope 
was  arrested  ;  it  was  a  great  piece  of  folly.  Cardinal 
Pacca  should  have  been  arrested  and  the  Pope  allowed  to 
remain  quietly  at  Rome.  But  there  is  no  remedy ;  what 
is  done  is  done. 

"  I  don't  know  what  Prince  Borghese  has  done,  but  my 
intention  is  that  the  Pope  shall  not  enter  France.  The 
best  place  for  him  will  be  at  Savona.  There  is  a  large 
house  there  where  he  will  be  comfortable  ...  I  shall  not 
oppose  his  return  to  Rome  if  his  madness  be  passed.  .  .  . 


CROWN    JEWELS    OF    SPAIN.  463 

Let  Cardinal  Pacca  be  thrown  into  Fenestrelle,  and  inform 
him  that  if  a  single  Frenchman  be  assassinated  at  his 
instigation  he  shall  pay  for  it  with  his  head. 

"  Napoleon." 


To  MARSHAL  LEFEBVRE. 

"  ScHCENBRUNN,  loth  July,  1809. 

'"  You  know  my  intentions  concerning  an  expedition  into 
the  Tyrol.  I  wish  you  to  be  at  Inspruck  on  the  1st 
August.  No  ridiculous  proclamations  ;  be  severe  ;  disarm 
the  country;  take  a  large  number  of  hostages  and  make 
examples.    Act  with  as  much  celerity  as  you  can. 

"  Napoleon." 


The  war  with  France  was  more  popular  in  the  Tyrol  than 
anywhere,  the  people  being  anxious  to  shake  off  the 
hated  Bavian  yoke  and  to  be  once  more  united  to  Austria. 
It  was  not  until  peace  had  been  concluded  at  Vienna  that 
the  French  were  able  to  break  the  resistance  of  the  gallant 
mountaineers  and  to  capture  Hofer. 

It  will  be  remembered  how  anxious  Napoleon  was  that 
no  one  should  make  away  with  the  crown  jewels  in 
Spain. 

To  COMTE  FOUCH^. 

"  SCHCENBRUNN,  list  July,  1809. 

"  I  see  that  there  is  some  question  of  the  casket  of  dia- 
monds belonging  to  Don  Antonio.  I  should  like  to  have  a 
list  of  these  in  order  to  see  if  they  do  not  belong  to  the 
crown  jewels  of  Spain,  which  cannot  be  found.  King  Charles 
swears  that  he  left  them  in  Spain.  These  diamonds  are 
worth  about  50,000,000  francs.  Have  this  matter  examined, 
it  is  most  important. 

"  Napoleon." 


464  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF   NAPOLEON, 

To  THE  EMPEROR  OF  AUSTRIA. 

"  SCHCENBRUNN,  22nd  July,  1809. 

"  Prince  Leichstenstein  has  handed  me  your  Majesty's 
letter,  in  which  you  inform  me  that  that  you  have  ap- 
pointed negotiators  to  treat  for  peace.  On  my  side  I  have 
given  my  instructions  and  full  powers  to  Comte  de  Cham- 
pagny.  ...  If  the  fourth  treaty  of  peace  succeeding  those 
of  Campo  Formio,  Luneville  and  Presburg,  can  be  the  last, 
secure  in  a  durable  manner  the  tranquillity  of  the  Conti- 
nent and  protect  it  from  the  clamours  and  intrigues  of 
England,  I  shall  regard  this  moment  as  most  fortunate  ; 
for,  in  the  four  wars  which  your  Majesty  had  waged  against 
France,  the  three  last  were  superfluous,  and  advantageous 
only  to  England. 

"  Napoleon." 

to  prince  cambac^res 

"  SCHCENBRUNN,  2yd  July,  1809. 
"  It  was  without  my  orders  and  against  my  will  that  the 
Pope  was  arrested.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

When  M.  de  Champagny  was  setting  out  to  meet  the 
Austrian  commissioners  the  Emperor  handed  him  a 
wonderful  note.  He  was  to  make  the  following  declara- 
tion : — 

"  France  has  always  desired  the  peace  of  the  Continent, 
as  England  has  always  found  it  to  her  interest  to  foment 
trouble,  divisions  and  war. 

"After  the  peace  of  Presburg,  that  of  Tilsit  and  the 
expedition  to  Copenhagen,  England  could  find  no  other 
expedient  for  troubling  the  continental  system  established 
than  by  wresting  Spain  from  the  French  alliance,  well  know- 
ing that  France  would  consider  a  change  of  system  in  Spain 
as  equivalent  to  a  declaration  of  war.  All  the  efforts  of 
the  cabinet  of  London  failed  in  presence  of  the  constant 


IMPERIAL   PROPERTY.  465 

friendship  of  Charles  IV.  That  cabinet  then  conceived 
and  executed  the  horrible  plan  of  arming  a  son  against 
his  father.  .  .  .  However,  all  Spain  was  up  in  arms  and 
French  troops  had  to  be  sent  there.  It  was  then  that  the 
court  of  Vienna  deemed  the  moment  favourable  to  break 
the  treaty  of  Presburg.  .  .  .  France  never  envied  any  of 
the  Austrian  possessions.  In  three  successive  wars  she 
restored  immense  territories  without  any  compensation. 
She  hoped  in  exchange  for  this  moderation  to  have  earned 
the  friendship  and  gratitude  of  the  sovereign  of  Austria.  The 
same  generosity  which  the  Emperor  showed  at  Presburg  he 
is  willing  to  show  again.  But  his  Majesty  owes  it  to  his 
subjects  to  make  sure  that  the  cabinet  of  Vienna  really 
desires  peace  and  not  simply  to  create  a  diversion  in  favour 
of  England." 

In  a  "  note  "  to  Cambac^r^s,  dated  August  2nd,  we  see 
it  stated  that — "  His  Majesty  has  reserved  for  himself  pro- 
perty in  Spain.  He  has  reserved  [for  himself  in  Germany 
numerous  estates,  &c.  He  has  also  reserved  for  himself  in 
the  kingdom  of  Italy  and  Naples  rights  having  an  important 
value."  After  pages  of  details  this  memorandum  goes  on  : 
— "  It  is  indispensable  to  introduce  law  and  order  into  this 
mass  of  property  which  his  Majesty  has  reserved  for 
himself,  which  he  has  given,  or  intends  to  give,  to  his 
distinguished  servants."  .  . 

On  the  3rd  in  a  letter  to  Davoust  the  Emperor  said  : — 
"  The  enemy  is  said  to  be  forming  an  intrenched  camp  in 
front  of  Olmutz  ;  he  has  evacuated  Bohemia  and  is  march- 
ing into  Hungary."  And  in  a  letter  to  Bertrand  he  spoke 
of  placing  Vienna  in  a  state  of  defence  in  the  event  of 
hostilities  recommencing.- 

To  COMTE  FOUCH^. 

"  SCHCENBRUNN,  (>th  August,  1809. 
"  I  wish    that    Cardinal    Pacca    had   been    arrested  at 
Rome  and  that  they  had  left  the  Pope  alone.     I  wish  that 
as  the  Pope  was  not  left   at  Genoa   that   he   had    been 
VOL.  II.  H  H 


466     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

conveyed  to  Savona,  but  since  he  is  at  Grenoble  I  should 
regret  to  learn  that  he  has  been  sent  to  Savona  ;  it  would 
be  better  to  keep  him  at  Grenoble  as  he  is  there  ;  it  would 
seem  to  be  trifling  with  the  old  man.  I  did  not  authorise 
Cardinal  Fesch  to  send  any  one  to  his  holiness.  I  simply 
informed  the  minister  of  public  worship  that  I  wished 
Cardinal  Maury  and  other  prelates  to  write  to  the  Pope 
saying  that  if  he  renounced  the  Concordat,  I,  on  my  side, 
should  consider  it  null  and  void.  I  suppose  that  you  have 
sent  Cardinal  Pacca  to  Fenestrelle.  I  make  a  great  dis- 
tinction between  him  and  the  Pope,  first  on  account  of  his 
position,  and  then  as  regards  his  moral  virtues.  The  Pope 
is  a  good  man,  but  ignorant  and  fanatical.  Cardinal  Pacca 
is  a  well-informed  man  and  a  scamp,  an  enemy  to  France 
who  deserves  no  consideration.  As  soon  as  I  know  where 
the  Pope  is  I  shall  adopt  definitive  measures.  Be  it  under- 
stood that  if  you  have  already  allowed  him  to  start  for 
Savona  you  must  not  make  him  return." 

Numerous  letters  were  now  written  on  the  subject  of  the 
Walcheren  expedition,  which  was  frequently  characterised 
by  Napoleon  as  a  mad  and  suicidal  act  on  the  part  of 
England.  On  the  6th  August  he  remarked  in  a  letter  to 
Clarke  : — "  After  the  advantages  which  we  have  gained 
here  I  presume  that  the  French  will  not  allow  themselves 
to  be  insulted  by  20,000  Englishmen.  I  cannot  see  what  the 
English  can  do ;  they  will  not  be  able  to  take  Flushing,  as 
the  dykes  can  be  cut.  They  will  not  take  the  squadron, 
because  it  can  go  up  to  Antwerp." 

And  again  the  next  day  : — "  It  appears  to  me  that  the 
enemy  is  intent  upon  taking  the  isle  of  Walcheren.  I  have 
ordered  General  Monnet  if  he  be  hard  pressed  to  cut  the 
dykes.  Reiterate  this  order.  .  .  .  Flushing  cannot  be 
taken,  as  Monnet  can  put  everything  under  water." 

The  day  afterwards  : — "  If  the  English  invest  and  besiege 
Flushing  I  see  no  means  of  driving  them  away  by  force. 
Flushing  must  find  safety  in  inundating  the  island." 


THE    ISLE    OF    WALCHEREN.  467 

Again  on  the  9th  :  "  To  speak  confidentially  it  is  possible, 
when  all  this  is  terminated,  that  I  shall  occupy  the  coasts 
of  Holland  in  order  to  close  her  ports  to  the  English.  .  . 
With  his  force  General  Rampon  could  not  drive  off  the 
English  ;  he  would  be  beaten.  Fever  and  inundation  will 
render  an  account  of  the  English.  ...  As  long  as  they 
remain  in  the  isle  of  Walcheren  there  is  nothing  to  fear. 
They  will  lose  two  months  in  front  of  Flushing ;  fever  and 
inundation  will  do  the  rest.  .  .  .  Allow  them  to  lash  their 
buttocks  in  the  marshes  and  pursue  the  shadow  of  a 
prey."  ... 

And  to  Cambacer^s  on  the  loth :  "  I  regret  that  you 
have  made  so  little  use  of  the  powers  I  gave  you.  .  .  .  Do 
not  allow  the  English  to  capture  you  in  bed.  .  .  . 

An  angry  letter  to  the  same  effect  was  addressed  to 
General  Clarke,  who  was  directed,  if  the  English  made  any 
progress,  to  raise  30,000  more  national  guards.  "It  is 
evident  that  the  English  wish  to  capture  my  squadron  and 
Antwerp." 

Napoleon,  on  taking  the  field  against  Austria,  had  left 
the  reins  of  government  in  the  hands  of  Fouche,  Cam- 
bac^res,  and  Clarke.  When  the  English  landed  in 
Holland  the  two  latter  were  afraid  to  assume  a  responsi- 
bility which  Fouche  unhesitatingly  took  on  his  shoulders, 
calling  out  the  national  guard  in  the  north  of  France  and 
confiding  the  command  of  the  army  in  Holland  to 
Bernadotte. 

To  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"  SCHCENBRUNN,  "jth  August,  1809. 

"  You  send  me  no  news  about  Spain.  The  king,  on  the 
25th  July,  wrote  that  General  Wellesley  had  arrived  at 
Talavera  with  25,000  Englishmen,  and  had  formed  his 
junction  with  Cuesta. 

"It  is  unfortunate  that  Marshal  Soult  should  have 
manoeuvred  so  badly,  and  not  have  joined  the  king.      I 

H  H  2 


468     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

hope  that  the  king,  with  55,000  men,  has  taken  up  a  posi- 
tion so  as  to  foil  any  attempt  upon  Madrid,  and  that  he 
will  order  Soult  to  join  him  ;  he  will  then  have  more  than 
100,000  men.  This  will  be  a  fine  opportunity  for  giving 
the  English  a  lesson,  and  for  finishing  the  war. 

"  Napoleon." 


On  the  1 8th  August  Napoleon  addressed  this  short 
epistle  to  General  Clarke — "  I  see  that  there  are  no 
letters  from  Spain  to-day.  I  am  anxious  for  news  from 
that  country,  and  to  learn  the  movements  of  Marshal 
Soult.  What  a  fine  opportunity  has  been  lost !  30,000 
English  at  150  leagues  from  the  coast  in  front  of  100,000 
of  the  best  troops  in  the  world  !  My  God !  what  it  is 
to  have  an  army  without  a  chief!" 

In  a  letter  of  the  20th  August,  addressed  to  Champagny, 
the  Emperor  said — "  As  for  Spain  things  are  going  on 
well ;  Soult  is  on  the  rear  of  the  English,  who  are  retreat- 
ing. The  King  of  Spain  is  at  Toledo.  In  the  battle  of 
Talavera  the  English  had  a  third  of  their  army  put  hors 
de  combat.     They  lost  10,000  men." 

The  next  day,  in  a  letter  to  his  War  Minister,  Napoleon 
wrote — "Inform  Marshal  Jourdan  that  I  am  extremely 
displeased  with  the  inaccuracies  and  falsehoods  contained 
in  his  reports  of  the  26th,  27th,  28th,  and  29th  July,  and 
that  this  is  the  first  time  in  which  the  government  has  been 
so  trifled  with.  He  said  on  the  28th  that  he  had  seized 
upon  the  field  of  battle  at  Talavera,  while  subsequent 
reports  show  that  we  were  repulsed  the  whole  day  long. 
Tell  him  that  this  infidelity  towards  the  government  is  a 
regular  crime,  and  that  this  crime  might  have  had  fatal 
results,  as  the  news  that  the  English  had  been  beaten  was 
about  to  influence  my  determinations.  .  .  .  He  may  say 
what  he  likes  in  the  journal  of  Madrid,  but  he  has  no  right 
to  disguise  the  truth  from  the  government." 

Wellington  has  been  censured  for  having  plunged  reck- 


TALAVERA.  469 

lessly  into  Spain,  and  for  gaining  a  victory  which  led  to  no 
results. 

Napoleon,  after  blaming  the  conduct  of  Soult,  said 
that  his  march  on  Placencia  was  dangerous  because  the 
other  army  beaten  at  Talavera  compromised  the  security 
of  all  his  armies  in  Spain.  "  While  the  English  had 
nothing  to  fear,  as  in  three  hours'  time  they  could  place 
themselves  behind  the  Tagus  ;  and  whether  they  repassed 
the  river  at  Talavera,  at  Almarez,  or  elsewhere,  they  had 
their  line  of  operation  on  Badajos  secure. 

"  My  best  troops  and  the  fate  of  Spain  have  therefore 
been  compromised  by  ignorance  of  the  rules  of  war,  and 
this  without  the  chance  of  obtaining  any  result  in  case  of 
success.  .  .  .  On  reaching  Talavera,  they  knew  that  they 
were  in  presence  of  the  English  army,  and  it  was  the 
greatest  absurdity  to  have  attacked  it,  without  first 
reconnoitring.  .  .  .  My  troops  were  led  to  the  shambles. 
....  Having  resolved  to  deliver  battle,  the  attack  was 
weakly  made,  since  my  arms  have  undergone  an  affront, 
and  that  12,000  in  reserve  [told  off  to  watch  the  Spaniards] 
never  fired  a  shot.  ...  It  required  the  union  of  all  these 
faults  for  an  army  like  my  army  of  Spain  to  be  braved  by 
30,000  English ;  but  as  long  as  they  will  attack  good 
troops,  like  the  English,  in  good  positions,  without  making 
sure  that  they  can  be  carried,  my  men  will  be  led  to  death 
to  no  purpose." 

In  a  second  letter  to  Champagny,  dated  the  24th  August, 
and  containing  instructions  for  the  French  ambassador  at 
St.  Petersburg,  Napoleon  wrote — "  You  must  give  M.  de 
Caulaincourt  news  of  the  Dutch  and  Spanish  expedi- 
tions. You  must  tell  him  that  the  English  have  been  beaten 
in  Spain,  although  they  claim  the  victory ;  and  that  the 
proof  is.  Lord  Wellesley  has  returned  to  Portugal." 

The  same  day,  in  a  letter  to  the  War  Minister,  his 
Majesty  said^"  You  will  find  inclosed  a  report  from 
General  Sebastiani,  forwarded  to  me  by  the  King  of 
Spain.      As  soon  as  I  receive  that  of  Marshal  Victor,  I 


470  THE   CORRESPONDEiXCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

shall  see  what  will  be  suitable  to  put  in  the  Moniteiir.  You 
will  see  by  the  report  of  the  English  General  Wellesley, 
that  we  lost  twenty  guns  and  three  flags.  Express  my 
astonishment  to  the  king,  and  my  displeasure  to  Marshal 
Jourdan,  that  they  send  me  carmagnoles  instead  of  telling 
me  the  truth.  Who  were  the  gunners  who  abandoned 
their  pieces,  the  infantry  divisions  who  allowed  themselves 
to  be  captured  ?  .  .  ." 

One  must  turn  to  the  pages  of  Comte  Miot  de  Melito, 
who  was  at  Madrid  when  the  battle  of  Talavera  was  fought, 
to  realise  the  panic  which  reigned  in  that  city,  and  which 
would  have  been  justified  had  Cuesta  seconded  the  efforts 
of  Sir  Arthur  Wellesley,  and  had  the  Junta  of  Seville  not 
delayed  the  march  of  Venegas.^  Some  of  the  partisans  of 
Joseph  took  refuge  in  the  Retiro,  while  the  court  and  the 
foreign  ministers  fled  to  St.  Ildefonso.  As  for  the  popula- 
tion of  Madrid,  it  crowded  to  the  gates  to  welcome  the 
victorious  armies,  and  it  was  not  for  more  then  a  week  that 
this  alarm  subsided.  The  count  admits,  and  so  does 
Lanfrey,  that  the  the  British  army  had  to  bear  nearly 
the  entire  brunt  of  Talavera,  and  the  latter  writer  very 
fairly  explains  the  reasons  which  obliged  the  British 
general  to  fall  back  after  having  dealt  King  Joseph 
and  Marshal  Victor  so  sharp  a  blow.  The  letter  in 
which  poor  Joseph  endeavoured  to  soothe  the  wrath  of 
his  brother  contain  some  curious  passages.    For  instance — 

JOSEPH  TO  NAPOLEON. 

"  list  July,  1809. 
" ....  If  I  regret  anything  it  is  that  I  did  not  take  the 
whole  English  army  prisoner.      This  is  what  would  have 
happened  if  daylight  had  lasted  two  hours  longer  on  the 

1  Lanfrey  says  that  Venegas  was  kept  inactive  at  a  moment  when 
he  might  have  captured  Madrid,  and  changed  the  whole  face  of  affairs, 
and  this  because  the  Junta  of  Seville  was  jealous  of  the  growing 
power  of  Cuesta.  Fortunately  for  the  Spaniards,  the  French  com- 
manders were  also  jealous  of  each  other. 


FLUSHING  .SURRENDERS.  47  I 

27th."  And  on  the  8th  August—" ....  I  hope  that  your 
Majesty  will  not  be  dissatisfied  [the  British  army  falling 
back  on  Portugal],  although  I  sincerely  think  that  had  you 
been  in  my  place,  not  a  single  Englishman  would  have 
escaped,  and  the  war  in  Spain  would  have  been  finished  ; 
but  I  am  engaged  in  a  profession  which  is  not  learned  in  a 
day.  ..." 

To  THE  COMTE  DE  CHAMPAGNY. 

"  SCHCENBRUNN,  18M  August,  1809. 

".  .  .  .  I  send  you   the  despatches  from  St.  Petersburg. 

There  is  nothing  new.     However,  you  will  remark  that 

there  is  always  something  obscure  as  regards  the  wishes  of 

that  cabinet.      It  might  have  explained  more  clearly  its 

intentions  with  regard  to  Galicia. 

"  Napoleon." 

The  fact  is,  that  the  French  alliance  was  highly  un- 
popular with  the  Russians,  and  there  seemed  some  pro- 
bability of  Alexander  sharing  the  fate  of  Paul.  More 
than  once  hostilities  had  been  on  the  point  of  breaking 
out,  and  but  for  Wagram  they  would  have  broken  out  in 
consequence  of  Napoleon  acting  with  his  usual  duplicity, 
and  fomenting  an  insurrection  in  Galicia. 

To  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"  SCHCENBRUNN,  %/Sfth  AugUSt,  1809. 

"  It  is  repugnant  to  my  feelings  to  suppose  that  Flushing 
has  surrendered ;  that  appears  to  me  impossible.  There 
would  be  in  that  conduct  an  amount  of  cowardice  approach- 
ing to  treason.  Flushing  can  defend  itself  as  long  as  it  has 
a  morsel  of  bread.     The  enemy  cannot  have  destroyed  the 

means  of  inundation.  ... 

"  Napoleon. 

Writing  to  King  Murat  on  the  27th,  Napoleon  said  that 
Wellesley  had  been  beaten  in  Spain,  but  that  he  greatly 
feared  Flushing  had  been  taken. 


472     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

On  the  22nd  September  the  Emperor  sent  orders  to 
the  Minister  of  Marine  to  station  a  flotilla  in  the  Gulf  of 
Vado,  so  as  to  prevent  the  Pope  escaping  by  sea.  In  fact 
a  plot  had  been  discovered  for  getting  his  Holiness  on 
board  an  English  frigate,  the  success  of  which  would  have 
been  gall  and  wormwood  to  Napoleon. 


To  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"SCHCENBRUNN,  4//%  September,  1809. 

"  I  have  seen  in  the  Moniteur  the  details  you  inserted 
on  the  subject  of  affairs  in  Spain;  they  are  not  sufficient. 
This  manner  of  enlightening  the  public  does  not  com- 
pensate for  the  immense  relations  of  the  English.  You 
must  therefore  publish  the  letters  of  different  generals, 
effacing  all  that  is  intended  for  the  Government  only.  For 
example,  there  are  letters  from  Soult,  from  Moncey,  from 
Sebastiani,  which  should  be  published.  Ask  Marshal 
Victor  to  send  you  an  account  of  his  operations.  You 
must  also  tell  General  Senarmont  that  he  has  not  sent 
a  correct  return  of  his  artillery ;  that  the  English  captured 
more  guns  than  he  admits.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  COMTE  FOUCHi. 

"  SCHCENBRUNN,  ^^th  September,  1809. 

"You  have  no  confidence  in  Abbe  de  Pradt.  I  do  not 
know  if  I  told  you  to  distrust  that  man  as  the  greatest 
enemy  that  we  can  have.  He  is  a  profound  hypocrite, 
having  neither  the  morality  nor  the  talent  of  his  condition, 
and  addicted  to  a  kind  of  intrigue  which  will  one  day 
lead  him  to  the  scaffold.  I  wish  you  to  treat  him  as  usual, 
and  to  let  this  remain  secret.  ...  I  have  more  than  pre- 
sumptions for  believing  him  to  be  a  diplomatic  agent.  I 
had  these  presumptions  before  my  journey  to  Spain,  which 
did  not  hinder  me  from  summoning  him  there,  nor  from 


GENERAL    MONNET    CONDEMNED.  473 

seeing  him  in  Paris  on  my  return.  I  wish  to  ignore,  and 
I  have  an  interest  in  ignoring,  what  I  know  of  the  character 
and  intrigues  of  that  man. 

"  Napoleon." 


And  consequently  the  Ahh6,  who  used  to  style  himself 
the  almoner  of  the  god  Mars,  was  employed  by  Napoleon 
both  in  religious  and  in  diplomatic  affairs. 

On  the  6th  September  Napoleon  wrote  to  the  Minister 
of  Police,  saying :  "  I  have  ordered  an  inquiry  into  the 
surrender  of  Cayenne,  of  Fort  Desaix,  of  Martinique,  and 
of  Flushing.  .  .  ." 

General  Monnet  was  tried  and  condemned  to  death  by 
default.     The  court  found  : — 

"That  General  Monnet,  contrary  to  his  duty,  did  not 
fulfil  the  orders  of  his  Imperial  Majesty,  in  case  of  being 
pressed  hard  by  the  enemy,  to  cut  the  dykes  rather  than 
surrender. 

■  "That  he  surrendered  after  a  bombardment  of  only 
thirty-six  hours,  and  when  the  enemy  was  still  1,000 
yards  from  the  bastion,  &c. 

"That  the  general  is  guilty  of  cowardice  a,nd  treason, 
of  extortion  and  embezzlement,  as  from  the  year  1803 
to  1806,  ten  Dutch  stivers  for  each  half-anker  of  gin 
exported." 

General  Monnet,  like  General  Dupont,  was  reinstated 
in  his  rank  and  honour  by  Louis  XVIII.,  was  degraded 
again  by  Napoleon  on  his  return  from  Elba,  and  once 
more  reinstated  after  Waterloo.  Some  of  the  charges 
against  him  were  certainly  exaggerated.  He  did  not 
capitulate  until  his  sea  defences  had  been  ruined  and 
every  gun  bearing  on  the  British  fleet  silenced,  until  a 
lodgment  had  been  effected  within  musket-shot  of  the 
rampart,  until  the  town  was  on  fire  in  several  places  while 
a  tempest  was  raging.  Under  these  circumstances,  Monnet, 
urgently  entreated  by  the  inhabitants,  surrendered. 


474  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  THE  MINISTER  OF  MARINE. 

"  SCHtENBRUNN,  •] th  September,  1809. 
"According  to  the  different  accounts  of  the  battle  of 
Trafalgar,  Rear-Admiral  Dumanoir  is  accused  of  not 
having  manceuvred  in  accordance  with  signals  and  the 
impulse  of  duty  and  honour;  of  not  having  done  all  in 
his  power  to  disengage  the  centre  of  our  fleet,  and  par- 
ticularly the  admiral's  vessel ;  of  not  having  attacked  the 
enemy  at  close  quarters,  and  even  of  not  having  ap- 
proached sufficiently  near  to  take  the  part  in  the  battle 
which  he  should  have  done  ;  lastly,  to  have  sheered  off 
when  able  to  fight.  Being  informed  that  a  great  number 
of  our  officers  who  were  made  prisoners  have  returned  to 
France,  we  write  you  the  present  letter,  so  that  the 
inquiry  we  have  already  ordered  may  take  place  without 
delay.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  COMTE  FOUCH:^. 

"  SCHGENBRUNN,  \ith  September,  1809. 

"  A  month's  sojourn  in  the  isle  of  Zeeland  has  placed 
half  the  English  army  on  its  back  and  has  exhausted  the 
other  half.  Without  the  cowardice  of  that  wretch  Monnet, 
this  expedition  would  have  been  dishonouring  only  for 
the  English,  and  would  not  have  afforded  them  the 
shadow  of  glory. 

"  I  am  highly  displeased  with  the  Prince  of  Ponte  Corvo 
[Bernadotte].  The  vanity  of  that  man  is  excessive.  I 
have  ordered  the  War  Minister  to  recall  him.  His  talent 
is  very  mediocre.  I  have  no  kind  of  faith  in  him.  He 
lends  a  willing  ear  to  all  the  intriguers  which  inundate 
this  great  capital.  During  war  he  is  the  same.  He 
almost  made  me  lose  the  battle  of  Jena ;  he  behaved 
feebly  at  Wagram ;  he  was  not  at  Eylau,  although  he 
might  have  been  present ;  and  he  did  not  do  all  he  might 
have  done  at  Austerhtz.  ..." 

"  Napoleon." 


CALAMITIES    OF   WAR. 


475 


On  the  14th  September  Napoleon  wrote  to  Prince 
Borghese,  the  husband  of  his  sister  Pauline,  who  was 
Governor-General  of  the  departments  beyond  the  Alps  :— 

"  I  see  with  pleasure  that  the  Pope  gives  benedictions 
and  enjoys  good  health  at  Savona.  Nothing  must  be 
neglected  in  order  to  render  the  life  of  this  old  man  agree- 
able. I  do  not  wish  him  to  suppose  himself  in  prison.  The 
guard  given  to  the  Pope  should  have  all  the  appearance  of 
a  guard  of  honour.  I  wish  even  to  place  a  general  officer 
at  the  head  of  it.  You  might  send  Csesar  Berthier  there 
to  act  as  governor -of  the  Pope's  household.  You  can  also 
send  a  chamberlain  to  compliment  the  Pope, 'and  to  see 
that  he  wants  for  nothing. 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  1 5th  September  Napoleon  wrote  to  Champagny, 
expressing  his  discontent  that  negotiations  for  peace  were 
not  going  on  rapidly.  It  was  some  consolation  that  in  the 
meantime  he  was  eating  and  drinking  at  the  expense  of 
the  Austrians.  He  said  that  he  had  told  M.  de  Bubna 
that  he  could  not  understand  the  policy  of  his  court ;  that 
they  had  committed  a  great  fault  in  offending  Prince 
Charles,  who  was  their  be.st  general ;  that  Prince  Leichten" 
stein  had  no  brains ;  that  General  Belgarde  did  not  see 
clear,  but  that  Prince  Charles  was  a  skilful  commander, 
who  was  loved  by  the  troops  and  enjoyed  their 
confidence.  .  .  . 

On  the  same  day  Napoleon  wrote  to  the  Emperor  of 
Austria  a  letter,  in  which  he  said  : — "  Of  all  calamities 
war  is  the  greatest :  woe  to  those  who  provoke  it !  The 
blood  and  the  tears  of  the  unfortunate  will  fall  upon 
them  ; "  and  professed  himself  willing  to  abate  some  of 
his  demands. 

On  the  24th  September  Napoleon  announced  to  M.  de 
Lacep^de  his  intention  of  creating  a  new  order  of  knight- 


476     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

hood,  that  of  the  "  Three  Golden  Fleeces,"  but  of  this 
little  more  was  heard.^  The  day  following  he  addressed 
this  note  to  Josephine : — 


"  Do  not  be  too  confident ;  I  advise  you  to  protect 
yourself  well  at  night,  for  one  of  these  nights  you  will  hear 
a  great  noise.  My  health  is  good  ;  I  don't  know  what 
people  say,  but  I  have  not  been  in  better  health  for  years. 
Corvisart  [who  had  been  suddenly  sent  for]  was  of  no  use 
to  me.   ... 

"  Napoleon." 

To  MARSHAL  '^OXi'l.T,  in  command  of  the  Army  of  Portugal. 
"  SCHCENBRUNN,  i(>th  September,  1809. 

"  I  am  very  dissatisfied  with  your  conduct  in  conse- 
quence of  this  phrase  in  the  circular  of  the  chief  of  your 
staff — '  The  Due  de  Dalmatic  is  to  be  asked  to  assume  the 
reins  of  government,  to  represent  the  sovereign,  to  clothe 
himself  with  all  the  attributes  of  authority,'  &c.  &c.  This 
would  have  been  a  crime  which,  in  spite  of  the  attachment 
I  bear  you,  would  have  obliged  me  to  consider  you  guilty 
of  lese-majesty.  .  .  .  How  could  you  have  forgotten  that 
the  power  you  exercise  over  the 'Portuguese  is  derived  from 
the  command  with  which  I  intrusted  you  .■'.... 

"  In  your  expedition  I  have  been  sorry  to  see  you  march 
on  Oporto  without  having  destroyed  Romana,  to  see  you 
remain  so  long  at  Oporto  without  opening  communications 
with  Zamora,  marching  upon  Lisbon,  or  doing  something. 
I  have  seen  with  regret  that  you  allowed  yourself  to  be 
surprised  at  Oporto,  and  that  my  army  ran  away  without 
fighting,  and  almost  without  artillery  or  baggage.  How- 
ever, after  hesitating  for  a  long  time,  the  attachment  I 
bear  you,  and  the  services  you  rendered  me  at  Austerlitz 

'  King  Joseph  having  the  Spanish  order  of  the  Golden  Fleece, 
Napoleon  ordered  the  institution  of  the  Three  Golden  Fleeces,  but  no 
knights  were  made. 


ROMAN    EMPERORS.  477 

and  elsewhere,  have  decided  me  to  forget  the  past,  and  I 
confide  to  you  the  post  of  major-general  of  my  armies  in 
Spain,  the  king  having  no  experience  in  war. 

"  Napoleon." 


It  appears  certain  that  had  Soult  not  been  beaten  by 
Wellington  that  he  would  have  tried  to  place  the  crown  of 
Portugal  on  his  own  head.  At  the  same  time  that 
Napoleon  wrote  the  above  letter  to  the  marshal  he  caused 
a  note  to  be  inserted  in  the  Moniteur,  sajdng  — "  The 
insulting  reports  spread  with  regard  to  the  Due  de  Dal- 
matie  are  false.  His  Majesty  has  never  ceased  to  repose 
confidence  in  his  fidelity  ;  he  has  given  him  a  new  proof  of 
this  by  creating  him  major-general  of  his  army  in  Spain." 

To  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"  ScHCENBRUNN,  7.nd  October,  1809. 

"  Write  to  the  King  of  Spain  and  say  that  the  English 

in  their  reports  claim  to  have  taken  some  guns  ;  that  they 

state  the  number  of  pieces ;  that  all  the  letters  from  the 

army  certify  this  ;  and  lastly,  that  General  Senarmont,  in 

his  report,  says  that  six  guns  were  taken.     Find  out  how 

many  guns  were  lost  at  Talavera,  and  say  that  the  slightest 

omission  will  be  criminal ;  that  it  is  not  for  publication, 

but  to  know  the  truth.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

In  reality  the  Enghsh  appear  to  have  captured  seventeen 
guns. 

On  the  3rd  his  Majesty  drew  up  a  "  note "  to  this 
effect : — "  The  Institute  proposes  to  give  the  Emperor  the 
title  of  Augustus  or  Germanicus.  Augustus  fought  only 
the  battle  of  Actium.  Germanicus  may  have  interested 
the  Romans  by  his  misfortunes,  but  his  life  was  illustrated 
by  very  moderate  recollections  [sic)." 

After  remarking  that  the  Roman  emperors — Tiberius, 


478     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Nero,  Caligula,  and  Domitian — had  not  left  behind  them 
enviable  reputations,  Napoleon  went  on  to  say : — 

"  The  only  man,  and  he  was  not  emperor,  who  distin- 
guished himself  by  his  character  and  so  many  illustrious 
actions,  was  Csesar.  If  there  were  a  title  that  the  Emperor 
could  wish  for,  it  would  be  that  of  Cmsar.  But  so  many 
little  princes  have  dishonoured  that  title  that  it  now  recalls 
not  the  great  Cssar,  but  a  heap  of  German  princes  as 
feeble  as  they  were  ignorant. 

"  The  title  of  the  Emperor  is  Emperor  of  the  French.  He 
does  not  wish  for  the  title  of  Augustus,  or  Germanicus,  or 
even  of  Ccesar.  .  .  ." 

The  statue  of  Napoleon,  with  the  garb  and  attributes  of 
the  Csesars,  was  afterwards  set  up  in  the  Place  Venddme, 
on  the  top  of  a  Trajan  column. 

In  a  letter  addressed  to  the  Emperor  of  Russia  on  the 
loth  October  Napoleon  said  : — 

"  I  have  accorded  Austria  the  most  advantageous  peace 
she  could  hope  for.  She  cedes  only  Salzburg  and  a  little 
on  the  side  of  the  Inn  :  she  cedes  nothing  in  Bohemia, 
and  nothing  in  Italy  but  what  is  indispensable  for  my 
communications  with  Dalmatia.  The  Austrian  monarchy 
remains  therefore  entire.  This  is  the  second  experiment  I 
have  desired  to  make ;  I  have  made  use  of  moderation 
when  she  had  no  right  to  expect  it. 

"  I  send  your  Majesty  the  last  English  papers ;  there  is 
a  revolution  in  the  ministry.  There  is  no  name  for  the 
folly  and  incoherence  of  the  cabinet.  It  has  allowed  30,000 
men  to  perish  in  the  most  detestable  country  in  the  world  ; 
it  might  as  well  have  thrown  them  into  the  sea.  In  Spain 
they  have  lost  a  large  number  of  men.  General  Wellesley 
has  committed  the  extreme  imprudence  of  plunging  into 
the  heart  of  Spain  with  30,000  men,  having  on  his  flanks 
three  army  corps  forming  90  battalions  and  50  squadrons, 
while  he  has  in  front  of  him  the  army  commanded  by  the 
king.     It  it  is  difficult  to  imagine  such  presumption," 

On  the  same  day  his  Majesty  wrote  to  General  Clarke, 


PEACE    WITH    AUSTRIA.  479 

telling  him  to  inform  the  King  of  Spain  that  he  had 
offended  against  principles  in  representing  the  insurgents 
as  120,000  strong,  whereas  he  had  only  40,000  ;  this  was 
discouraging  the  French  soldiers,  and  giving  the  enemy 
a  poor  opinion  of  them,  and  diminishing  French  credit  in 
Europe.  "  I  repeat,"  added  the  Emperor,  "  that  in  war 
moral  and  opinion  are  more  than  half  the  reality.  The 
art  of  great  captains  has  always  been  to  make  the  enemy 
believe  that  their  troops  were  very  numerous,  and  to  make 
their  own  army  believe  that  that  of  the  enemy  was  very 
inferior.  .  .  .  When  I  conquered  the  Austrians  at  Eck- 
muhl  I  was  one  to  five,  and  yet  my  soldiers  believed  they 
were  equal  to  the  enemy.  .  .  .  Far  from  admitting  that  1 
had  only  100,000  men  at  Wagram,  I  endeavoured  to 
persuade  every  one  that  I  had  220,000.  .  .  ." 

To  THE  EMPRESS. 

"  ScHCENBRUNN,  ii,th  October,  i8og. 
"  I   send  you  a  line  to  say  that  peace  was  signed   two 
hours  ago  between  Champagny  and  Prince  Leichtenstein. 

"  Napoleon." 


The  next  day  his  Majesty  wrote  thus  to  the  Emperor  of 
.Austria  : — 

"  I  have  received  the  letter  of  your  Imperial  Majesty  of 
the  2Sth  September.  I  saw  with  pleasure  Field-Marshal 
Prince  Leichtenstein.  His  mission  met  with  the  success 
which  your  Majesty  desired,  and  peace  was  yesterday 
signed  between  us.  Your  Majesty  could  not  have  sent  me 
a  more  agreeable  minister  nor  one  more  fit  to  arrange  your 
affairs.  The  fourth  war  between  your  Majesty  and  myself 
is  terminated.  I  am  about  to  leave  Vienna,  and  I  leave  it 
in  the  hope  that  all  our  differences  have  been  settled,  that 
peace  between  us  may  be  perpetual,  and  that  war  will  not 


480     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

again  break  out.  Let  your  Majesty  confide  your  affairs  to 
ministers  who  are  acquainted  with  the  respective  positions 
of  the  two  countries.  ... 

"Napoleon." 

To  THE  EMPRESS. 

"  Nymphenberg,  2isi  October,  1809. 
"  I  arrived  here  yesterday  in  good  health.  I  shall  stop 
for  a  day  at  Stuttgard.  You  shall  receive  twenty-four 
hours'  notice  of  my  arrival  at  Fontainebleau.  It  will  give 
me  great  pleasure  to  see  you  again,  and  I  await  the 
moment  with  impatience.     I  embrace  you.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  COUNT  ALDINI. 

"  Fontainebleau,  28M  October,  1809. 
"  I  beg  that  you  will  write  me  an  historical  sketch 
tending  to  prove  that — The  popes  have  always  been  the 
enemies  of  the  power  predominating  in  Italy.  When  the 
Germans  triumphed  they  called  the  French  ;  when  victory 
rendered  the  French  masters  they  leagued  with  the 
Germans  to  drive  them  out. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  COMTE  D'HAUTERIVE. 

"  Fontainebleau,  28//%  October,  1809. 
"  Draw  up  a  report  of  the  conduct  of  Prussia  during  the 
present  war,  in  the  formation  of  camps,  in  the  affair  of 
Schill,  of  his  officers,  of  the  Prince  of  Orange,  and  other 
complaints  of  that  nature,  so  that  these  materials  may 
serve  to  guide  my  conduct. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"Paris,  21st  November,  1809. 
"  Inform  the  King  of  Spain  that  if  Marshal  Ney  had  not 
been  recalled  from  Salamanca  my  army  would  not  have 


NEW    LEVIES.  481 

undergone  such  an  affront ;  that  General  Marchand  is  not 
capable  of  commanding  in  chief,  and  that  when  I  employ 
marshals  it  is  that  I  feel  the  necessity  of  it,  and  that  there 
is  no  system  pursued  in  the  conduct  of  the  campaign 
in  Spain. 

"  Napoleon." 

The  Spaniards,  commanded  by  the  Duke  del  Parque, 
had  managed  to  beat  the  French  and  take  possession  of 
Salamanca. 

To  THE  VICEROY  OF  ITALY. 

"Varis,  22nd  November,  1809. 
"  I  see  with  pleasure  that  you  have  arrived  at  Milan. 
You  have  written  a  work  on  your  Italian  campaign.  I  beg 
you  will  send  it  to  me.  I  have  found  my  financial  affairs 
here  in  great  disorder.  The  English  expedition  cost  me 
2,000,000/.  The  new  levies  and  the  immense  armaments 
that  I  am  making  for  Spain  continue  to  ruin  me.  You  will 
therefore  understand  that  I  cannot  lighten  the  burdens  of 
my  kingdom  of  Italy. 

"  Napoleon." 

to  king  louis  of  holland. 

"  Paris,  ^yd  November,  1809. 
"  I  have  received  your  letter,  in  which  you  make  known 
your  desire  to   see  me.     You  are  at  liberty  to  come  to 

Paris. 

"  Napoleon." 

On-  the  3rd  December  Napoleon,  in  a  message  to  the 
Chambers,  said  that  he  was  marching  upon  Cadiz  and 
Lisbon,  when  he  was  forced  to  retrace  his  steps  in  order 
to  plant  his  eagles  on  the  ramparts  of  Vienna.  "  Three 
months,"  he  said,  "had  sufficed  to  terminate  the  fourth 
Punic  war.     The  English  army,  led  by  the  good  genius  of 

VOL.  IL  I  I 


482  THE   CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

France,  terminated  its  destinies  in  the  pestilential  marshes 
of  Walcheren.  .  .  .  Frenchmen,  all  who  resist  you  shall  be 
conquered.  Your  greatness  will  increase  with  the  hatred 
of  your  enemies.  You  have  long  years  of  glory  and 
prosperity  before  you.  You  have  the  force  and  the  energy 
of  the  Hercules  of  the  ancients.     I  have  united  Tuscany 

to  my   kingdom History  has  indicated  the  conduct 

which  I  should  observe  towards  Rome.  ...  It  has  been 
demonstrated  to  me  that  the  spiritual  influence  exercised 
in  my  states  by  a  foreign  sovereign  was  contrary  to  the 
independence  of  France,  and  to  the  dignity  and  security 
of  my  throne.  However,  as  I  acknowledge  the  necessity 
of  the  spiritual  influence  of  the  descendants  of  the  first 
of  the  pastors,  I  have  been  able  to  conciliate  these  great 
interests  by  cancelling  the  donation  of  the  French 
Emperors,  my  predecessors,  and  by  uniting  the  Roman 
States  to  France." 

In  this  way  the  pope  would  no  longer  be  a  foreign 
sovereign. 

His  Majesty  afterwards  said—"  I  shall  protect  the  Porte 
if  the  Porte  severs  itself  from  the  baneful  influence  of 
England."  And,  "  My  friend  and  ally,  the  Emperor  of 
Russia,  has  united  to  his  vast  empire  Finland,  Moldavia 
and  Wallachia,  and  a  district  of  Gahcia.  I  am  jealous  of 
nothing  good  which  can  happen  to  that  empire."  And, 
for  his  Majesty  thought  of  returning  to  Spain—"  When  I 
show  myself  on  the  other  side  of  the  Pyrenees  the 
terrified  Leopard  will  seek  the  ocean  in  order  to  avoid 
the  shame  of  defeat  and  death.  The  triumph  of  my  arms 
will  be  the  triumph  of  the  genius  of  good  over  that  of 
evil,  of  moderation,  order,  and  morality,  over  civil  war, 
anarchy,  and  evil  passions.  I  hope  that  my  protection 
and  my  friendship  will  restore  happiness  and  tranquillity 
to  the  Spanish  people." 

On  the  9th  December  Napoleon,  in  a  letter  to  Cham- 
pagny,  pointed  out  that  Russia  should  be  satisfied  with 


PRINCE    EUGENES    INCOME.  483 

his  message  and  the  manner  in  which  he  had  acted,  seeing 
that  she  had  not  drawn  the  sword  against  the  Austrians, 
who  were  all  along  convinced  that  they  had  nothing  to 
fear  from  the  Czar.^ 

On  the  22nd  December,  while  at  Trianon,  the  Emperor 
drew  up  a  note  on  the  subject  of  the  affairs  of  Prince 
Eugene,  from  which  it  appears  that  at  the  date  in  question 
he  enjoyed  a  revenue  of  60,000/,  which  amount  he  might 
save  up,  as  it  did  not  include  his  official  salary,  which  was 
ample  enough  for  all  purposes.  In  six  years  he  would  have 
80,000/,  and,  added  his  Majesty,  "  as  everything  leads  to 
the  belief  that  he  will  keep  his  viceroyalty  for  another 
twenty  years, he  will  invest  thirty  million  francs  in  France, 
and  with  compound  interest  forty  millions,  which  will  give 
him  a  revenue  of  from  three  to  four  million  francs." 

There  was  evidently  a  good  deal  of  misgiving  on  the 
part  of  the  Czar  in  spite  of  the  declarations  contained  in 
the  message  of  the  3rd  December,  as  is  shown  by  the 
following  letter  : — 

To  THE  EMPEROR  OF  RUSSIA. 

"Paris,  Z'^st December,  1809. 
"  Sir,  my  Brother, — I  have  received  a  second  note 
from  Chancellor  Romanzoff ;  it  afflicts  me.  Why  return  to 
affairs  which  were  settled  by  my  Vienna  letter }  I  have 
declared  my  intentions  in  the  face  of  Europe  not  only 
with  regard  to  the  Duchy  of  Warsaw,  but  even  about 
Moldavia  and  Wallachia.  I  do  not  know  what  is  required 
after  all  this  ;  I  cannot  destroy  chimeras  and  fight  against 
clouds.  I  leave  your  Majesty  to  judge  whether  your 
language  or  mine  is  most  in  accordance  with  alliance  and 
friendship.  To  show  distrust  is  already  to  have  forgotten 
Tilsit  and  Erfurth. 

"  Caulaincourt  tells  me  that  your  Majesty  is  at  Moscow ; 
you  are  indefatigable. 

1   Vide  letter  to  Empress  after  divorce. 


484     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

"  I  have  been  living  a  retired  life,  being  really  afflicted 
by  what  the  interests  of  my  monarchy  obliged  me  to  do. 
Your  Majesty  is  aware  of  my  attachment  for  the  Empress. 
Will  your  Majesty  permit  me  to  refer  you  to  Caulaincourt 
for  what  I  have  to  say  concerning  my  policy  and  my  true 
friendship  7  He  will  never  be  able  to  express  all  my 
feelings  towards  you. 

"  Napoleon." 


END    OF   VOL.    IT. 


B.   CLAY,   SONS,   AND  TAYLOR,  BREAD  STREET  HILL,   E.C. 


