
Gift of Orla B. TaStlor 

A.B. 1886, LL.B. 1887, 
LL.D. 1933 



*'^"V.-%J 






iim 






f ^^^ 









A SFXECTION FROM 
THE LETTERS AND DESPATCHES 

OF THE 

FIRST NAPOLEON. 



VOL. I. 



A SELECTION FROM 



THE LETTERS AND DESPATCHES 



FIRST NAPOLEON. 



aSSiti^ iSxplanatotg Note^. 



BY 

CAPTAIN THE HON. D. A. BINGHAM, 

AUTHOR OF "marriages OF THE BONAPARTES." 



IN THREE VOLUMES, 
VOL. I. 



LONDON: CHAPMAN AND HALL, 

Limited. 

1884. 



LONDON : 

R. Clay, Sons, and Taylok, 

BKEAD STREET HILL. 



7!/ 



PREFACE. 

In the selections which we have made from the 
voluminous Correspondence of Napoleon we have confined 
ourselves to letters of general interest and such docu- 
ments as throw light upon the character of one of the 
most wonderful men ever born. Much has already been 
written about Napoleon ; but people still write about 
Caesar. The marvellous career of both captains furnishes 
an almost inexhaustible mine for the student of history. 
Both left behind them something more than the names 
of their victories, something more solid than their material 
conquests. As we find the portrait of Caesar in his 
Commentaries, so we find the portrait of Napoleon in his 
Correspondence. We fancy that the selections we have 
made will give a fair insight into the character and genius 
of the man who, succeeding the Revolution, re-established 
order in France and swept like a hurricane over the rest 
of Europe, destroying in his passage a great deal that 
was rotten. Voltaire says that the highwayman was 
succeeded by the conqueror, and the rapacity of Napoleon, 



VI PREFACE. 

which stands out most glaringly in his Correspondence, 
betrayed his descent. He shows himself an inveterate 
plunderer. It will be seen that he always had peace 
on his lips, but war was in his heart. His professions in 
favour of peace were rapidly followed by bloodshed and 
rapine. That he alone was the author of '^ those big 
wars," which, to many, " make ambition virtue," is proved 
by the calm which succeeded his removal from the throne. 
The principles upon which he governed are no longer in 
favour in France ; he certainly did not succeed in estab- 
lishing the dynasty he was so anxious to found. Im- 
perialism has for the moment few adherents ; and yet 
the work of the Great Napoleon has not been obliterated ; 
his Code, his administration, and many of his vast public 
works bear witness to his genius and his glory. The 
stranger who visits Paris must be struck with the magnifi- 
cence of the monuments dedicated to his memory : the 
triumphal Arch, which four regimes helped to construct 
— Empire, Restoration, Constitutional Monarchy, Republic 
— the Column of Vendome, the splendid tomb under the 
dome of the Invalides — these, and the broad avenues, the 
streets and the bridges called after his marshals or his 
victories, speak of his fame. The Legion of Honour 
which he founded is the only order which survives. Other 
capitals have good reason to remember the great soldier — 
Moscow and Madrid, Florence and Milan, Berlin and 
Vienna ; everywhere traces of him in Rome, Naples, 
Lisbon, Cairo, Munich, and Amsterdam. By sea alone 



PREP^ACE. Vll 

he was powerless ; no naval victory figures in the list 
of his triumphs. There are islands which may almost 
be said to belong to him — Corsica where he was 
born, Elba where he was confined, and St. Helena 
where he died. 

If some of the letters we have selected exhibit Napoleon 
in an unfavourable light, we must remember what Dr. 
Johnson wrote, that — " No person ever rose to supreme 
power in whom great qualities were not combined with 
a certain meanness which would be deemed inconceivable 
in ordinary men.'' But in few heroes has this mixture 
been more evenly distributed. His last letter, craving 
the hospitality of England, and written when escape was 
impossible, is a sad example of this want of dignity 
which excited the epigram of the Abbe de Pradt and 
some of the severest stanzas of Byron. 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER I. 
Youthful Letters and Antecedents i 



CHAPTER II. 
The Year 1796 60 

CHAPTER III. 
The Year 1797 125 

CHAPTER IV. 
The Year 1798 197 

CHAPTER V. 
The Year 1799 241 

CHAPTER VI 
The Year 1800 284 

CHAPTER VII. 

The Year 1801 333 

CHAPTER VIII. 
The Year 1802 382 



A SELECTION FROM 
THE LETTERS AND DESPATCHES 

OF THE 

FIRST NAPOLEON. 



THE CORRESPONDENCE OF 
NAPOLEON. 

CHAPTER I. 

YOUTHFUL LETTERS AND ANTECEDENTS. 

During the Second Empire the French Government de- 
termined to publish the " Correspondence of Napoleon I.," 
and a Committee, presided over by Prince Napoleon, was 
charged with this duty. At the outset of their labours 
the Committee thus addressed Napoleon III. : — 

" Sire, — Augustus placed Caesar among the gods, and 
dedicated a temple to him : the temple has disappeared, his 
Commentaries remain. Your Majesty, wishing to raise an 
imperishable monument to the chief of your dynasty, has 
ordered us to collect and to publish the political, military, 
and administrative correspondence of Napoleon I. . . . 

" Let us at once state that, in conformity with the 
instructions of your Majesty, we have scrupulously 
avoided any alteration, amendment, or modification of 
the originals. In declaring that his public life commenced 
with the siege of Toulon, Napoleon I. himself determined 
the starting-point for the Committee. It is at that 
immortal date the present publication begins." 

It is objected that the public life of a man commences 
from the day he enters the career he has chosen, and that 
VOL. I. B 



2 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

Napoleon's public life dates from his first commission \w 
the army m 1785, if not from his entry into the military 
school of Brienne, at the expense of the country, in 1779. 
The Committee was no doubt deterred from publishing 
the early correspondence for several reasons. It would 
have revealed Napoleon first of all in his character of a 
Corsican patriot, hating France, ignorant of the language 
of the people he was destined to govern ; then a violent 
Jacobin and the friend of the Robespierres ; an officer 
guilty of several serious acts of insubordination, which in 
less troubled times would have cost him his life ; who only 
escaped being brought before a court-martial by a miracle, 
on the charges of desertion and levying war against the 
French Government ; whose name was ^v^ times struck 
off the Army List, and who was only reinstated on the 
production of documents filled with inaccurate statements. 

The assertion made by the Committee of not tampering 
with the correspondence is certainly not correct, for many 
curious letters have been omitted altogether, and others 
have been revised and corrected. This is not much to be 
wondered at on the part of a Committee engaged in raising 
" an imperishable monument.'' However, since the fall of 
the Second Empire there has been a great rummaging of 
the archives of the War Office, and strange matters have 
been brought to light and rescued from that dust in which 
Augustin Thierry says the national history is still hidden. 

The Committee published twenty-nine 8vo. volumes, 
reaching from the siege of Toulon, where Napoleon 
acquired the rank of general, down to the second and 
final collapse of the First Empire at Waterloo. Before 
commencing the perusal of the letters we have selected, it 
will be well to bear in mind the following facts in connec- 
tion with the most remarkable genius of modern times. 

Corsica, after having been some time in the possession 
of the Genoese, was sold to France under the auspices of 
Choiseul, "the coachman of Europe," who bought it to 
counterbalance the loss of Canada. The Corsicans offered 



NAPOLEON S BIRTH. 3 

a stout resistance to the French, but were finally subdued, 
after an expenditure of much blood and 50,000,000 francs. 
Paoli, the Corsican leader, had exhibited great skill, 
courage, and energy in defence of his native island, but 
in May, 1769, Corsica was definitively annexed to France. 
Paoli fled to England. Charles Bonaparte, the father of 
the future emperor, had been one of his warmest partisans, 
and his wife had shared with him the dangers of the last 
campaign. Towards the end of May Charles Bonaparte 
tendered his submission, and was thus brought into con- 
tact with the Comte de Marbeuf, the French governor, 
with whom he was soon on intimate terms. 

In 1764 Charles Bonaparte, the last of his race, had 
married Laetitia Ramolino, the most beautiful girl in the 
island. In 1765 a son was born, who lived only a few 
months. In 1766 came a daughter, who also died young; 
and in 1768 a third child, who was christened Nabulione. 
The identity of Nabulione is enveloped in mystery. 
According to Charles Bonaparte, and the official his- 
torians of the empire, this child was Joseph. Recent 
authors reject the idea of two sons having received the 
name of Nabulione, and declare there was a fraudulent 
substitution ; that Nabulione, or rather Napoleon, was 
born at Corte in 1768, and Joseph at Ajaccio in 1769. 
There is a great deal of evidence in support of this theory, 
and no reliable evidence against it — nothing but the asser- 
tion of interested parties. In a letter to Paoli, Napoleon 
afterwards alluded to the scenes of bloodshed amid which 
he had been born — scenes which took place in 1768, but 
which had ceased in 1769. On several other occasions he 
made allusions and declarations tending to show that he 
was born in January, 1768, and not on the isth August, 
1769. Joseph, too, made similar admissions, and certainly 
Napoleon from his childhood behaved like the eldest son. 
However, according to official history, Napoleon was born 
on the iSth August, 1769, when Corsica had become 
French, and as all the early documents concerning the 

B 2 



4 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

family were destroyed and the registers mutilated at Corte, 
Ajaccio, Bastia, and Marseilles, as soon as Bonaparte 
attained power, one must accept the official date. 

The reason given for a substitution is, that when Charles 
Bonaparte obtained a foundation at Brienne, Napoleon 
was just over the age for admission, while Joseph, of a 
meek and retiring disposition, was unsuited for a military 
career. Under these circumstances Charles Bonaparte 
took his eldest son to the Royal Military College, passing 
him off as his second son. 

Charles Bonaparte, after tendering his submission, 
became a fervent partisan of the French, was appointed 
one of a committee of twelve gentlemen who administered 
the island under the French governor, and was afterwards 
chosen to represent the Corsican nobility in the General 
States at Versailles. 

In 1778, thanks to M. de Marbeuf, he received a free 
admission for one of his sons into the military school at 
Brienne, and in the month of December set out for France, 
accompanied by Joseph, Napoleon, and Fesch, his wife's 
half-brother. The party repaired first to Autun, where 
they were kindly received by the bishop, Monsignor de 
Marbeuf, the brother of the count. It was only ten years 
later that Talleyrand was appointed to this See. 

Joseph, Napoleon, and Fesch were all put to school. 
Joseph and Fesch were destined for the Church, and 
Napoleon had to prepare for Brienne. There exists a 
report of his master, the Abbe Chardon, showing that 
the latter was very intelligent, and that he learned to 
speak and write French fairly in three months. 

Having shown proof of his nobility for a hundred and 
forty years, Charles Bonaparte received the necessary 
papers from the Prince de Montbarey, and took Napoleon 
to Brienne, where, after passing in French, he left him on 
the 24th April, 1779, the same year that Josephine Tascher 
de la Pagerie married Alexander de Beauharnais. 

As at Autun, so at Brienne, Napoleon was in the hands 



NAPOLEON WRITES TO HIS FATHER. 5 

of the clergy. The head-master was Pere Louis ; Pere 
Patrault, ever afterwards held in high esteem by Napoleon, 
taught mathematics ; Pere Dupuy literature ; and the ill- 
fated Pichegru, who, educated in a monastery, had served 
in America as a private soldier, gave military instruction — 
Pichegru, supposed to have been strangled in 1804 at the 
instigation of his former pupil. 

Napoleon had not been long at Brienne when the taunts 
and arrogance of his young comrades wounded his pride. 
He was on the foundation ; he owed everything to the 
royal bounty, and he had no pocket-money. Though 
only twelve years of age, he not only felt and resented 
the inferiority of his situation, but he expressed his feel- 
ings, with an amount of vigour truly remarkable, in the 
following letter, which is the earliest preserved specimen 
of his correspondence : — 

" My Father, — If you or my protectors do not give me 
the means of supporting myself more honourably in the 
house where I am, let me return home immediately. I 
am tired of exhibiting indigence, and of seeing the smiles 
of insolent scholars who are only superior to me by reason 
of their fortune ; for there is not one capable of feeling 
the noble sentiments with which I am animated. What ! 
sir, your son is to be the laughing-stock of some popinjays, 
who, proud of the pleasures they give themselves, laugh- 
ingly insult the privations I endure ! No, my father, no ! 
Should fortune absolutely refuse the amelioration of my 
lot, remove me from Brienne, and if necessary give me 
a mechanical profession. By these offers judge of my 
despair. This letter, believe me, is not dictated by any 
vain desire to indulge in expensive amusements ; I am 
not at all fond of them. I simply experience the want 
of showing that I have the means of procuring them like 
the rest of my comrades. 

" Your respectful and affectionate son, 

'' Buonaparte. 

''S^h April, 178 1.'' 



6 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

Among the comrades of Bonaparte were de Dampierre, 
de Comminges, de Castries, and many other sprigs of the 
nobility, including de Bourrienne, afterwards his secretary, 
and Phelippeaux, who, with Sir Sydney Smith, success- 
fully defended St. Jean d'Arc, and helped to change his 
destiny by barring his road to the East. 

In April, 1783, Bonaparte, after a dispute with a brother 
cadet who had railed at him about Corsica and his father, 
was placed under arrest. He immediately wrote to M. de 
Marbeuf, the protector of himself and his family, saying : — 

"Now, if I am guilty, if I have been justly deprived of 
my liberty, add to the favours with which you have already 
honoured me that of withdrawing me from Brienne and 
depriving me of your protection. It would be a theft to 
the prejudice of some one more worthy than myself to 
continue to enjoy that protection. No, sir, I shall never 
be more worthy of it. I shall never cure myself of an 
impetuosity, all the more dangerous because I believe the 
motive sacred. No matter what interest commands, I 
shall never have the strength of mind to see a man of 
honour — my father, my respectable father — dragged in the 
mud ! On this subject, sir, I shall always feel too deeply 
to confine myself to complaining to my chiefs ; I shall 
always remain persuaded that a good son ought to avenge 
a similar outrage. As for the favours which you have 
showered upon me, they will be ever present to my mind. 
I shall say, I acquired an honourable protection, but to 
take advantage of it required virtues which Heaven has 
refused me, &c. &c. 

'' Napoleone Buonaparte." 

M. de Marbeuf interceded, Bonaparte was released, 
passed his examinations with success, was distinguished 
for application, mathematics, tolerable knowledge of 
history and geography ; was weak in Latin ; " would 
make an excelle^it sailor^ He had acquired a taste for 



LETTER TO UNCLE FESCH. 7 

a sea-faring life from having frequented the society of 
Corsican fishermen and listened with avidity to their 
marvellous stories, which greatly impressed his romantic 
imagination. Hence his efficiency in naval matters, and 
a store of knowledge never forgotten. 

On the 15th June, 1784, Bonaparte despatched this 
long letter to his uncle Fesch, the future cardinal, on 
family matters : — 

"My dear Uncle, — I write to inform you that my 
dear father is going to pass through Brienne in order to 
take Marianne (sister Eliza Bacciochi) to St. Cyr, and 
to try and re-establish his health. He arrived here on the 
2 1st with Lucien [who was going to be a priest], who 

knows French, and has forgotten his Italian I am 

persuaded that my brother Joseph does not write to you. 
When he writes to my father it is only a couple of lines. 
It is true that he treats me better As for the pro- 
fession he wishes to adopt, he at first, as you know, chose 
the Church. He now desires to serve the king, and in 
this he is wrong for many reasons. 

" First : As my dear father remarks, he has not courage 
enough to affront the perils of an action ; his health is 
feeble, and will not allow him to support the fatigues of 
a campaign ; and my brother looks on the military pro- 
fession only from a garrison point of view. Yes, my dear 
brother would make a good garrison officer ; he is well- 
made, light-minded, fit for paying frivolous compliments, 
and with these talents he will always get on well in 
society. 

'* Second : He has received an ecclesiastical education^ 
and it is very late to undo that. Monsignor the Bishop 
of Autun would have given him a fat living, and he would 
have been sure to become a bishop. What an advantage 
for the family ! Monsignor of Autun has done all he could 
to encourage him to persevere, promising him that he shall 
never repent. Should he persist in wishing to be a soldier 



8 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

I must praise him, provided he has a decided taste for his 
profession, the finest of all, and the great motive power 

of human affairs He wishes to be a military 

man ; that is all very well, but in what corps ? Is it 
in the marine ? 

" First : He knows nothing of mathematics ; it would 
take him two years to learn. Second : His health is 
incompatible with the sea. Is it the engineers ? He 
would require four or five years to learn what is necessary, 
and at the end of that time he would be only a cadet. 
Besides, I think that working all day long is not in accord- 
ance with the levity of his character. The same reasons 
which apply to the engineers apply to the artillery, with 
this exception, that he would have to work eighteen 
months to become a cadet, and eighteen months more to 
become an officer. Oh ! that is not to his taste. Let us 
see. No doubt he desires to join the infantry. Good ; 
I understand ; he wishes to pass the day doing nothing ; 
he wishes to dawdle about all day long. And what is a 
slender officer of infantry ? Three parts of the time a 
scapegrace. And this is what neither my father, nor 
you, nor my mother, nor my grand-uncle, the archdeacon 
desires : for he has already exhibited symptoms of levity 
and prodigality. Consequently a last effort will be made 
to induce him to enter the Church, in default of which 
my dear father will take him back to Corsica, where 
he will be under his eye, and will try and get him to 
the bar, &c. 1 

*'Napoleone de Buonaparte. 

'' P.S. Tear up this letter. It is to be hoped Joseph, 
with his talents, and the feelings with which his educa- 
tion ought to have inspired him, will decide well and 
become the supporter of our family." 

A curious letter to be written by a younger son, 
aged fifteen, during his father's lifetime. The paragraph 



FAMILY AFFAIRS. 9 

concerning I Lucien, who had forgotten his Italian, is 
interesting from the fact of Lucien having taken refuge 
in Italy later in life, and having had his children 
naturalised Italians. 

Joseph having stood firm, it was decided that he should 
go to Metz or Brienne, but for the moment he returned 
to Ajaccio with his father. On the 12th September, 1784, 
Napoleon wrote the following reply to a letter conveying 
this intelligence : — 

** My dear Father, — As you may imagine, your letter 
did not cause me great pleasure ; but family interests and 
the state of your health, which are dear to me, oblige me 

to approve of your prompt return to Corsica I am 

delighted that Joseph has accompanied you, provided he 
can return by the ist November. He can come here, 
because Father Patrault, my mathematical master, remains. 
The principal begs me to assure you that Joseph will be 
well received. Father Patrault says that if my brother 
wishes to work we might pass our examination for the 

artillery together I hope you will prefer Brienne to 

Metz for several reasons : First, because that will be a con- 
solation for Joseph, for Lucien, and for myself. Second, 
because you would be obliged to write to the principal at 
Metz, and that would occasion delay. Third, because it is 
not customary at Metz to teach all Joseph must learn in 
six months for his examination ; consequently my brother, 
who knows nothing of mathematics, would be placed with 
children, and this would disgust him. These and many 
other reasons should induce you to send him here. I 
therefore hope, before the end of October, to embrace 
Joseph. 

'' I beg you will send me Boswell and any other histories 
bearing on my work. You have nothing to fear ; I will 

bring them back to Corsica were it in six years 

*' Your very humble and very obedient son, 

''De Buonaparte." 



lO THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

For many years Napoleon busied himself with his 
history of Corsica, which he fondly hoped would gain 
him fortune and renown. He laboured at it incessantly, 
but it was destined never to see the light. 

The following letter seems to have been written in 
1790, and not, as its date would lead one to infer, in 
1793, the first year of the RepubHc. It was addressed 
to Abbe Raynal, a member of the Academy : — 

" Sir, — It will be difficult for you to remember, among 
the large number of strangers who importune you with 
their admiration, a person to whom you have shown some 
kindness. Last year you talked about Corsica with plea- 
sure ; condescend, therefore, to cast an eye over this sketch 
of its history. I present you with the two first letters, 
and if you accept them I will send the remainder. 

" My brother, whom I have recommended to the com- 
mittee of deputies charged to bring back Paoli to the 
country, and to receive a lesson of virtue and honour, 
will hand them to you. 

'' I am, with respect, 

" Your very humble and very obedient servant, 

'' Buonaparte, 

" AjACCio, the i^thjune {sic), ^\Officer of Artillery, 

''' Year \st of Liberty T 

Lucien Bonaparte says, in his Memoirs^ that the Abbe 
Raynal sent the two chapters to Mirabeau, who declared 
they announced a genius of the first order. They appear 
to form part of the Ashburnham collection One finds 
such passages as these in them : — 

" A lover of freedom, you take an interest in the fate 
of Corsica, which you admire ; it was called by the 
character of its inhabitants to enjoy liberty, and by the 
^ centrality ' of its position, the number of its ports, and 
the fertility of its soil, to do a large trade. Then why 
have the Corsicans never been free, nor traders 1 Among 



CORSICAN PROCLIVITIES. II 

the curiosities of the French Revolution this is not the 
least. Those who slew us as rebels are to-day our pro- 
tectors. They are animated by our sentiments. Man ! 
man 1 you are despicable in slavery, and you are great 
when the love of liberty enflames you I Then prejudices 
are dissipated, your soul is elevated, your reason regains 
its empire ; regenerated you are truly the king of 
nature." 

" To how many vicissitudes are nations exposed ! Is 
it Providence or blind hazard which governs our fate ? 
Pardon, O God! but tyranny, oppression, and injustice 
devastate the earth, and the earth is the work of your 
hands. Suffering and care are the lot of the just man, 

and the just man was made in your image What 

a picture is offered by modern history ! Nations slaughter- 
ing each other for family quarrels, and cutting each others' 
throats in the name of the Ruler of the universe ; knavish 
and greedy priests working on their imagination by means 

of their love of the marvellous and their fears You 

felt that the history of Corsica was wanting to our litera- 
ture ; your friendship believed me capable of writing it. 
I eagerly accepted a labour which flattered my love for 

my country, then abased, unhappy, enslaved The 

constancy and virtues of my nation will captivate the 
suffrages of the reader." 

" I shall have to speak of Paoli, whose wise institutions 
for an instant insured our happiness, and allowed us to 
conceive the most brilliant hopes." 

"... . V/hen the triumvirs offered to the world the 
hideous spectacle of successful crime, Corsica and Sicily 
were the refuge of Sextus Pompey. I see with pleasure 
my country, to the shame of the universe [England 
included] serve as an asylum for the last remains of 
Roman liberty, and the heirs of Cato," &c.^ 

^ At this moment the head of Napoleon was full of the philosopher 
of Geneva, who looked upon Corsica as a kind of Utopia, where free 
government might be established and flourish ; but in after years Jean 



12 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

This history of Corsica, the fruit of so much labour, 
was never published. Submitted to Paoli some years 
later, that chief found the author too young, advised him 
to consult authorities, and expressed the desire not to be 
eulogised. Napoleon was on the point of laying his work 
before Necker, but changed his mind, and sent it to Pere 
Dupuy, one of his old tutors at Brienne. The good father 
naturally disapproved of the sentiments of the author, 
found the narrative disconnected, the style and the 
grammar faulty, and recommended a total revision. This 
want of encouragement, and supervening events, prevented 
the publication of the MS. 

On the 24th of February, 1784, Charles Bonaparte 
died, *'the irreconcilable enemy of religion, and of the 
Jesuits who had despoiled his family." He departed 
this life at the age of thirty-eight, leaving behind him 
five sons and three daughters, in a state of relative 
destitution. He was deeply regretted, as the following 
letters prove :— 

"Paris, 29/^ March, 1785. 

*'My dear Mother, — Now that time has somewhat 
calmed the first transports of my grief, I hasten to assure 
you of the gratitude with which your kindness has always 
inspired me. Console yourself, my dear mother; circum- 
stances require this. We will redouble our solicitude, 
happy if we can, by our obedience, make up m some 
degree for the inestimable loss of a cherished husband. I 
terminate, my dear mother, by imploring you to calm 
your grief. My health is perfect, and I pray every day 



Jacques was pronounced to be a bad fellow, and when Stanilas 
Girardin proposed to the First Consul a visit to Ermenonville to see 
the relics — the hermitage, the cap, the table, the arm-chair, &c.— he 
said, ^^ Bah ! I have no taste for such tomfooleries ; show them to my 
brother Louis." Fourteen years had operated a great change in 
Napoleon's ideas about the Contrat Social, and other matters. 



NAPOLEON S FATHER. I 3 

that Heaven may favour you in a similar way. Present 
my respects to Zia Geltrude, &c., &c. 

** P.S. The Queen of France was confined of a son, 
called the Duke de Normandy, on the 27th March, at 
7 P.M. 

" Your very humble and affectionate son, 

" Napoleon de Buonaparte." 



This letter and the last which he wrote to his father 
betrayed an amount of feeling which was seldom revealed. 

In the following letter Napoleon rather over-estimated 
the qualities of his father, who really busied himself very 
little with his children. On several occasions afterwards 
he condemned in severe terms the political conduct of 
the committee of twelve, to which Charles Bonaparte 
belonged : — 

To M. DE BUONAPARTE, Archdeacon of the Cathedral of A jaccio, 
in Corsica^ at Ajaccio^ via Antibes, 

"Paris, iZth March, 1785. 
"My dear Uncle, — It would be useless to express 
how deeply I feel the misfortune which has befallen us. 
We have lost in him a father, and God knows what a 
father ! His tenderness, his affection, alas ! everything 
designed him to be the support of our youth. You have 
lost in himi a dutiful and grateful nephew. Ah ! you 
know better than I do how he loved you. / dare even 
say that the country has lost in hijn an enlightened, zealouSy 
and disinterested citizen. And yet Heaven let him die ; 
and in what a place t A hundred leagues from his native 
land — in a foreign country, indifferent to his existence, 
far from all he held precious. One son, it is true, was 
present at the terrible moment, and this must have been 
a great consolation for him, but certainly not to be com- 
pared to the melancholy satisfaction he would have 



14 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

experienced in terminating his career in his own house, 
in the bosom of his wife and family. But the Supreme 
Being did not permit this. His will is unchangeable ; 
He alone can console us. At least, if He has deprived us 
of the person we hold most dear, He has left us those 
persons most capable of replacing him, &c. 

" Your very humble servant and nephew, 

"Napoleone de Buonaparte.'' 

It is impossible on reading this letter not to recall how 
Napoleon himself was destined to die far from his wife, 
his son, mother, brothers, sisters, France, and Corsica, in 
another hemisphere, and with only a few faithful followers 
to soothe his last moments. 

What were the prospects of Napoleon Bonaparte at this 
moment } He regarded himself as an alien. He could 
hardly hope for any exceptional favour. M. de Marbeuf 
was dead. In the ordinary course of events he would 
become a captain after fifteen years' service, and after 
another fifteen years be able to retire from the service 
with the cross of St. Louis and a modest pension. As 
it turned out, before fifteen years had passed Napoleon 
had shown himself one of the most consummate generals 
the world ever produced ; he was First Consul, and had 
crowned a series of brilliant triumphs with the victory 
of Marengo. Fifteen years afterwards, instead of retiring 
with his cross and his pension, he was exiled to 
St. Helena. 

However, for the moment he was a subaltern on 36/. 
a year, with 5/. lodging money, and 8/. royal bounty as 
a pupil of Brienne. He was ungainly in his person, un- 
prepossessing, diminutive, and taciturn, and there was 
nothing attractive about him but the lustre of his eyes, 
which revealed the working of no ordinary mind, which 
seemed to gaze deep into futurity, and to read the inmost 
thoughts of all who conversed with him. 

Having been ordered to Douai with his regiment, the 



MELANCHOLY OUTLOOK. I 5 

climate of that place, and family difficulties, greatly 
affected his imagination, as is shown by this frag- 
ment : — 



"Always alone in the midst of men, I return to my 
quarters to commune with myself and to indulge in the 
vivacity of my melancholy. In what direction do my 
thoughts turn to-day ? In the direction of death. In 
the dawn of my existence, I might still hope to live for 
a long while. I have been for the last six or seven years 
absent from my country. What pleasure would it not 
afford me to see once more my native land and my 

parents What rage therefore prompts me to kill 

myself ? What do in this world ? Since I must die, 
would it not be better to destroy myself? If I were 
sixty years of age, I would respect the prejudices of my 
contemporaries and wait for nature to finish its course ; 
but as I commence to experience misfortunes, and there 
is no pleasure for me, why should I support life ? How 
far are men removed from nature ! They are cowardly, 
base, grovelling ! What a spectacle awaits me in my 
country ! My compatriots, laden with chains, embrace 
the hand which oppresses them. They are no longer 
those brave Corsicans whom a hero animated with his 
virtues ; enemies of tyrants, of luxury, and vile courtesans. 
.... Frenchmen, not satisfied with having deprived us of 
our liberty, you have corrupted our morals ! .... If I had 
only one man to destroy in order to deliver my com- 
patriots, I would plunge the avenging blade of my country 
and of its violated laws into the breast of the tyrant. Life 
is a burden to me, because I enjoy no pleasure," &c., &c. 

Soon after writing the above dismal and patriotic 
impressions, Bonaparte obtained leave of absence and 
returned home, disembarking at Ajaccio in February, 1787. 
He ought to have rejoined his regiment in May, but he 
applied for an extension of leave thus : — 



1 6 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

^^ind Aprils 1787. 
"The sieur Napoleon Buonaparte, second lieutenant, 
entreats Monsignor the Marshal de Segur to be good 
enough to accord him a furlough of five months and a 
half, dating from the i6th May next, of which he stands 
in need for the recovery of his health, according to inclosed 
certificates. Seeing his want of fortune, he begs this 
furlough may be granted with pay. 

" Buonaparte." 

Napoleon was not ill — merely feverish and restless, but 
he had family affairs to look after ; he was more busy than 
ever with his history of Corsica ; he was also at work on 
a romance, on a drama called the Comte d' Essex, and on 
the Masked Prophet^ a tale after the manner of Diderot, 
and resembling, in prose, the Veiled Prophet of Khorassan 
of Thomas Moore. The point of this fable is to condemn 
the madness of those fanatical persons who allow them- 
selves to be lured to destruction, as Napoleon afterwards 
lured the French to destruction in more than one disastrous 
campaign. Napoleon only rejoined his regiment in May, 
1788. Instead of five months and a half, he remained 
absent a whole year. 

On his return to France he learned that his regiment 
had been ordered to Normandy, and he applied for and 
obtained permission to remain in Paris to settle urgent 
private affairs. When this furlough had expired, he 
demanded permission to return home, to attend the 
deliberations of the States of Corsica. This extra leave 
was accorded, and he at once set out for his native isle, 
where he remained until May, 1788. 

On his return to Auxonne, Napoleon settled in the Rue 
Vauban, and read hard. In the month of August he was 
put under arrest for neglect of duty, but this did not 
hinder him from writing thus to Uncle Fesch : — '' I am 
unwell ; the important works I have superintended these 
last few days are the cause. You are aware that the 



REVOLUTIONARY IDEAS, I 7 

general here thinks so highly of me that he charged me 
to construct several works which required a vast amount 
of calculation, and for ten days, at the head of 200 men, 

I have been on duty. My comrades are jealous 

But what distresses me most is my bad health." A few 
days later: ''I was on the point of sending my history to 
the publisher, but the unfortunate news of the disgrace of 
the Archbishop of Sens ^ arriving yesterday obliges me to 
change my plans." Bonaparte now recast his history of 
Corsica, and also wrote a Dissertation sur V Autorite 7'oyale, 
relating how monarchs had usurped authority in twelve 
kingdoms of Europe, how most of them deserved to be 
dethroned, and how military government was favourable 
to tyranny. This "dissertation" was never published; 
had it been otherwise it might have got its author into 
serious trouble. Bonaparte was then nineteen years of 
age, an officer in the royal artillery, and it was while 
wearing the king's uniform, partaking of the royal bounty, 
and after having received a free education in a royal 
school, that he wrote this revolutionary diatribe. 

On the I2th June, 1789, Bonaparte wrote the following 
letter to Paoli, then in England : — 

** General, — I was born when the country was perish- 
ing. Thirty thousand Frenchmen vo^nited on our coasts, 
drowning the throne of liberty \x\ seas of blood, such was 
the odious spectacle which first met my eye. The cries 
of the dying, the groans of the oppressed, the tears of 
despair surrounded my cradle from my birth. 

"You left our island, and with you disappeared the hope 
of happiness ; slavery was the price of our submission. 
Overwhelmed by the triple chain of the soldier, the legist, 
and the tax-gatherer, our compatriots beheld themselves 
despised — despised by those who have got the administra- 
tion in their hands Traitors to the country, base 

^ Monsignor de Marbeuf, who had been translated, and to whom 
the work was to be dedicated. 

VOL. I. C 



15 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

souls corrupted by a sordid love of gain, have circulated 
calumnies against the national government and against 
your person, in order to justify themselves." Then follow 
many noble and patriotic sentiments, and finally : '' I hoped 
to be able to go to London to express the feelings you have 
awakened, and to talk over the misfortunes of our country, 
but I am too far away. Perhaps a day will arrive when 

I shall be able to overcome this obstacle 

"Napoleon Buonaparte, 

" Officer in the Regi?nent of La FereJ* 

Only a few days before writing the above. Napoleon, 
who was never destined to land in England, had drawn 
up a petition for his mother, who desired to get Louis 
admitted into one of the military schools. In this petition 
we find such expressions as these : '* Charged with the 
education of eight children, widow of a man who always 
served the king .... who sacrificed considerable sums 
to further the views of the government .... deprived of 
resources, it is at the foot of the throne and in your 
sensitive and virtuous heart she hopes to find them," &c. 
While thus craving the royal bounty, Napoleon freely 
expressed his hatred of the monarchy and of France. 

In July, 1789, Napoleon wrote to his mother, saying : — 

'* I have no other resource here but work. I dress 
myself only once a week. I sleep very little since my 
illness; that is past belief. I go to bed at 10 P.M. and rise 
at four in the morning. I make only one meal a day, at 
three o'clock : this suits my health very well '' 

This regiine suited his health so little that it brought on 
a low fever, which greatly alarmed the regimental doctor, 
M. Bienvelot. Sick leave was consequently demanded, 
and was accorded from the 15th September, 1789, to isth 
March, 1790; and again Napoleon set out for his beloved 
Ajaccio. 



MATTEO BUTTAFUOCO. 1 9 

It was during this visit that he wrote his passionate and 
eloquent Letter to M, Buttafuoco, in which he poured out 
page after page of wrathful and indignant vituperation. 
Matteo Buttafuoco was a general in the French army, a 
representative of Corsica, and had been the bosom friend 
of Charles Bonaparte. He was now accused by Napoleon 
of being a traitor and a stipendiary of France. He was 
told that the chief traits of his life were traced in letters 
of blood ; that from being the representative of a free 
people he had been transformed into the satrap of a 
tyrant ; that he had communicated to Choiseul the plans 
and the secrets of the cabinet of Corte ; that his conduct 
was looked upon as base and atrocious, and that the 
Corsicans had burned down his house (as a few months 
later they burned down that of the Bonapartes). The 
French, added Napoleon, had been beaten in Corsica, in 
spite of their gold, their discipline, their numerous bat- 
talions, the activity of their squadrons, and the skill of 
their artillery — beaten at Penta, Vescovata, Loretto, St. 
Nicolao, Borgo, Barbeggio, and Oletta. But in the end 
they had prevailed, and — " in the midst of this general 
disaster, in the ' bosom ' of the cries and groans of this 
unfortunate people, you reaped the fruit of your labours. 
Honours, dignities, pension, were lavished on you." In 
such language did the lieutenant of twenty impugn the 
conduct of a general officer. But at this epoch insubordi- 
nation was rife, and the presence of Paoli, who had just 
been allowed to return to Corsica, had greatly inflamed 
patriotic minds. 

Bonaparte at this period played the part of a Jacobin, 
and at the same time wished to seize the citadel of Ajaccio 
and to drive out the French. The whole island was dis- 
tracted, and there was a rumour that France was about 
to restore Corsica to the hated rule of Genoa. Napoleon's 
leave had expired on the iSth March, and on the i6th 
April he wrote to his old colonel, the Chevalier de Lance, 
saying : — 

c 2 



20 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

"SiGNOR General, — My shattered health will not 
permit me to rejoin my regiment before a second 
season passed at the waters of Orezza, that is to say, 
before the 15th October, 1790. This obliges me to ask 
for four months and a half leave. I forward this petition, 
with certificates, to your lordship." 

Leave was granted for four months from the 15th June. 

At this juncture, a violent dispute having arisen between 
the Royalist authorities and the municipality of Ajaccio, 
M. de la Ferandiere, the governor, threatened to burn 
down the town unless an officer called De la Jaille, 
who had been taken prisoner, were restored to liberty. 
Napoleon was all in favour of resistance and of attacking 
the citadel, which, as he maintained, had neither amuni- 
tion nor provisions, and could not hold out long. The 
municipality, however, cowed by the determined attitude 
of the governor, merely protested, and it was Napoleon 
who drew up the protest, which commenced thus : — 

" The palladium of the liberty of nations is public 
opinion. Princes and magistrates are humiliated by its 
censures and glorified by its praises ; disdained sometimes 

by powerful men, but never with impunity shall 

we, who were called the precursors of liberty, allow our- 
selves to be betrayed by those who live among us, by 
those base minds who were the first to throw themselves 
into the arms of the French ? " &c. Slc. 

And it was a lieutenant of artillery on sick leave, a 
pupil of the Royal Military School, who, after arresting a 
superior officer and attempting to seize on a French 
fortress, wrote this ! 

We next find Napoleon approving of the decrees of the 
Assembly against the clergy, and, in connection with Abbe 
Fesch, composing a Letter on the Constitutional Oath of the 
Priesthood — a letter of which no trace remains. The failure 



SAVED BY A BRIGAND. 2 1 

of his schemes against the Royalists, and his anti-religious 
sentiments, however, brought him into disrepute in Corsica, 
and on the occasion of a rehgious procession the scoffer 
narrowly escaped being torn in pieces. He was only saved 
by a penitent, who declared he would kill the first person 
who touched Lieutenant Bonaparte. The penitent was 
one of the most redoubtable and popular bandits in the 
island — Trenta Coste — 

'^ Un brigand veritable et parfait Catholique " — 

who was afterwards rewarded by the First Consul. 

On the 15th September there were elections in Corsica, 
and Paoli was unanimously elected President of the 
Assembly and Commander-in-Chief of the National 
Guard. Disappointed in his literary, political, and mili- 
tary projects, Napoleon now contemplated returning to 
his regiment. The Academy of Lyons had not awarded 
him the prize of 1,500 francs offered by Abbe Raynal for 
the best essay on '^ What Truths and Sentiments should 
be inculcated into the minds of men in order to insure 
their happiness ? " he had not been elected to the 
Assembly ;; his two attempts on the citadel of Ajaccio 
had failed ; and he had not obtained, as he had hoped, 
the command of the National Guard. 

His leave was up on the isth October, 1790, but it was 
only on the 1st February, 1791, that he left Ajaccio, 
accompanied by his brother Louis. He had hardly 
landed at Marseilles when he wrote to Uncle Fesch : 
" I am in the cabin of a poor man ; it pleases me to 
write to you from such a place after having chatted with 

these honest people It is quite true that Peretti (a 

Corsican Royalist, and friend to Buttafuoco) threatened 
to stab Mirabeau. This does not honour the nation. The 
Patriotic Society (of which Napoleon was a member) 
would do well to offer Mirabeau a complete Corsican 
costume, that is to say, a cap, vest, breeches, drawers, 



2 2 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

cartridge-belt, dagger, pistol, and gun. This would have 
a good effect ! " 

On reporting himself at Auxonne, Napoleon declared 
that he had twice attempted to pass the straits and had 
twice been driven back by stress of weather, and produced 
certificates to this effect. Not only were his excuses 
accepted, but the Chevalier de Lance, by ante-dating his 
return, procured him three months' pay, which was a 
matter of importance to the needy lieutenant, who occu- 
pied a chamber which was nearly bare, and which in the 
way of furniture had only a miserable bed without curtains, 
a table covered with books and papers, and two chairs. 
Brother Louis was obliged to sleep on the floor in an 
adjoining closet. 

Twenty years later, when King Louis fled from Holland, 
Napoleon exclaimed to Caulaincourt : "Abdicate without 
warning me I Run away to Westphalia as if flying from 
a tyrant ! My brother injure instead of aiding me 1 That 
Louis I educated on my pay of a lieutenant. God knows 
at the expense of what privations I found means to 
send money to pay my brother's schooling ! Do you know 
how I managed ? By never entering a cafe or going into 
society ; by eating dry bread, and brushing my own clothes 
so that they might last the longer. I lived like a bear, 
in a little room, with books for my only friends, and when, 
thanks to abstinence, I had saved up a few crowns, I 
rushed off to the bookseller's shop and visited his coveted 

shelves These were the joys and debaucheries of 

my youth." 

On his return to Auxonne Napoleon devoted his whole 
time to study. Louis acted as his secretary. He was 
very sanguine with regard to the success of his History of 
Corsica, not yet abandoned. He passed much time in the 
study of theological questions, which always possessed a 
peculiar attraction for him, especially the disputes between 
the Roman and Gallican Churches. He said afterwards that 
he might have taken out his degree as a doctor of divinity 



FLIGHT OF LOUIS XVI. 23 

at this period. He also wrote his Dialogue sur V Amour ^ 
to prove that love was baneful to society and to individual 
happiness, and that it would be a great blessing were 
Providence to deliver us from it. He composed, too, his 
Reflections on the State of Nature^ in which he propounded 
various theories concerning the existence of man before 
the formation of any regular social ties. There is nothing 
very remarkable in these youthful essays, which show little 
beyond the mental activity of the writer, whose brain, as 
he afterwards said, never felt weary. He could work for 
any number of hours without experiencing the slightest 
fatigue. 

A great revolution now occurred and the old regime 
expired. On the 2ist June, 1791, the king fled from 
Paris, with the intention of throwing himself into the arms 
of his troops on the eastern frontier. This flight neces- 
sarily exercised a paramount influence on the army. More 
than half the officers declared in favour of Louis XVI. and 
deserted their colours ; the remainder swore fidelity to 
the nation. The rank and file to a man adhered to 
the Republic. 

In the midst of the general excitement Bonaparte dis- 
tinguished himself by the violence of his recriminations 
against the Court and the officers who joined the army of 
Conde. In a letter to his friend Commissary Naudin 
he said : — 

'' This country is full of zeal and fire. In an assembly 
of twenty-two societies, three departments petitioned in 
favour of the king being brought to trial. On the occasion 
of the banquet of the I4th,^ I proposed a toast to the 
patriots of Auxonne. This regiment can count on the 

men, the sergeants, and half the officers P.S. The 

southern blood runs through my veins with the rapidity 
of the Rhone ; you must therefore pardon me if you 
experience some difficulty in reading my scrawl." 
* Anniversary of the fall of the Bastille. 



24 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

In this same month of June Napoleon was promoted to 
the rank of first lieutenant, and was transferred to the 
fourth regiment of artillery, then in garrison at Valence. 
He had been attached to the regiment of La Fere for 
sixty-nine months, but thirty-five of these had been passed 
on leave. Napoleon, longing to display his talents in the 
capital, now wrote to Uncle Fesch : ^' Send me 300 francs ; 
that sum will enable me to go to Paris. There, at least, 
one can cut a figure and surmount obstacles. Everything 
tells me I shall succeed. Will you prevent me from doing 
so for the want of 100 crowns.'^" And to his great-uncle, 
Lucien, he wrote, claiming six crowns which his mother 
owed him, and of which he stood sorely in need. 

At this moment the Republican officers and the army 
took the oath to the nation. The tricoloured flag was 
adopted ; horse, foot, and artillery were placed on a war 
establishment, and M. Duportail, the war minister, counted 
upon being able to place in the field 372,000 men. 

Learning that it was the intention of the Assembly to 
raise four battalions of Corsican volunteers, Napoleon 
demanded permission to superintend this operation. Leave 
having been refused by his colonel, as he had been only 
two months with his regiment, he applied to the com- 
mander of the district, with better success. He was 
granted a furlough of three months, and was to be back 
at Valence, at the latest, by the 31st December, 1791. 
A general order had been issued by the Assembly that 
all officers and men were to rejoin their corps before the 
10th January, 1792, on pain of being considered deserters. 

On the 6th September, 1791, Napoleon, accompanied 
by Louis, was once more back at Ajaccio. He found 
Corsica divided into Paolists, Republicans, and Royalists ; 
he himself was an ardent Paolist, and wished to exter- 
minate his political enemies. Volney, who was in the 
island at this time, wrote a report on the civil condition 
of Corsica, which he said had cost France 5,000,000 francs 
and had yielded nothing. The taxes had not been 



STATE OF CORSICA. 25 

collected for three years. Salaries never reached their 
destination. No less than 130 murders had been com- 
mitted in two years. The island was in the hands of a 
few nobles, who were always fighting among themselves 
and making friends again. The agricultural condition 
was wretched, and men ploughed their fields armed to 
the teeth. Elections always gave rise to bloodshed. The 
Assembly v/as almost entirely composed of ecclesiastics. 
The population was exceedingly fanatical. 

It was at this moment that the decrees of the Assembly 
on the civil constitution of the clergy were promulgated. 
The exasperation of the people was intense. At Bastia 
the inhabitants took up arms and wished to massacre the 
new bishop, who had taken the oath to the nation. 

In November Napoleon wrote to Sucy, the commissary 
of war at Valence, saying that he was going to travel 
through the island with M. de Volney, which author 
*' wishes to settle here with me, and to pass his life quietly 
in the bosom of a free people, of a fruitful soil, and the 
perpetual spring-time of our country." When Napoleon 
wrote thus he was playing a most active part in the 
internal affairs of the island — so active that he quite 
forgot that his leave expired on the 30th December, 
1 79 1 1 He was intent on obtaining military rank, and, 
thanks to ruse and violence, he was elected in Aprils I792> 
lieutenant-colonel of the second battalion of Corsican 
volunteers. As a lieutenant of artillery Napoleon could 
not legally hold this rank, but he claimed it as no longer 
forming part of the regular army ! This did not prevent 
him from writing to the paymaster of his regiment, on 
the lOth April, for money. The reply was, that his 
name had been struck off the roll of the regiment since 
the 1st Januciry, 1792! 

Napoleon, who seldon renounced any scheme on which 
he had once set his mind, determined to make another 
attempt to get possession of the citadel of Ajaccio. He 
had now a battalion under his orders. It was arranged 
that Brother Joseph and Uncle Fesch should stir up 



2 6 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

strife by demanding the execution of the decrees of the 
Assembly relative to the clergy, and during the troubles 
which would inevitably ensue Napoleon was to carry out 
his plans. During the religious ceremonies of Easter a 
quarrel was fomented, and with great military tact 
Napoleon seized on a couple of convents which com- 
manded the town. A few shots were exchanged and a 
few persons killed. The Ajaccians appealed to Colonel 
Maillard, who commanded the French garrison, and that 
officer consented to arbitrate between the volunteers and 
the municipality. In the end, to the mortification of 
Napoleon, who wanted to carry matters to extremes, the 
difficulty was arranged, and Paoli blamed the conduct of 
the young lieutenant-colonel, who was ordered to Corte 
with five companies of his battalion. Aware that this 
escapade might be attended by serious consequences, 
Napoleon at once wrote a long justification of his conduct 
to the Directory of Corsica, to the war minister, and to 
the Legislative Assembly. Fortunately for him Colonel 
Maillard's report on this affair reached the War Office at 
a moment when the minister was overwhelmed with work. 
War had just been declared with the Emperor of Austria- 
Who could have then supposed that the young officer 
labouring under the accusations of indulging in civil strife, 
with the intention of taking a French fortress, and of 
desertion, was destined to bring the war declared on 
the 20th April, 1792, to such a brilliant conclusion at 
Campo Formio ? 

It was only on the 8th July that the war minister found 
time to reply to Colonel Maillard, the French commandant 
at Ajaccio. He strongly condemned the conduct of '' M. 
Bonaparte,'' and could have sent him before a court 
martial ; but this class of misdemeanour, by a recent law, 
he said, had been reserved for the ordinary tribunals. 
The matter therefore had been referred to the minister 
of justice. 

Napoleon, afraid of remaining in Corsica and braving 
the vengeance of the clerical party, determined to leave 



OPINION OF THE FRENCH. 27 

his native isle once more. He could not return to Valence, 
where he would have been arrested as a deserter, and he 
therefore made up his mind to go boldly to Paris. Paoli, 
only too glad to get rid of him, gave him a certificate to 
the effect that his sojourn in Corsica had been obligatory. 
Quartermaster-General Rossi, and other friends, furnished 
him with similar documents. He reached the capital on 
the 2 1st May, and fortune favoured him once more. The 
War Office authorities had no time to scrutinise his case 
carefully ; they accepted his excuse that having Been 
elected lieutenant-colonel of volunteers, he had not been 
able to rejoin his regiment at the expiration of his leave. 
It was not remarked that Napoleon's leave had expired 
previous to his election. As for the minister of justice, 
he never took any notice of the matter, and both 
insubordination and desertion remained unpunished. 

Awaiting ministerial decision. Napoleon wrote to Joseph, 
saying : — 

*'The men at the head of the Revolution are a poor 
lot. It must be acknowledged, when one views matters 
closely, the people do not deserve all the trouble taken 
about them. You are acquainted with the history of 
Ajaccio ; that of Paris is the same. Perhaps here men are 

meaner, worse, and greater calumniators Every one 

pursues his own interest, and searches to gain his own 
ends by dint of all sorts of crimes ; people intrigue as 
basely as ever. All this destroys ambition. One pities 
those zvho have the misfortune to play a part in public 

ajfairs To live tranquilly and enjoy the affections 

of one's family is what one should do when one has 5,000 
francs a year and is between twenty-five and forty years 
of age ; that is to say, when the imagination has calmed 
down and no longer torments one. I embrace you, and 
recommend you to be moderate in all things — in all things, 
mind, if you desire to live happily. 

'' Buonaparte." 



28 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

Everything was in a state of dire confusion in Paris at 
this period. Six war ministers had succeeded each other 
in rapid succession between the beginning of May and the 
beginning of October ; and before the end of October 
Napoleon's explanations were accepted and he was re- 
instated in the army as captain, his promotion being 
ante-dated a year, with pay. Not satisfied with this piece 
of good luck he demanded to be transferred to the marine 
artillery, and then claimed the rank of lieutenant-colonel, 
on the ground that he had commanded a battalion of 
volunteers in Corsica. This demand, which was deemed 
presumptuous, still lies unanswered in the archives of the 
War Office, marked S. R. {sans reponse). 

The Revolution having broken up the Royal Schools, 
male and female, we now find Napoleon writing the 
following letter to the administrators of Versailles : — 

" Gentlemen, — Buonaparte, brother and guardian of 
demoiselle Marie Anne Buonaparte" (who afterwards called 
herself Eliza), ''has the honour to remind you of the law of 
the 7th August suppressing the school of St. Louis. He 
demands the execution of that law, &c. 

'' Buonaparte." 

This demand was accorded, and demoiselle Bonaparte 
received 352 francs to enable her to return home, with 
her linen, &c. 

Although Napoleon's regiment was about to cross the 
frontier, he applied for and obtained permission to 
accompany his sister to Corsica, where the youthful pair 
arrived on the 17th September, 1792. Napoleon at once 
resumed the command of his battalion of volunteers on 
his own authority, although drawing pay as a captain of 
artillery. This was equivalent to desertion. Paoli, who 
commanded the district, reproached him with the violence 
and insubordination he now exhibited, but refrained from 
taking any other notice of his conduct. At this epoch 



SARDINIAN EXPEDITION. 29 

an attack on the island of Sardinia was planned, and 
Napoleon's battalion was told off to take part in the 
expedition. Napoleon had fondly hoped to obtain the 
command of a column destined to create a diversion, but 
he was doomed to disappointment, Cesari Colonna having 
been selected for this duty. The expedition ended in 
disaster. Before starting, the French sailors and the 
Corsicans came to blows. The main body on landing in 
Sardinia was seized with a panic ; the troops fired on 
each other, fled without seeing the enemy, and insisted 
on re-embarking. The column to which Napoleon was 
attached hardly cut a better figure ; he himself narrowly 
escaped being forgotten ashore with his men, and finally 
had to make his escape, after spiking his guns and 
mortars and throwing them into the sea. It is only fair 
to the young artillery ofiicer to say that he was in no way 
answerable for the failure of this expedition, and that 
he, at least, meant fighting, and displayed the qualities 
of a soldier. 

On his return to Corsica Napoleon abandoned his 
battalion without leave and repaired to Ajaccio, where 
he learned that Louis XVI. had been sentenced to death, 
tftat war had been declared with England, that the Con- 
vention had sent an extraordinary commissioner to the 
island, and that the four battalions of Corsican volunteers 
were disbanded. What course should he take .^ He was 
an ardent patriot and hated France. At the same time, 
being on bad terms with Paoli, he hardly liked joining the 
party determined to resist the orders of the Convention. 
His regiment had been in the field for nearly six months, 
but he had no intention of rejoining. 

Thanks to a series of blunders and to despatches cross- 
ing each other, the Convention alienated Corsica, and on 
the 2nd April, 1793, ordered its commissioners to arrest 
Paoli and send him to its bar. This decree threw the 
whole island into a transport of fury. Bonaparte hesitated 
no longer. He drew up a passionate address to the 



30 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

Convention in favour of Paoli. After due reflection the 
Convention cancelled its decree of the 2nd April, but it 
was too late. At this critical moment Napoleon changed 
sides, and attempted, for the third time, by means of a 
stratagem, to gain possession of the citadel of Ajaccio. 
He was foiled once more, and obliged, with his family, to 
seek safety in flight — and what a flight it was ! One 
exile became Emperor of France and King of Italy ; 
another reigned first at Naples, then at Madrid ; Lucien 
became Prince of Canino ; Louis sat on the throne of 
Holland ; Marie Anne became Grand Duchess of Tuscany ; 
Pauline a princess ; and Abbe Fesch a Cardinal. Caroline, 
the future Queen of Naples, and Jerome, the future King 
of Westphalia, being children, were left behind concealed 
in the house of their maternal grandmother. The ex- 
asperated patriots fired the property of the Bonapartes 
and branded them as traitors. Napoleon was now a traitor 
in Corsica, and a deserter in France, 

After many perils by land and deep this wonderful 
family disembarked in France. Napoleon at once pro- 
ceeded to Nice and rejoined his regiment. Thanks to a 
certificate from Salicetti, one of the commissioners of the 
Convention, who explained his absence, he was allowed 
to resume duty. The Convention could not afford to be 
very particular, seeing the numbers of officers who had 
deserted and joined the princes over the border. In Na- 
poleon's corps only fourteen officers out of eighty had 
consented to serve the Convention, whose hands were 
stained with the blood of the king. 

After being attached to the coast artillery Napoleon 
took part in an unsuccessful attack on Avignon, which was 
held by the rebels. He became thoroughly dejected and 
ill. His prospects were deplorable, and his family were 
living on the scanty allowance granted by the Convention 
to Corsican refugees. Others were acquiring fame on the 
field of battle. The names of Hoche and Marceau were 
on every lip, and his old tutor Pichegru was general-in- 



SIEGE OF TOULON. 3 1 

chief of the army of the north. But the name of Bona- 
parte was known only to a very limited circle, and he was 
employed in getting guns into position, throwing up breast 
works, and counting piles of cannon-balls. 

It was at this period that Napoleon wrote his Souper 
de Beattcaire^ which revealed a wonderful amount of erudi- 
tion and acute knowledge of the human mind, and con- 
tained many striking ideas concerning military matters. 
The three government commissioners, Salicetti, Gasparin, 
and Robespierre the younger, to whom Napoleon showed 
his pamphlet, were so forcibly impressed with its merits 
that they ordered its publication at the expense of the 
Treasury. Augustin Bon Joseph Robespierre, who seems 
to have immediately comprehended the genius of the 
young artillery officer, then twenty-five years of age, at 
once took him under his wing. Napoleon would have 
fain joined the army of the Rhine, but there was work 
brewing close at hand. Toulon, imitating the example of 
Lyons and some other cities, had declared against the 
Republic, and had opened its port to Admiral Hood, to the 
general consternation of new France. Fortune now sud- 
denly smiled on the Bonapartes, who were taken up by the 
government commissioners. Madame Bonaparte received 
pecuniary aid, which enabled her to settle with her children 
at Marseilles. Joseph, thanks to false certificates, was 
made a war commissary of the first class. Lucien Brutus 
was appointed store-keeper at St. Maximin, and the Abbe 
Fesch store-keeper to the army of the Alps, where, ac- 
cording to his nephew, he feathered his nest to the 
detriment of the troops. As for Napoleon, he obtained 
the command of the artillery of the right wing of the 
army which, under General Carteaux, had been sent to 
lay siege to Toulon. His superior, Donmartin, having 
been wounded at the commencement of the operations, 
and Perrier, the second captain, being absent, the com- 
mand soon devolved on Napoleon. Salicetti and Gasparin 
wrote to Carnot, saying : '* Carteaux is incapable. We 



32 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

have no engineers. Banna Parte (sic) is the only officer of 
artillery who knows anything of his duty, and he has too 
much work ; " and " To compensate him for his zeal he 
has been made major of the second regiment of artillery." 
Carteaux was superseded by Doppet, who, having declared 
he knew nothing of siege operations, was replaced by 
a fine old soldier called Dugommier. A great deal has 
since been said of the preponderating part played by 
Napoleon at the siege of Toulon. How much of this is 
fiction ? how much fact ? Looking at official documents, one 
finds that he was mentioned only once in general orders in 
company with his countrymen Arena and Cervoni ; but he 
was brought into daily contact with Robespierre the 
younger, Ricord, Barras, and Freron, whose influence was 
great ; and Salicetti befriended him — Robespierre whom 
he afterwards denied, Barras who gave him a wife and the 
command of the army of Italy, Freron who was engaged 
to be married to his sister, the lovely Paulette, and Salicetti 
who had him arrested after Thermidor as a Terrorist. If 
citizen Bonaparte received the grade of brigadier-general 
for his services before Toulon the same rank was conferred 
on Cervoni. It was Cervoni who w^as sent to Paris to 
announce the fall of Toulon. But we are anticipating. 

It is at this epoch that the official correspondence, pub- 
lished under the Second Empire, commences. The first 
reports of Napoleon are stamped with that surprising 
energy and decision peculiar to him from his infancy. On 
the 25 th October, 1793, he wrote a report to the Committee 
of Public Safety, in which he explained the position of 
affairs, and expressed the ^^ extreme pain he felt at the 
little attention paid to his branch of the service." ^^ Three 
parts of mankind," he added, ''think of necessary matters 
only when they feel the want of them ; but then it is 
too late. There is no competent person at the head of 
the arsenal of Marseilles, and a great deal of experience is 
required to fill that post. It is a well known fact in the 
artillery that the formation of siege trains is a most difficult 



ACTIVE OPERATIONS. 1,1, 

operation. The artillery was not organised when I joined 
this army, but, thanks to the decisions at which you have 
arrived [flatterer !], it is now getting into working order. I 
have had to struggle against ignorance, and the base passions 
which it engenders. You ought to accord to the artillery 
of this army that consideration and independence which 
military and time-honoured custom have conceded to it, 
and without which it can be of no great service." And he 
then pleaded in favour of a general of artillery being sent 
to command the artillery — no doubt hoping that the choice 
might fall on himself. 

It is difficult to explain how Napoleon in this tone of 
command came to communicate directly with the Com- 
mittee of Public Safety and the War Minister over the 
heads of his immediate superiors. He at once displayed a 
masterly activity in the organisation of the artillery, draw- 
ing guns, horses, oxen, &c., from the neighbouring depart- 
ments. He wrote to Minister Dupin at the beginning of 
November saying that when the representatives of the 
people "detained" him with the army before Toulon 
everything was in the most deplorable condition, *' the 
general down to the lowest aide-de-camp meddling with 
the artillery ; " but he soon changed all that. " Three 
days after my arrival the army had an artillery and 
the batteries of the Mountain and the Sans-Culottes 
were established, which sent the hulks to the bottom, 
and resisted 20,000 round shot. The enemy at once 
understood the inutility of their naval guns, and deter- 
mined to risk everything by disembarking their troops. 
They ought to have been annihilated, but fatality, or 
our incompetence, allowed them to succeed. A few days 
later they had twenty-four guns in position, a covered 
way, palisades, and had received reinforcements from 
Spain and from Naples. I comprehended that the attempt 
on Toulon had failed, and that a regular siege was neces- 
sary. I spared nothing to push forward the attack on the 
Fort of Eguillette, and to organise a strong artillery train. 

VOL. I. D 



34 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

I sent an intelligent artillery officer, obtained from' the army 
of Italy, to Lyons, Briangon, and Grenoble to draw all that 
could be useful to us from those different places. I re- 
quisitioned the army of Italy for the guns not required 
for the defence of Antibes and Monaco. I have also re- 
quisitioned the department of the Var, and have drawn 
lOO horses from Marseilles. 

" I have procured eight bronze guns from Martigues and 
have replaced them by iron guns. I have requisitioned Mar- 
seilles, Aix, and the Bouches-du-Rhoneforall the materials 
mentioned in inclosure D. I have established at OUioules 
[just outside Toulon] an arsenal, where eighty blacksmiths, 
carpenters, &c., work without ceasing. I have established 
a park where gabions, hurdles, fascines, &c., are being 
made. I have requisitioned all the workmen at Marseilles 
engaged in the manufacture of baskets and demijohns. I 
have requisitioned horses from all the departments, from 
all the districts, from all the commissaries of war, from 
Nice to Montpellier and Valence. I have caused all the 
wood I could find at La Seyne and Ciotat to be taken in 
order to make platforms for the guns and mortars. I am 
having 5,000 sand-bags/^r die7n made at Marseilles. I have 
established an artificers' shop where tarred fascines and in- 
cendiary projectiles are being manufactured. I have taken 
measures for establishing a foundry at Ardennes, which is 
in our power, and I hope in a week's time to have grape 
and round shot from this foundry, and mortars in a fort- 
night. I have a workshop where ten armourers are 
repairing muskets. 

*' You will give me some credit, Citizen Minister, for these 
different operations when you learn that I have to direct 
the park, the military operations, and the arsenal all alone ; 
that I have not even a sub-officer of artisans ; that I have 
only fifty men to work the guns in position, and that many 
of these are recruits What we most require is powder, 
and I hope you will exert yourself to send me a supply 
without delay . . . BUONAPARTE." 



LETTER TO THE WAR MINISTER. 35 

One can imagine red tape standing aghast at the 
amount of responsibility thus assumed, and the restless 
activity of the young commandant : — 

To CITIZEN DUPIN, War Minister. 

"Ollioules, 30/A Nove?nber, 1793. 
" At 5 A.M. there was a "panic at the heights of Arenes 
about 1,000 toises from Toulon, 6,000 of the enemy under 
the command of the English general, O'Hara, having 
attacked the position, driven in the outposts, and reached 
the battery. Six pieces of twenty-eight were spiked. At 
this moment we arrived in force. General Dugommier 
fought with true Republican courage. We recaptured the 
battery and took the English general (who had been 
wounded in the arm) prisoner. We pursued the enemy 
at the point of the bayonet, killed some four or five hundred, 
and made a large number of prisoners, among whom a 
Spanish colonel, an English major, and several subalterns. 
The guns of the Convention were unspiked in sufficient time 

to increase the confusion of their retreat Nothing 

could equal the courage displayed by our soldiers. This 
is a happy augury for the plan which has been drawn up. 

'' Buonaparte." 

This may be said to have been Napoleon's first real 
contact with the English, whom he was destined to meet 
again at St. Jean d'Acre and Waterloo. We learn nothing 
here of a slight bayonet wound which he received, nor of a 
skin disease which he contracted before Toulon, and which 
often tormented him afterwards. 

On the fall of Toulon, the civil commissioners recom- 
mended Bonaparte for a brigade, and he was called upon 
to furnish the usual information. His answers to the 
printed questions were — 

Name ? — Napoleon Buonaparte. 
Age ? — Twenty- five. 

D 2 



36 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

Residence ? — Brienne, Paris, Valence, Auxonne, Corsica. 

Corps? — 1st regiment of Artillery; command of 2nd 
battalion of Corsican National Guard. 

Garrisons, &c. ? — Auxonne ; 2nd, Valence ; 3rd, Ajaccio ; 
4th, Bonifacio ; 5th, Nice ; 6th, Siege of Toulon. 

Detail of Services ? — Capture of the Isle of Magdeleine, 
Siege of Toulon. 

Noble or not noble ?— Not noble. 

Professio7i before joining ? — Joined at age of fourteen 
years. 

Profession of father before 1 4/// fnly, 1 789 ? — Died 1785. 

This etat des services teems with errors and omissions 
which might be set down to carelessness, but for the fact 
that all the public documents furnished by Napoleon and 
his brothers — marriage certificates, &c. — contain the grossest 
misstatements. It is extraordinary to find Napoleon de- 
claring himself ''not noble," seeing that he and his sister 
had only been admitted into the Royal schools of Brienne 
and St. Louis on their father showing one hundred and 
forty years of nobility. 

On the 1 6th February, 1794, Bonaparte received his 
commission of brigadier-general. He had been five" years 
and a half second lieutenant, one year a lieutenant, one 
year and four months a captain, and two months a major. 
Out of ninety-nine months in the service, he had been fifty- 
eight months away from his corps, either on furlough or 
absent without leave. In fact, after an effective service of 
less than four years he found himself a general officer. 

Ordered next to inspect the coast defences, Bonaparte 
set out for Marseilles, from which city he addressed a report 
to the War Minister, which, but for his usual good fortune, 
might have cut short his career. 

The report ran thus : — 

'' The fort of St. Nicholas is not capable of defence. . . . 
It is however indispensable to place it in a state of defence, 



JOINS THE ARMY OF ITALY. 37 

at least against the attacks of evil-minded persons. I am 
therefore going to place guns in the fort so that they will 
command the cityT 

This was quite sufficient to raise a storm of indignation 
in those days, especially in Marseilles. Point guns on the 
people ! Turn a fort into a bastille ! Bonaparte and the 
commander of the district, General Lapoye, were summoned 
to appear at the bar of the Committee of Public Safety, 
which was almost equivalent to being sent to the guillotine. 
The former appealed to the Conventialist Salicetti, and 
acting on his advice and that of Augustin Bon Joseph 
Robespierre, wrote an explanation of his conduct, and re- 
mained where he was, to let the storm blow over. Lapoye 
appeared before the Convention, proved his innocence, and 
said Bonaparte was away on duty ; and the matter 
dropped. A less fortunate officer would in all probability 
have lost his head. Luckner, de Custine, de Biron, 
Houchard, Beauharnais, and Chancel had lost theirs for 
less serious crimes against the Republic. 

On the 1st April, 1794, Bonaparte, who was at Nice, 
received orders to join the army of Italy, under the com- 
mand of General Dumberion. He was to act as general 
commandant of artillery and inspector-general. The repre- 
sentatives of the people were Robespierre the younger, and 
Salicetti. Buonaroti was Revolutionary Agent. 

The campaign was of short duration, and General 
Dumberion was back at Nice on the 8th May, after having 
beaten the Austrians and Sardinians in two or three unim- 
portant engagements. Robespierre wrote several remark- 
able despatches on the operations. In one despatch he 
complained bitterly of the embezzlements practised by the 
army contractors, and declared that "the defenders of 
liberty are naked." In another despatch, which it will be 
well to bear in mind, he denounced to his brother, Maxi- 
milien, the perfidy of the Royalists. '* Everywhere," he 
wrote, "terror has preceded us. The Emigres persuaded 



38 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

the people that we assassinated and violated, that we ate 
children and destroyed religion. This last cahunny produced 
the most baneful effect. In the valley of Ogneglia a popu- 
lation of 40,000 souls took to flight. Neither women, 
children, nor old men were to be found there. . . . The 
defenders of the cotintry behaved in the most exemplary 
manner. They never touched an image in a country 
which, thanks to superstition, abounds in them.'' 

During this brief campaign, Bonaparte had no chance 
of distinguishing himself, but he had the opportunity of 
studying the country — an opportunity not thrown away. 

Matters prospered once more with the young general, 
who was charged to draw up a plan of campaign for the 
army of Italy. He was on terms of intimacy with the 
younger Robespierre, who wrote to his terrible brother that 
Bonaparte, general-in-chief of the artillery, was " an officer of 
transcendent merit .... hit a CorsicaiiT Bonaparte sent 
in three plans of campaign, with "observations" and " con- 
siderations." The ^^ Report of Bonaparte on the political 
and military position of the armies of Piedmont and Spain," 
which is very diffuse, contains several curious paragraphs. 
The writer said — " Attacks must not be disseminated, but 
concentrated. ... It is Germany (Austria) which must be 
annihilated ; that accomplished, Spain and Italy will fall of 
themselves. . . . No dispassionate person could think of 
taking Madrid [which King Joseph Bonaparte entered in 
July, 1808, and the Emperor Napoleon in December of the 
same year]. The defensive system should be adopted on 
the Spanish, and the offensive on the Piedmontese frontier. 
. . . The armies of the Alps and of Italy should be united so 
as to obey the same mind. . . . Germany must be smitten, 
but never Spain nor Italy. . . . We should never plunge 
into Italy as long as Germany offers a redoubtable 
front." 

This report, which is in the handwriting of Junot, is 
classed in the archives of the War Office as emanating 
from Robespierre, probably in consequence of the notes 



FALL OF THE ROBESPIEKRES. 39 

which ''the incorruptible" wrote in the margin. It is 
curious to remark that Robespierre approved of all the 
propositions of Napoleon, with the exception of the last. 
And Bonaparte himself proved in 1796 that there was no 
great danger in " plunging into Italy " before the power 
of Austria had been utterly broken. 

In October, 1793, a French frigate, called La ModestCy 
was lying in the port of Genoa, crew at breakfast, &c., 
when she was surprised and captured by the English. 
Robespierre at once threatened vengeance, and an ulti- 
matum was addressed to the Serene Republic, which was 
held responsible for the outrage, and which hardly knew 
which way to turn, for the French might storm Genoa from 
the land side, and the English ruin it from the sea. 

In July, 1794, General Bonaparte was despatched to 
Genoa on a double mission. He was to settle matters with 
the Doge (who gave satisfaction), and was to examine 
Savona, Genoa, and the surrounding country, in a military 
point of view. The general terminated his mission with 
success, and carefully treasured up in his capacious mind 
the topographical knowledge he acquired. Nothing escaped 
his eagle glance. 

On the 28th July, 1794, he was back at Nice, full of glee, 
more confident than ever in his star, and persuaded that he 
would be selected to carry out the operations in Italy 
which he had recommended. But on the same day that 
Bonaparte returned to Nice, his two most powerful patrons, 
the Robespierres, perished, and the Reign of Terror was 
brought to a close. The news fell on him like a thunder- 
bolt. Bonaparte was at the camp of Sieg when he heard 
of the catastrophe on the 5th August. All Robespierre's 
friends were menaced. Some fled the country, others 
turned round on the tyrant, and among the latter Salicetti, 
Albitte, and Laporte, government agents, who denounced 
Bonaparte and ordered his arrest. 

On the loth August, 1794, an officer and ten men pre- 
sented themselves at the lodgings of General Bonaparte 



40 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

and escorted him to Nice. On the 12th he was committed 
to Fort Carre, and his papers were placed under seal. 
Fortune again favoured Napoleon. Had he been taken 
to Paris he would certainly have been executed. At An- 
tibes he was safe for the moment, and his friends had time 
to intercede in his favour. 

On the 12th he wrote to the representatives of the 
people, saying : — 

" You have caused me to be arrested. I have been dis- 
honoured without trial ; or rather I have been tried without 
being heard. In a revolution there are two classes, those 
who are ' suspected,' and the patriots. . . . To declare a 
patriot * suspected,' is to pronounce a verdict and to deprive 
him of all he considers most precious — confidence and 
esteem. In which category am I classed ? Since the 
commencement of the revolution, have I not been seen 
fighting against domestic enemies, or, as a soldier, fighting 
against foreigners .'* 

'' I have sacrificed living in my department (id est 
Corsica) ; I have abandoned my property ; I have lost 
all for the Republic. 

** Since then I have served with distinction before Toulon, 
and have deserved some of the laurels which were gained at 
Sagorio, Oneille, and Tanaro, by the army of Italy." 

And he wildly asked why he had been arrested a week 
after the fall of the tyrant, and protested that the only 
thing which made him support the burden of life was the 
idea that it might be useful to his country. 

On the same day Napoleon wrote a letter to Junot, 
saying : — 

'^ I recognise your friendship, dear Junot, in the proposal 
you make. . . . Men may be unjust towards me, but it is 
sufficient to be innocent ; my conscience is the tribunal 



IN PRISON. 41 

before which I arraign my conduct. That conscience is 
calm when I interrogate it ; do nothing, you would only 
compromise me, &c. 

" Buonaparte." 

" Under arrest^ Fort Carrd^ AntibesT 

Junot, Marmont, and some other hot-headed young 
officers of the army of Italy, had proposed to rescue 
Napoleon and to march on Paris. The general preferred 
to trust to less violent measures. He also wrote to Tilly, 
the French ambassador at Genoa, saying : — 

"You have no doubt heard of the conspiracy of 
Robespierre, St. Just, Couthon, &c. &c. . . . Our maritime 
operations have been somewhat disarranged. The artillery 
was well to the front, and the Sardinian tyrant was about 
to receive a heavy blow, which I hope is only delayed. . . . 
I was slightly affected by the fate of the younger Robes- 
pierre, whom I liked and believed honest ; but had he been 
my father I would have stabbed him myself had he aspired 
to tyranny." 

It is supposed that this letter was not really intended 
for Citizen Tilly, but for the eyes of the government 
commissioners. It is not to be found in the " Correspond- 
ence,'' which is not astonishing. The copy that exists 
in the archives of the War Office bears this marginal 
note : " To be submitted again to the Emperor (Napoleon 
III.) in consequence of the last phrase." 

Sahcetti, Albitte, and Laporte having found nothing of 
a compromising character in the papers of Bonaparte 
reported in favour of his liberation, and he was conse- 
quently released on the 24th August, after having been in 
prison for thirteen days. He was not, however, at once 
reinstated in the army. 

On hearing that an expedition to Corsica was contem- 
plated Napoleon applied for employment, and. thanks to 



42 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

Salicetti, his request was granted. A month after his 
release from prison he was general-in-chief of the artillery 
of the Mediterranean expeditionary corps. He wrote in 
a letter dated — 

" Head Quarters, Cairo (Italy), 
^^ ^^rd September^ i794- 

'' It remains for us to deliver Corsica from the tyranny 
of the English. The season is favourable ; not a moment 
should be lost. . . . With 10,000 men and twelve ships of 
war the expedition would be a simple promenade. Drive 
the English from a position which renders them masters of 
the Mediterranean ; punish the scamps who have betrayed 
the Republic, deliver a number of good patriots and 
restore them to their homes : these are the matters which 
should occupy the attention of the government. 

" Buonaparte." 



Corsica was at that moment in the hands of England, 
who had set up Sir Gilbert Elliot as Viceroy, and pro- 
mulgated a constitution. Nelson, then captain of the 
Agamemnon had bombarded and reduced Bastia, and 
the '' impregnable Calvi '' had been forced to capitulate. 
It was generally supposed that the island was lost for 
France, and many Frenchmen were not sorry for it, for 
the Corsicans were most unpopular in the south, as 
witness a report which Jean Bon St. Andre sent to the 
Committee of Public Safety, saying — '' Nothing stands in 
the way of the despots of this nation ; I can assure you 
it is hard for Frenchmen to submit to the domination of 
Corsicans. . . . The Republic has lost two frigates, but 
need only regret the Melpomene ; it will gain by having 
fewer traitors, rebels, intriguers and robbers, among its 
citizens. . . The ingratitude of this perfidious nation is at 
its height. The people understand only anarchy, and the 
leaders despotism. They will find in the English, rulers 
w^ho will make them repent their treason. It is desirable 



LOSS OF THE MELPOMENE, 43 

that the departments in the south of France should be 
cleansed of this villainous race." ^ 

Jean Bon St. Andre, immortalised in the pages of the 
Anti- Jacobin, afterwards served *•' the little Corsican ; '' and 
the Corsicans, "whom the Romans would not have for 
slaves, furnished France with a master." For the moment 
the future master was displaying his usual activity in 
organising the expedition, which got under way on the 

^ In a letter, dated Tunis, 8th November, 1793, Nelson gives a short 
description of an engagement between his ship, the Againeiiiiton, and 
the Melpomene, Minerve, Fo7'tunee, forty-four guns each, the Touchet 
of twenty-four, and a brig. A fight of four hours resulted in the 
Melpomene being disabled, and the other vessels hauling off and 
leaving her to her fate. 

In May, 1794, Nelson, writing to his wife, said — ^'Bastia is a 

beautiful place This island is to belong to England, to be 

governed by its own laws as Ireland, and a Viceroy placed here, with 
free ports. Italy and Spain are jealous of our obtaining possession ; 
it will command the Mediterranean." 

To MRS. NELSON. 

"Camp, Bastia, 20th May, 1794. 
" I always was of opinion; have ever acted up to it, and never had 
any reason to repent it, that one Englishman was equal to three 
Frenchmen : had this been an English town I am sure it would not 
have been taken by them." 

In his journal of 23rd May he wrote: — "At daylight the most 
glorious sight that an Englishman can experience, and which I 
believe none but an Englishman could bring about, was exhibited — 
4,500 men laying down their arms to less than 1,000 British soldiers." 

To MRS. NELSON. 

"Camp, Calvi, June 2jtk, 17^4. 
'* That we shall take Calvi in due time I have no manner of doubt. 
You know probably that George III. is King of Corsica, chosen by the 
unanimous consent of the people, the best of all titles. The first 
resolution of the Parliament of Corsica was to declare that they were 
Englishmen ; they might have been mistaken for Irishmen by 
their bull." 

And in fact, Calvi, in spite of its reputation of being impregnable, 
was obliged to open its gates. 



44 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

3rd March, 1895, fell in with an English squadron, and 
was driven back to port with the loss of two ships — the 
Qa-ira^ which belied her name, and the Censeur}- 

After this failure, the expeditionary force having been 
broken up, Napoleon once more found himself unemployed. 
Matters again assumed a sombre hue. The Minister for 
Foreign Affairs declared that there were too many Cor- 
sicans in the service, and that their patriotism was more 
doubtful than their determination to make money. A 
list of general officers having been made out, Bonaparte, 
according to seniority, stood 139th. Scherer, who had 
succeeded Dumberion in the command of the army of 
Italy, in his inspection report wrote : — 

" Buonaparte (brevet rank), 

" Twenty-seven years of age, 

*' Six years service, 

"Born at Ajaccio in Corsica, 

" Commanded a battalion before Toulon, and the siege 
artillery. 

" This officer is a general of artillery, of which branch 
of the service he possesses a thorough knowledge, but he 
has too much ambition and is too much given to intrigue 
for promotion." 

Sucy, the Commissary of War at Valence, an old school 
fellow of Napoleon, reported — ''' He will stop short of 
nothing but the throne or the scaffold." 

Having disposed of his horses and carriage, Bonaparte, 
accompanied by Louis, by Marmont and Junot, set out 
for Paris by order of the War Minister. He felt like an 
outcast, and he was ready to sell his sword to the highest 

^ In this action the English had fourteen ships of 1,090 guns, and 
only 7,650 men ; whilst the French had fifteen ships, mounting 1,174 
guns, and 16,900 men. The issue of the expedition was regarded as 
so certain that the mayor and municipal council embarked on board 
the Sans-Culotte, The only ships which showed fight were the two 
which were captured. 



ONCE MORE IN PARIS. 45 

bidder. In a paroxysm of despair he wrote to brother 
Joseph after his arrival in the capital : — '* I feel like a 
person on the eve of battle, and that it is nonsense to take 
any thought for to-morrow when death may overtake me 
at any moment. Everything tempts me to brave destiny, 
and if this continues, my friend, I shall finish by not 
getting out of the way of the carriages as they pass. 
This sometimes astonishes my reason, but such is the 
feeling produced by the moral spectacle of this country, 
and the doctrine of chances " — meaning that French- 
men were contemptible, and chance for the moment 
unpropitious. 

Napoleon on reaching Paris put up at a shabby house 
called L Hotel de la LibertCy situated in a street which now 
bears the name of Aboukir, in honour of one of his victories 
in Egypt — a victory which he said had effaced the disgrace 
of the battle of the Nile. He found everything in con- 
fusion. With the fall of Robespierre unity of action had 
disappeared, and instead of being governed by one, the 
country was ruled by sixteen independent committees. 
Napoleon was soon able to convince himself that there was 
no chance of his Jacobin friends returning to power. In 
March, 1795, Carnot, who, as the organiser of victory, had 
been spared the fate of his colleagues, was replaced, and in 
May fifteen members of the Revolutionary Tribunal were 
executed ; others were transported to Cayenne, or thrown 
into the fortress of Ham. Bonaparte, though known as 
the creature of the Robespierres, remained unmolested. 

At this period, ordered to join the army of the west and 
to take the command of a brigade of infantry. Napoleon 
ought to have immediately started for Rennes and have 
reported himself to Hoche, who was engaged in pacifying 
La Vendee. This order highly incensed him for several 
reasons. He considered it a degradation to be removed 
from the artillery ; he had no desire to serve against the 
ChouanSy and was annoyed at being taken away from the 
army of Italy in which he was known. He received 



46 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

permission to remain in Paris until the 15th May, but when 
his leave expired he determined not to join his new corps. 
Thanks to a doctor named Marquis, he obtained a sick 
certificate, which he sent to the War Office with a demand 
for a month's extra leave, which was accorded. On the 
23rd June he wrote to brother Joseph : '' I am employed 
as a general of brigade in the army of the west, but not in 
the artillery. I am ill, and this obliges me to take a 
furlough of two or three months ; when I recover my health 
I shall see what is to be done." 

Several other letters followed in rapid succession. 

To JOSEPH BUONAPARTE. 

" Paris, 2\th Jtme^ 1795. 
'* I intend to use all haste with the commissions for your 
wife. Desiree demands my portrait ; you will give it to 
her should she still wish for it ; this not being the case, 
keep it for yourself. No matter what happens, you know 
well you cannot have a better friend than myself, or one 
more dear to you, and who more sincerely desires your 
happiness. Life is like an empty dream which is soon 
dissipated. If you leave France and think your absence 
will be long, send me your portrait. We have lived so 
many years together, so closely united, that our hearts 
are mingled, and you know better than any one how 
entirely mine belongs to you. I feel while tracing these 
lines an amount of emotion I have seldom experienced. 
We shall soon meet ; I can no longer continue my letter. 

" Buonaparte." 

Joseph was then intent upon settling at Genoa, and 
devoting himself to the oil trade, little foreseeing the 
brilliant destinies and the two crowns in store for him. 

To JOSEPH BUONAPARTE. 

'•' Paris, 6//^ Jidy^ 1795. 
'* I have received no news of you since you left. In 
order to reach Genoa one must cross the Lethe, for 



LETTERS TO JOSEPH. 47 

D6sir6e no longer writes to me since she has arrived in 
that city. 

"The EngHsh have disembarked 12,000 men, most of 
them hnigreSy in Brittany. That does not give much 
uneasiness here. We are so sure of the superiority of 
our infantry that we laugh at the threats of the English. 

" The armies of Italy and the Pyrenees appear to have 
been attacked with great spirit. 

'' Every day a few Articles of the Constitution are 
decreed. Everything is quiet. There is still a scarcity 
of bread. The weather is cold and damp for the season, 
and renders the harvest backward. A louis here is worth 
750 francs. 

" Buonaparte.*' 



To JOSEPH BUONAPARTE. 

"Paris, 12th July, 1795. 

*' The English will be obliged to re-embark in a few 
days. Pichegru is preparing to pass the Rhine. La 
Vendee is tranquil, and the Chouans are only seen north 
of the Loire. Peace with Spain is imminent. 

" The Dutch appear warm friends of their Revolution. 
It is probable that the Stadtholder will not return. He 
has no party. 

'' The North is disturbed, and Poland conceives hopes. 

" Italy is growing rich on the spoils and misfortunes 
of France, 

" Luxury, pleasure and the arts flourish once more here 
to an astonishing degree. Yesterday PhMre was given 
at the Opera for the benefit of a retired actress ; there was 
an immense crowd at the doors from 2 P.M., although prices 
had been trebled. Carriages and fashionables have reap- 
peared, and forget, or rather only remember as a dream, that 
they ever ceased to shine. Libraries are open, and lectures 
on history, chemistry, astronomy, &c., succeed each other. 



48 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

Everything is accumulated in this country to amuse and 
render life agreeable. One is torn from one's reflections, 
and how is it possible to be gloomy in this busy whirlwind ? 
Women are seen everywhere — at the theatres, in the 
promenades, and the libraries. In the study of the savant 
you meet very pretty persons. Here alone of all places 
in the world they deserve to hold the helm ; therefore the 
men are mad about them, think only of them, live only 
by and for them. A woman requires to be but six months 
in Paris to know what is due to her and the extent of 
her empire. 

"Buonaparte." 



To JOSEPH BUONAPARTE. 

"Paris, I'^th July, 1795 

*' Still no letter from you, and it is more than a month 
since you left. Nor have I heard from Desiree since she 

reached Genoa I suppose you have taken the 

opportunity of being at Genoa to get our plate. 

" Louis is at Chalons, finishing to make himself a man ; 
he is studying mathematics and fortification. 

" I await your letters before deciding on the purchase 
of a property. It is impossible to have anything suit- 
able for less than 800,000 or 900,000 francs" [probably 
in assig7iats\ 

"Junot is here living like the d , and spending as 

much of his father's money as possible. Marmont, who 
accompanied me from Marseilles, is at the siege of 

Mayence I await your letters with impatience. 

Salutations to your wife. I should much like to embrace 
her in Paris, where one is better than at Genoa. It is 
here that an upright and prudent man, who confines 
himself to his friends, lives with all the liberty imaginable, 
if he wishes, and is perfectly free. 

" Buonaparte." 



LUCIEN ARRESTED. 49 

To JOSEPH BUONAPARTE. 

"Paris, z^th July, 1795. 
*' I am a General employed in the army of the West ; 
my malady detains me here. I await further details from 
you. I believe you avoid speaking to me about Desir^e 
on purpose, &c. 

" Buonaparte." 

to joseph buonaparte. 

''loth July, 1795. 

" You shall obtain the passport you require You 

ought to have received a letter from Freron .... Lucien 
has got himself arrested ; a courrier starts to-morrow with 
orders from the Committee of Public Safety to set him 
at liberty. I will do all you want with time and patience. 

** The peace with Spain renders an offensive war in 
Piedmont indispensable. The plan I have proposed is 
being discussed and will infallibly be adopted. If I go 
to Nice we shall see each other, and Desiree also. I await 
your answer about purchasing you a property. I am 
going to write to Madame Isoard to give Lucien some 
money, and I will procure a place for him in Paris before 
starting The harvest is splendid. 

*' This great nation gives itself up to pleasure, dancing, 
and theatres, and women (who are the prettiest in the 
world) have become the principal occupation. Ease, 
luxury, and bon ton have recovered their reign ; the Terror 
is remembered only as a dream. 

" Buonaparte." 

At this moment there was a large amount of national 
property in the market — property which had been taken 
from the Church and the nobles, and which patriots were 
allowed to purchase on easy terms. 

VOL. I. E 



50 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

To COMMISSARY SUCY. 

"Paris, 17M August^ 1795. 

'* I congratulate you on joining the army Fortune, 

favour, and the esteem of men vary and oscillate perpetu- 
ally I have been appointed to serve in the army 

of La Vendee as General of the Line : I have not accepted, 
A great many ofificers would command a brigade better 
than I could; but few could command the artillery so well. 
I retire satisfied that the injustice done to the service 
will be sufficiently felt by those who know how to 
appreciate matters. 

". . . . Health, constancy, and never be discouraged. 
If you find men wicked and ungrateful, remember the 
great, although buffoon maxim, of Scapin — * Let us be 
thankful to them for all the crimes they do not commit.' 

'' Buonaparte." 
to joseph buonaparte. 

"Paris, 2o/>^ August, 1795. 

"I am at this moment attached to the Topographical 
Department of the Committee of Public Safety for the 
direction of armies, in place of Carnot. If I make the 
demand I shall obtain permission to go to Turkey as 
General of Artillery sent by the Government to organise 
the artillery of the Grand Signor, with good pay and a 
flattering title. I will get you made consul Every- 
thing is quiet here, but storms are perhaps brewing. I 
shall take five or six officers with me The Com- 
mittee of Public Safety having charged me with the 
direction of the armies, and wdth the plans of campaign 
(which is highly flattering) will not, I fear, allow me to 
go to Turkey. We shall see. 

" Buonaparte." 



MILITARY MATTERS. 5 I 



To JOSEPH BUONAPARTE. 

''Paris, \st Septeinber, 1795. 
" . . . . There is a little excitement in consequence of 
the renewal of the Convention. The Royalists are stirring ; 

we shall see how this will end Scherer has gone to 

the army of Italy ; Kellermann to that of the Alps ; Hoche 
has been transferred to La Vendee ; Moncey to the coast 
of Brest.'* 

And four days later : — 

*' The Committee consider that it will be impossible for 
me to leave France as long as the war lasts. I am going 
to be re-established in the artillery, and shall probably 

remain at the Committee Should I stay here it 

is possible I may be seized with the madness of marrying. 
I should like to receive a few words from you on this 
subject, and it might be well to speak to the brother of 
Desiree. Let me know the result, and that will terminate 
the affair. 

** The celebrated Bishop of Autun (Talleyrand) and 
General Montesquiou have received permission to return 
to France, and have been struck off the list of emigres. 

'' Buonaparte." 



To JOSEPH BUONAPARTE. 

'^ Paris, 6//^ Septe77iber, 1795. 

'^ . . . No matter what happens, you need feel no 
alarm concerning me, as I have for friends the best men of 
all parties. Mariette is extremely zealous in my behalf: 
you are aware of his opinions. I am on intimate terms 
with Doulcet You know my other friends of an opposite 
opinion. 

" I am going to write to your wife. I am well satisfied 
with Louis ; he answers the hopes 1 conceived of him. He is 

E 2 



52 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

a good fellow after my fashion — zvarmth, wit, talent ^ honesty , 
goodness, all coinbined. You know, my friend, that I only 
live for the pleasure I can give my family. If my hopes 
are seconded by the good luck which never abandons me 
in my undertakings, I shall be able to fulfil all your 

desires I feel much being deprived of Louis, who 

was of great assistance to me — no one more active, more 
skilful, and more insinuating. Since Louis is no longer 

here, I can attend only to the most important affairs 

To-morrow I shall have three horses, and this will enable 
me to drive about in a cabriolet and attend to business. 

"Adieu, my friend. Amuse yourself; everything is 
going well ; be gay. Think of my affair (Desiree), for I 
am mad to have a home. It must be concluded or broken 
off. I await your reply with impatience. You can remain 
at Genoa as long as you wish. The motive is simple — 
to recover the little property which we still possess in 
Corsica. 

*' Buonaparte." 

The active correspondence kept up with Joseph, and 
the letter to Commissary Sucy, reveal much that hap- 
pened at this curious and eventful epoch in the life of 
Brigadier Bonaparte, but not all. They show us that he 
had fits of dejection, which never lasted long ; that his 
thoughts were constantly turned towards the East ; that he 
was hard pressed for money, and that he was anxious to 
marry. Joseph had espoused the daughter of a wealthy 
soap-boiler of Marseilles, Julia Clary, who had brought 
him a dowry of 20,000/., and Napoleon wished to marry 
her sister, Desiree. Desiree Clary, however, was not 
destined to become Empress of France, but the wife of 
General Bernadotte, and Queen of Sweden. In 1795 the 
Bonapartes did not bear a high reputation in the south, 
and the soap-boiler declared that one Bonaparte in his 
family was quite sufficient. 

Napoleon's sick leave expired on the 14th July, but as 



LITERARY PRODUCTIONS. 53 

he had no intention of joining the army of the West he 
procured another medical certificate, and asked for an 
extension. '* My doctor allows me to hope/' he wrote, 
**that in twenty days, that is to say, on the 4th August, 
I shall be able to rejoin my army corps." He wished to 
gain the 4th August, because on that date the Committees 
would be renewed, and *' that wretch Aubry," as he called 
him, would no longer be war minister, and it was to Aubry, 
a captain in the same corps as himself, that he attributed 
his removal from the artillery. 

The ill-health of the young General did not prevent him 
from being busy with his pen. In July he wrote a Reciieil 
sur r Histoire depuis le 9 Ther?nido7^, An II. (date of the 
fall of Robespierre) jusqiCau cojjumncehient de I An IV., 
and also Une Etude sur la Politicpie, les Causes des Troubles, 
et des Discords ; both of which autographs are in private 
collections. In addition to this he drew up a memo- 
randum on the army of Italy, showing the advantages 
of adopting offensive operations ; and Lanfrey rightly 
remarks that it is impossible to read this document with- 
out a feeling of intense admiration. It was referred to 
Kellermann, who commanded the army of the Alps, and 
to Scherer, who commanded the army of Italy. The former 
considered it the work of a madman ; the second remarked 
that the officer who recommended such operations should 
be sent to carry them out. A year later this madman did 
carry them out, to the great astonishment of the world in 
general and of Kellermann and Scherer in particular. 

However, for the moment the look-out was gloomy, 
although all around seemed gay and bent on making up 
for lost time. On the i8th Thermidor (5th August) 
Brigadier Bonaparte addressed a memorial to the Repre- 
sentatives of the People and the Committee of Public 
Safety, in which he set forth his services at considerable 
length and asked to be re-instated in the artillery. This 
document contained several inaccuracies. The petitioner 
said he had joined the artillery in 1782, whereas he only 



54 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

obtained his commission at the end of 1784. He claimed 
to have served seventeen years instead of twelve, &c., &c. 
The petition having been referred to the competent atho- 
rities, Napoleon was once more in despair and meditated 
suicide. On the i6th August he received a peremptory 
order to join his corps, and was told that in addition to 
sending in the sick certificate of Citizen Marquis, he 
should, according to regulation, have presented himself 
before the Medical Board. '*If," terminated the order, 
''your state of health prevents you from undergoing the 
fatigue of active service, inform me of the fact and I will 
ask the Committee to replace you.'' On the reception of 
this document the General immediately rushed off to 
Barras, Freron, and other friends, representing himself as 
the victim of his attachment to the Repubhcan party, and 
speaking much about the army of Italy, of the East, and 
of Constantinople. That he did not plead in vain is 
proved by the fact of his having been appointed to the 
topographical department on the 20th August, a post 
which, if we are to believe a letter written to brother 
Joseph, gave his active brain sufficient occupation. " I 
hope," he wrote to the future King of Naples, '' that you 
will obtain a consulate in the kingdom of Naples. I 
am overwhelmed with business from i to 5 P.M. at the 
Committee, and then from 11 P.M. till 3 A.M." 

The great ambition of Napoleon at this moment was to 
get to the East. Lucien said he prophesied that British 
preponderance in India would daily increase, and declared 
that he would take service in that country unless promoted 
at home. '' I heard him several times say," wrote Lucien 
in his Memoirs^ " that the English made more of a good 
artillery officer than the French did, and that distinguished 
officers of that arm were rare in India." He added : *' If 
I take that decision, I hope you will soon hear of me, and 
that I shall return in a few years a rich nabob, bringing 
home handsome dowries for my three sisters. . . . Mamma 
was quite angry with Napoleon for speaking so often 



WISHES TO GO TO TURKEY. 55 

about going to India, considering him quite capable of 
putting this project into execution in a moment of 
vexation against the Government." 

At this moment the Sublime Porte and the French 
Repubh'c were on excellent terms, and in July, 1795, the 
Sultan, for the second time, asked for French artillery 
officers, &c. Napoleon, made aware of this demand, 
immediately drew up a memorandum on the amelioration 
of the Turkish artillery, and a note on the best means of 
augmenting the power of Turkey against the encroach- 
ments of European monarchies, a summary of which 
we give : — 



Note Written by BUONAPARTE. 

"30/y^ August^ 1795. 

**At a moment when the Empress of Russia has 
strengthened the bonds which unite her to Austria, it is 
in the interest of France to do all in her power to render 
the military capabilities of Turkey more formidable. That 
Power has numerous and brave bodies of militia, but very 
ignorant with regard to the art of war. The formation 
of the artillery, which exercises so powerful an influence 
on modern tactics and the gaining of battles, and almost 
exclusively in the taking and defence of strong places, is 
still in its infancy m Turkey. The Porte, which feels 
this, has several times demanded artillery and engineer 
officers. We have some we can dispose of at the present 
moment ; but they are neither sufficiently numerous 
nor sufficiently capable to produce a result of any 
consequence. 

''General Buonaparte, who has acquired some reputa- 
tion in commanding the artillery of our army under 
various circumstances, and especially at the siege of 
Toulon, offers to go to Turkey on a mission from the 
Government : he will take with him {\vq or six officers, 



56 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

each with a special knowledge of the sciences relative 
to war. 

*' Should he be able, in this new career, to render the 
Turkish armies more formidable, he believes he will be 
doing his country a signal service. 

''Buonaparte." 

This note was backed up by two members of the Com- 
mittee, who spoke very highly of Napoleon's previous 
services. The Government determined to send out a 
military commission to Turkey. Kellermann and Scherer 
were ordered to carry out the plans furnished by Bona- 
parte, and the young General told Bourrienne to look 
out for a property for him in the valley of the Yonne. 
The road to fortune appeared once more open, but there 
was to be another slip between cup and lip. 

On the 5 th September Napoleon sent in a request for 
horses, setting forth that he had been obliged to sell the 
animals he had at Nice for a trifle. The demand was 
returned by the Re-mount Department with this note : 
*' The certificate does not state that Citizen Bonaparte 
really sold his horses," &c. This matter created a con- 
siderable noise, more especially as it coincided with the 
return of the petition, which the General had addressed 
to the Representatives of the People and the Committee, 
on his exclusion from the artillery. The various errors 
committed by General Bonaparte were pointed out, and 
a confidential report made by the artillery and engineer 
department was most unfavourable to the petitioner. 

On the 15th September, 179S, the Foreign Of^ce sub- 
mitted to the Committee of Public Safety the following 
project : — 

*' General Buonaparte shall go to Constantinople with 
two aides-de-camp, to serve in the army of the Grand 
Turk, to contribute by his talents and acquired know- 
ledge to the reorganisation of the artillery of the powerful 



AGAIN STRUCK OFF THE ACTIVE LIST. 5/ 

Turkish empire, and to execute whatever shall be ordered 
by the ministers of the Porte," &c., &c. 

On the same day the Committee of Public Safety issued 
this decree : — " General Buonaparte, formerly requisitioned 
to serve under the orders of the Committee, is struck off 
the active list in consequence of his refusal to repair to the 
post assigned to him " — refusal to join the army of the 
West. This decree was signed by Cambaceres, the future 
arch-chancellor of the empire, by Berlier, Merlin, and 
Boissy. 

The blow was severe, and no doubt Napoleon poured 
out his feelings on the subject in his letters to his brother; 
but, strange to say, at this point the publication of his 
correspondence with Joseph is suddenly broken off for 
a while. 

Bonaparte, however, was not destined to remain long 
under a cloud. He had several powerful friends, and 
among them Paul Barras, who had seen him at work at 
Toulon and who had not lost sight of him. The Royalist 
reaction was raising its head in the most formidable 
manner, and the adherents of the princes were full of 
confidence. The Convention perceived that strong mea- 
sures could alone save it. 

On the nth Vendemiaire (2nd October) Napoleon 
received this laconic note : " The Citizen Bonaparte is 
invited to come, without fail, to-morrow morning, at ten 
o'clock, to the house of the Citizen Director Barras, at 
Chaillot.'' What happened then is tolerably well known. 
Bonaparte was charged with the defence of the Convention, 
and on the 13th Vendemiaire smote the Royalists hip and 
thigh, and saved the Republic. The Convention hastened 
to confirm his appointment as second in command of 
the Army of the Interior, of which Barras was the 
nominal Commander-in-chief, and two days afterwards the 
Artillery Committee reported in favour of his mission to 
Constantinople. But it was too late. Napoleon often 



58 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

returned to the idea of invading the East ; when emperor 
he seriously contemplated marching on India and seating 
himself on the throne of Delhi, where he proposed to 
remain for four years. For the moment, however, he was 
satisfied with the brilliant change affairs had taken. He 
thus announced his success to Joseph : — 

''Paris, 2 a.m., 6M October^ 1795. 

''At last all is over. My first idea is to think of you, 
and to send you news concerning myself 

" The Royalists, formed into sections, became daily more 
insolent. The Convention ordered that the Lepelletier 
section should be disarmed, and it resisted the troops. 
Menou, who commanded, is said to have played the 
traitor, and was at once dismissed. The Convention 
appointed Barras to command the army, and the Com- 
mittees appointed me second in command. We posted the 
troops ; the enemy marched to attack us at the Tuileries ; 
we killed a great number of them, and lost on our side 
thirty men killed and sixty wounded. We have disarmed 
the sections, and all is quiet. As usual, I was not wounded. 

" The General of Brigade, 

" Buonaparte. 

" P.S. Happiness is for me : my courtship to Desiree 
and to Julie." 

Barras soon resigned his military post, and Napoleon 
wrote to Joseph : — 

"Paris, ist November-, 1795. 

'^A week ago I was appointed General-in-chief of the 
Army of the Interior. The Council of Five Hundred and 
the Ancients are assembled, and the former has drawn 
out a list of the Executive Directory. It appears that 
the five members are to be Sieyes, Rewbel, Barras, Le 
Tourneur, and La Revelliere-Lepaux. My health is good, 
although I lead a very busy life. 

'' Buonaparte." 



CHANGE OF FORTUNE. 59 

There is no more mention of Desiree, whose dowry was 
no longer required. Napoleon was re-instated in the artillery, 
and on the 23rd October was made a General of Division. 
He had evidently money at his disposal. He wrote to 
Joseph : ''I have lodging, talble, and a carriage to offer 

you I have sent 50,000 francs, money, assignatSy 

chiffons, to the family, therefore have no uneasiness. . . . 
You shall soon be made a consul. If Genoa does not 
please you, come to Paris." The rest of the family — 
Lucien, Louis, Jerome, and Uncle Fesch, and a number 
of friends, were speedily provided for. 

How strange the vicissitudes in the life of this great 
soldier, who was : — 

Sixty-six months, second lieutenant. 

Twelve months, first lieutenant. 

Thirteen months, captain. 

Two months, major. 

Twenty-two months, general of brigade. 

When appointed general of brigade he had been present 
with his corps for forty-one months. 

He was cashiered in 1792, in 1794, and in 1795. 

He was only once promoted regularly — when he was 
made first lieutenant. His other grades were all obtained 
by favour from Robespierre, Barras, and other friends in 
power. 

The year 179S, which had opened so gloomily for 
Napoleon, and had more than once almost witnessed the 
ruin of all his hopes and ambition, closed on far more 
cheerful prospects. The high-road to fortune and glory 
was now open to him. 



CHAPTER II. 

THE YEAR 1796. 

Even those historians who most condemn the tyranny 
of Napoleon admit the extraordinary mihtary and ad- 
ministrative capacity which he exhibited in 1796. Never 
were so many battles gained and so many kingdoms 
overrun in the short space of twelve months. In 1/95 the 
name of Bonaparte w\as unknown beyond a very limited 
circle; before the close of 1796 he filled the trump of 
fame and had set down the mighty from their seats. He 
had humbled the Emperor of Germany, had forced the 
Kings of Sardinia and of Naples and the Pope to sue 
for peace ; he had broken up the ancient government of 
Venice, deposed the Duke of Modena, created two Re- 
publics in Italy, and established his authority in Genoa 
and Tuscany. He had beaten with inferior forces, in the 
midst of hostile populations, Beaulieu, Wurmser, Provera, 
Quasdanowich, Alvinzi, Davidowich, and the Archduke 
Charles. In 1795 he was wandering about Paris, some- 
times contemplating suicide, and at other times allowing 
his imagination to be flushed with visions of Eastern 
conquest; before the end of 1796 he was the greatest 
power on the Continent. In 1795 we found him com- 
plaining of ''that wretch Aubry," and of war ministers 
in general. In 1796, thanks to the enthusiasm which his 
victories excited in France, he could afiford to treat with 



LITERARY LABOURS. 6 1 

disrespect the positive orders of the Directory, and to 
settle the affairs of Italy after his own fashion. He had 
three times been deprived of his rank in the army, thanks 
to acts of insubordination, previous to being appointed y 
Commander-in-chief of the army of Italy. In the course 
of 1796 he several times disobeyed the orders of the 
Government by concluding suspensions of arms and 
treaties, and entering into other arrangements with the 
enemy, without waiting for their approbation ; but instead 
of being removed from the service, he was then in a 
position to impose his views on the Directory by simply 
asking to be relieved of his command. 

In perusing his correspondence for 1796, it is necessary 
to bear in mind that Bonaparte considerably exaggerated 
the difficuhies with which he had to contend, underrating 
the strength of his own forces and overrating that of the 
enemy. Before commencing our selection for this memo- 
rable year, we shall merely add that the Correspondence 
of Napoleon contains, for 1796, no less than 1,258 letters, 
despatches, orders of the day, and proclamations. On the 
nth May Bonaparte wrote no less than nineteen letters, 
&c. ; on the 14th April, eighteen, including a detailed 
account of his first victory of Montenotte ; on the 26th 
April, eighteen ; on the 4th May, eighteen, &c., and the 
year can hardly be said to have commenced before April. 
On the 9th May, Bonaparte wrote to Carnot that he loved 
his wife to madness, and this is sufficiently proved by the 
extravagant letters that he addressed to Josephine during 
the campaign in question, and which are not to be found 
in the Correspondence, but in a separate volume published 
in 1833 — letters as remarkable for their passion as for 
their impropriety, although Madame de Remusat says 
any woman would have been proud to receive them. It 
must certainly be remembered that they were addressed 
to a woman of a certain age, who had been married before, 
and whom Bonaparte had met in very dissolute society. 

In the first page of the " Military Correspondence," 



62 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

Bonaparte (19th January, 1796) indicates the best plan to 
adopt in order to beat the Sardinian and Austrian armies, 
and to reach Turin. These objects obtained, he says (and 
his observations are very remarkable, seeing what hap- 
pened before the close of the year) : — • 

" The King of Sardinia will sue for peace. The French 
general must say he has no power to conclude peace, and 
that he must send a courier to Paris ; during this time 
his majesty will be obliged to make propositions of such 
a nature that it will be impossible to refuse them, as they 
will perfectly fulfil the aim of the Government; without 
this Turin will be burned. 

*' However, as the war in Italy will depend entirely on 
the season of the year, each month will require a different 
plan of campaign. The Government must therefore have 
absolute confidence in their general, and allow him great 
latitude, simply indicating the objective. It requires a 
month to receive a reply to a despatch sent from Savona, 
and during that time everything may change." 

A fortnight after, Bonaparte descended from the summits 
of the Alps and pierced the enemy's line at Montenotte, 
the Sardinians were suing for peace, and the road to Turin 
was open. No necessity, however, arose for burning down 
that capital, for the King, Charles Emmanuel, one of whose 
sisters was married to the Comte de Provence who after- 
wards became Louis XVIII., and the other to the Comte 
d'Artois who became Charles X., ceded Nice and Savoy 
to France, and laid down his arms. 

We shall henceforth speak of Napoleon as Bonaparte, as 
he thus signed his name until he adopted the Imperial title. 

At the close of 1795 Bonaparte was appointed General- 
in-chief of the Army of the Interior, succeeding his friend 
and protector, Paul Barras. The first letter which we 
quote for 1796 is addressed to General Clarke, an officer 
of Irish descent, who played a considerable part in the 



Bonaparte's marriage. 63 

Napoleonic drama, and who was created Due de Feltre 
under the Empire. In '96 he was Director of the Topo- 
graphical Department, which post had recently been held 
by Bonaparte. 

To CITIZEN CLARKE^ General of Division. 

" Paris, 2\th February^ 1796. 
'* Citizen General, I have received your note. ... It 
is true that the choiians are organised in the department 
of the Eure, but the flying column destined to maintain 
tranquillity has restored order. I have directed General 
Fluet to act in concert with the justice of the peace and 
to arrest the anigres and refractory priests in the parish 
of He. 

'' Buonaparte." 

About a year later Clarke was removed from the service 
as a Royalist, and nothing but Bonaparte's popularity in 
Paris saved him from sharing the same fate, on the same 
charge, and in conjunction with the regicide Carnot ! 

In the following letter, the first he signed *' Bonaparte," 
without the "u," the young general announced his mar- 
riage. He had met Josephine in the company of Barras, 
at that moment the most influential of " les cinq sires!' 
Barras had been one of his best men, and according to 
report had given to Josephine, as a wedding gift, the 
command of the army of Italy for her husband. It is true 
that Carnot also claimed the honour of this appointment, 
and that all five Directors wished to get rid of a protector 
who alarmed them by his indefatigable activity and ill- 
concealed ambition. 

To CITIZEN LE TOURNEUR. 

" Paris, wth March, 1796. 
" I have requested the Citizen Barras to inform the 
Executive Directory of my marriage with the Citoyenne 
Tascher Beauharnais. The confidence which the Directory 



64 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

has shown me under all circumstances renders it my duty 
to inform them of all my actions. It is a new bond which 
attaches me to the country ; it is a new pledge of my firm 
resolution to find salvation in the Republic alone. 
" Salutations and respect. 

*' The General-in-chief of the army of Italy, 

" Bonaparte." 

Strange to say, Hoche, Bonaparte's rival, had been 
thrown into prison because, while in command of the 
army of the Rhine, he had married a young lady of Thion- 
ville. It is true that this was in the days of the terrible 
Committee of Public Safety, which considered the moment 
of commencing a campaign ill-chosen for matrimony and 
domestic happiness. Barras thought by this marriage 
with Josephine to secure the support of Bonaparte. 

Immediately after his marriage Bonaparte started to 
take command of the army of Italy, then about 34,000 
strong. His honeymoon lasted only forty-eight hours. 
On assuming the command he issued the following 
proclamation :— 

" Nice, i']th March, 1796. 
" Soldiers, you were naked, ill-fed : the Government 
owed you much and had nothing to give you. Your 
patience, and the courage you have exhibited in the midst 
of these rocks, are admirable ; but they procure you no 
glory ; no brilliancy is reflected on you. I desire to lead 
you into the most fertile plains in the world. Rich pro- 
vinces and great cities will be in your power; you will 
find there, honour, glory, and wealth. Soldiers of Italy, 
will you be wanting in courage and constancy } " 

More than one French historian has severely blamed 
Bonaparte for encouraging among his Republican ofiicers 
a spirit of ambition and among Republican soldiers an 
insatiable cupidity. "Bonaparte," says Lanfrey, *' pointed 



DEMANDS ON GENOA. 65 

to Italy, not as a nation to be delivered, but as a prey to 
be seized upon, and his excitations produced a thirst for 
plunder of which no modern war offers another example." 
But Bonaparte was not alone to blame for this, and the 
military chest, though strictly guarded, was absolutely 
empty. Hitherto the Republic had fought in defence of 
the immortal principles of '93, but now it was about to 
indulge in a war of aggression and systematic robbery. 

To CITIZEN FAYPOULT. 

"Nice, 27M March, 1796. 
" I have received your letter. I dined yesterday at the 
house of General Scherer, with your wife. I shall be 

charmed to be of service to her It is said that the 

Genoese offer us 3,000,000 francs. My opinion is that this 
sum should be accepted without noise, and that we should 
continue to live in peace and friendship with that Republic, 
whose enmity would be baneful to our commerce and 
would disarrange our military calculations. 

'' Bonaparte." 

The chief interest in the above letter, addressed to an 
officer of the commissariat, lies m the fact that it shows 
Bonaparte, even before entering Italy, intent on setting 
aside the plans of the Directory, which were certainly 
faulty, and acting for himself. Bonaparte had succeeded 
Scherer in the command of the army of Italy, and he was 
destined to succeed him again on his return from Egypt. 
The demands upon poor Genoa were increased in the most 
exorbitant manner as soon as Bonaparte became master 
of the situation. 

To THE DIRECTORY. 

''Nice, -zZth March, 1796. 
" I have been for several days in the midst of the army; 

yesterday I assumed the command The adminis- 

VOL. I. F 



66 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

trative situation is regrettable, but not to be despaired of. 
I am obliged to threaten the contractors, who have robbed 
much and who enjoy credit, and I obtain a good deal by 
flattering them afterwards. The army will henceforth 
have good bread and meat; it has already received 
considerable sums, in the way of arrears. 

" The marches from the Rhone to the Var are pro- 
visioned, and five days ago my cavalry, my baggage 
waggons, and my artillery were in motion. Citizen 
Directors, your intentions shall be carried out ; I shall 
march shortly. I have announced to the army that you 
are satisfied with its good conduct and patience. This has 
greatly flattered the soldiers, and especially the officers. 
A battalion mutinied and woidd not leave Nice, on the 
pretext that it had neither shoes nor money. I had all 
the grenadiers arrested ; I made the battalion march, and 
when it was a league out of Nice, I despatched a counter- 
order and sent it to the rear. My intention is to disband 
this corps and to incorporate the soldiers in other battalions, 
the officers not having shown sufficient firmness. 

^^ I was received by this army with all the demonstrations 
of joy and confidence due to one wlio during five months, 
acting under your eyes, has merited your confidence. 

'^ I have been particularly struck with the frankness and 
honesty of General Scherer. He has acquired claims to 
my gratitude by his loyal conduct and the alacrity with 
which he has communicated useful information. His 
health appears somewhat shaken. He has a great facility 
for speaking on moral and political matters which might 
be of use to you. 

" Our position with regard to Genoa is critical .... 
There are two courses open. To seize upon Genoa by 
surprise, but that is opposed to your intentions and would 
be contrary to the law of nations ; or to live on good 
terms with her, and not to exact money from the people, 
which is the only thing they value. 

''Bonaparte/' 



Bonaparte's generals. 67 

Bonaparte, on joining the army, was not well received 
at first, especially by some of the general officers senior to 
him in the service, and who had already distinguished 
themselves in the field. However, he speedily caused his 
authority to be respected, and Massena and Augereau 
acknowledged that they had found their master. Among 
other officers in the army of Italy were Marmont, Junot, 
Murat, Joubert, Lannes, Victor, and Suchet, all destined 
to acquire more or less celebrity in the field. 

ORDER OF THE DAY. 

''Nice, 29//^ March^ 1796. 

" The General-in-chief Bonaparte reviewed the looth 
demi-brigade, &c. He is satisfied with the appearance 
of the troops, their sentiments of devotion towards the 
Republic, and their resolution to conquer. He has 
inspected the active divisions of the army, and has every- 
where found soldiers accustomed to vanquish and to suffer, 
and as devoted to liberty as to discipline, which is the 
sinew of armies. They will find in him a comrade, strong 
in the confidence of the Government, proud of the esteem 
of patriots, and decided to acquire for the army of Italy 
destinies worthy of it. 

"In execution of a decree of the Directory, General 
Alexander Berthier is appointed chief of the staff of the 
army of Italy '* 

Berthier had already seen a fair amount of service in 
America and elsewhere. He could read a map, and 
although he was not capable of commanding a division 
he was invaluable as a staff-officer. 

To THE DIRECTORY. 

" AlbENGA, 6th Aprils 1796. 
'' I have transferred my head-quarters to Albenga. The 
movement which I found commenced against Genoa has 

F 2 



68 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

drawn the enemy out of his winter quarters Beau- 
lieu has published a manifesto, to which I shall reply after 
the battle. I was much annoyed by this movement on 
Genoa, which obliged that RepubHc to assume a hostile 
attitude and alarmed the enemy, when I counted 
on catching him napping. This will cost us so many 
more men. 

'' General Colli sent an eniigi^e named Moulin with a 
flag of truce. I had him arrested and brought before 
a court martial, as nothing can render the person of a 
parricide sacred. 

". . . . The army is m a terrible state of destitution. 
I have still great obstacles to surmount, but they are 
surmountable. Distress has authorised insubordination, 
and without discipline victory is out of the question. I 
hope all this will be changed in the course of a few days. 

'' Bonaparte." 

The movement on Genoa which aroused Beaulieu nearly 
proved fatal to Bonaparte, who but for the gallant 
defence of a redoubt would have been cut off by General 
d'Argenteau. 

To THE DIRECTORY. 

^^ Albenga, %th Aprils 1796. 

''You will find inclosed the letter written to me by 
General Colli, who commands the army of the King of 
Sardinia, and the answer I have returned. I hope it is 
in conformity with your intentions. 

'' The Treasury often sends us letters of change which 
are not honoured. One for 172,800 francs, drawn on Cadiz, 
has just been returned, which augments our difficulties. 

*' I found this army not only destitute of everything, but 
without discipline and in a chronic state of insubordination. 
The discontent was so great that evil-minded men took 
advantage of it to form a ' Company of the Dauphin,' and 



THE FIRST ITALIAN CAMPAIGN. 69 

to Sing Chouan and anti-revolutionary songs. I have had 
two officers tried by court martial for crying Vive le roif 

" I suppose that Moulin's mission had something to do 
with all this. Although the Treasury has not kept faith 
with us we shall push forward. 

'' Bonaparte." 

ORDER OF THE DAY. 

"Carcare, i2th April^ 1796. 
" Vive la R^publique ! To-day, 23rd Germinal, the 
division of General Massena and that of Laharpe attacked 
the Austrians, 13,000 strong, commanded by General 
Beaulieu in person and the Generals Argenteau and 
Roccavina, occupying the important position of Monte- 
notte. The Republicans completely defeated the Austrians, 
killing or wounding about 3,000 men. General Roccavina is 
among the wounded. Further details will be furnished 
when all the information relative to this glorious affair 
has been collected." 

To THE DIRECTORY. 

'* Carcare, i^th Aprily 1796. 

" The Italian campaign has commenced. I have for- 
w^arded a report on the battle of Montenotte. After 
manoeuvring for three days in order to conceal his 
intentions, Beaulieu attacked the right of our army with 
10,000 men. General Cervoni resisted the enemy with the 
intrepidity which characterises the soldiers of liberty. I 
was not deceived as to the real object of the enemy. As 
soon as I was informed of the attack on my right, I 
ordered General Cervoni to wait until it was dark and 
then to fall back by a forced march (hiding his movement 
from the enemy) on my centre, which was protected by 
the heights of the Madona of Savona." 

"On the loth, at 4 A.M., Beaulieu in person, with 15,000 
men, attacked and forced all the positions on which the 



70 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

centre of the army rested. An hour after noon he attacked 
the redoubt of Monte Legino, which was our last line of 
defence. The enemy returned several times to the charge, 
but the redoubt, defended by 1,500 men, was rendered 
impregnable by the courage of those who defended it. 

"Bonaparte." 

The battle was renewed the next day, and Massena 
coming up, the Austrians were routed. Had General 
Rampon and his men not held the redoubt, the campaign 
would have been lost, and half the French army and its 
general-in-chief captured. The next night was employed 
by Bonaparte in repairing his error, and this was very soon 
done. His great object was to separate the Sardinian and 
Austrian armies, and this he effected by beating Beaulieu 
at Montenotte and then Beaulieu and Colli at Mellesimo. 
It is true that Beaulieu captured a French detachment at 
Dego on the 13th, but Massena retook that position after 
some desperate fighting. 

To DIRECTOR CARNOT. 

^' Carcare, \^th April, 1796. 

" You will find the details of the battles of Montenotte 
and Millesimo in the report forwarded to the Directory. 
I cannot conceal from you that I am seconded neither by 
the artillery nor the engineers, as, in spite of your orders, 
I have not a single one of the officers I asked for. 

" I have captured Montezemoto. I have no officer of 
engineers capable of taking a survey of Ceva, and I shall 
have to go there myself, although my presence is very 
necessary on the right, where perhaps in an hour I shall 
be engaged with Beaulieu, who is furious, and wishes to 
make a despairing effort. Will you believe it, that I have 
not a single engineer officer who has studied at Mezieres, 
nor one who has seen a siege or who has served in a 
fortified place },...'' 

" Bonaparte." 



ENTHUSIASM OF THE TROOPS. 7 1 

It is related that when the French troops arrived at 
Montezemoto and beheld the beautiful plains of Italy 
beneath them, they halted, and, struck with admiration> 
saluted their young commander with unanimous acclama- 
tions. In a very few days Bonaparte had managed to 
win the confidence of the army, whose cupidity he had 
also aroused. 

To GENERAL SERURIER. 

"Lesegno, 2Qth April, 1796. 
*'I have learned with pain that our troops allowed 
themselves to be surprised yesterday at the village of St. 

Michel By these various movements you will be in 

a position to take your revenge in a brilliant fashion 

You must not be astonished, my dear general, at the little 
check you have received ; it will only be the prelude to 
our victory. 

''Bonaparte." 

Beaulieu, in spite of his age, was a very enterprising 
and active soldier ; but, fortunately for Bonaparte, he was 
badly seconded, and the people of Turin lost courage, 
Having been beaten at Vico and then at Mondovi, his 
Sardinian majesty, much against his own inclination, sued 
for peace. His troops had been beaten, but he was still 
formidable by reason of his artillery, his cavalry, and the 
natural positions he might occupy. Nor was Turin in any 
immediate danger, for the French had no siege pieces and 
Beaulieu was not far off. 

ORDER OF THE DAY. 

'* Lesegno, 22nd April , 1796. 

"The General-in-chief congratulates the army on its 
bravery and the successes it has gained over the enemy ; 
but he sees with horror the fearful pillage in which perverse 
men, who join their corps only after the battle, and who 



72 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

commit excesses which dishonour the army and the French 
name, have indulged. 

" He consequently orders : — 

" First. That the chief of the staff shall, within twenty- 
four hours, make a report on the morality of the adjutant- 
generals and other officers attached to the staff. 

*^ Second. The generals of division will, within twenty- 
four hours, transmit to the General-in-chief, a note on the 
morahty of the field officers under their orders since the 
opening of the campaign," &c., &c. 

And generals of division were authorised to shoot officers 
'* who by their example excite others to pillage, thus de- 
stroying discipline, spreading disorder through the army, 
and compromising its safety and glory." 

Sometimes these acts of pillage were punished, some- 
times they were excused, and at other times tolerated, if 
not encouraged. 

To THE DIRECTORY. 

*' Carru, i\th April, 1796. 

*' I have forwarded a report on the battle of Mondovi, 

which does the greatest honour to the troops You 

have no idea of the military and admuiistrative condition 
of the army. When I arrived it was undermined by ill- 
intentioned persons, it was without bread, without dis- 
cipline. I have made examples My life here is 

inconceivable , I return fatigued to my quarters, and it is 
necessary to sit up working all night, and to go everywhere 
to re-establish order. The soldier without bread is driven 
to commit acts which make one blush to be a man. I Intend 
to make terrible examples. / shall rest07'e order, or shall 

cease to command these brigands The campaign is 

not yet decided. The enemy is driven to despair ; he is 
strong, and fights well. He knows I am in want of every- 
thing, and trusts to time. I place my faith in the genius 



STATE OF THE ARMY. "] ^ 

of the Republic, the bravery of the soldiers, the harmony 
of the chiefs, and the confidence reposed in me. I have 
100,000 men against me, and can oppose only 34,000 
infantry and 3,500 cavalry to that force. The enemy 
possesses strong places and a numerous and efficient 

artillery 

'' Bonaparte." 

In order to put an end to pillage, Bonaparte then 
announced his intention of laying a heavy war indemnity 
on the various conquered provinces, which were also 
requisitioned for the immediate benefit of the army. 

The King of Sardinia having sued for peace, Joseph Bona- 
parte was despatched to Paris for instructions, also Citizen 
Junot, who was to present to the Government twenty-one 
Austrian and Sardinian standards, captured at Montenotte, 
Millesimo, Dego, and Mondovi, and to persuade Josephine 
to join her disconsolate husband. 

To THE DIRECTORY. 

" Cherasco, 26M Aprils 1796. 
*^ . . . . Everything is going on well. There is not so 
much pillaging. The first thirst of an army in want of 
everything has been quenched. There was an excuse for 
these unfortunate fellows^ who after having sighed for 
three years on the summit of the Alps, reached the pro- 
mised land and desired to enjoy it. / have had th^ee of 
them shot, and half-a-doze7i condevuied to hai^d labour, .... 
To-morroiv a coi^poral and some soldiers, who stole the sacred 
vases fro fi I a church, are to be shot. In three days discipline 
will be severely established, and astonished Italy will 
admire the moderation of our army as it already admires 
its courage. This occasions me a great deal of pain, and 
makes me pass very unhappy moments. Horrors, which 
make me shudder, have been committed. Happily the 
Piedmontese army, during its retreat, committed still 

greater ones. 

'' Bonaparte." 



74 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

PROCLAMATION TO THE ARMY. 

" Cherasco, 26/^ Aprils 1796. 

** Soldiers, — In fifteen days you have gained six 
victories, captured twenty-one standards^ fifty-five guns, 
several strong places, conquered the richest portion of 
Piedmont; you have made 15,000 prisoners and have 
killed or wounded 10,000 men. 

*^ Hitherto you had fought for sterile rocks, which bear 
witness to your courage, but which were useless to the 
country. To-day you equal by your services the armies 
of Holland and of the Rhine. Devoid of everything, you 
have supplied everything. You have gained battles with- 
out guns, passed rivers without bridges, accomplished 
forced marches without shoes, bivouacked without brandy 

and often without bread To-day you are amply 

provided for. The magazines captured from the enemy 
are numerous ; the siege and field-pieces have arrived. 
.... I promise you the conquest of Italy, but on one 
condition. You must swear to respect the people you 
deliver, and repress the horrible pillage in which scoun- 
drels, excited by the enemy, have indulged. Without 
that you will not be liberators, but a pestilence, and your 
victories, your courage, your success, and the blood of 
your brothers who have perished, will be all lost, as well 

as honour and glory 

''Bonaparte." 

On the 28th April Bonaparte, in spite of the orders of 
the Directory, took upon himself to sign an armistice with 
the King of Sardinia, who allowed himself to be influenced 
by wealthy and timid citizens, who trembled for the fate 
of Turin. 

To THE directory. 

"Cherasco, 29M April, 1796. 
*' The village of Coni has been occupied by our troops. 
.... I feel sure that you will approve of the suspension 



THE GENOESE REPUBLIC. 75 

of arms granted to the Sardinians ; it is an armistice 
accorded to one wing of an army, giving me time to beat 
the other. It is a king who places himself entirely at my 
discretion, giving me up three of his strongest places and 
the richest half of his states 

'' During the suspension I intend crossing the Adige 
with your army and entering Germany by the Tyrol. 
.... My columns are on the march : Beaulieu is flying, 
but I hope to overtake him. I shall lay a contribution of 
several millions on the Duke of Parma. He will make 
you propositions of peace, but be in no hurry, so that I 
may have time to force him to pay the expenses of the 
campaign, to replenish our magazines, and to repair our 
military train. 

" If you do not accept peace with the King of Sardinia; 
if your intention is to dethrone him, you should amuse him 
for a few decades, and send me information at once, so 
that I may seize on Valenza and march on Turin. 

" I shall send 12,000 men to Rome when I have beaten 
Beaulieu and obliged him to repass the Adige 

"As for Genoa, I think you should demand fifteen 
millions, and that the persons who burned the Modeste be 
tried as traitors to the country. If you charge me with 
this affair, and keep the matter secret, I will manage to 
accomplish all you wish. 

''Bonaparte." 

The Genoese, in spite of their neutrality, had allowed 
the English to seize on a French frigate in 1793, not being 
well able to help themselves. This was one of those sores 
which Bonaparte liked to keep open. At the beginning 
of the campaign Genoa was to be mulcted to the extent of 
3,000,000 francs without fuss ; now the Republic was to 
be called upon to pay 15,000,000, not that any further 
crime could be imputed to it, but because Napoleon was 
in a position to exact better terms. 

Having settled matters to his own satisfaction with 



76 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

Sardinia, which was detached from the coalition and ren- 
dered perfectly helpless, Bonaparte now started in pursuit 
of Beaulieu, and prepared to levy black-mail on the whole 
of Italy from the Alps to the Adriatic. 



To CITIZEN FAYPOULT. 

"ACQUI, 1st May, 1796. 

''We reached Acqui yesterday. Beaulieu flies so fast 

that we cannot catch him Send me a geographical, 

historical, political, and topographical note on the imperial 
fiefs in the neighbourhood of Genoa ; also a note on the 
Dukes of Parma, Placentia, and Modena ; the forces they 
have in the field ; their forts ; in what consists the wealth 
of those countries ; above all send me a list of the pictures, 
statues, cabinets, and curiosities at Milan, Parma, Placentia, 

Modena, and Bologna 

'' BONAPARTE." 

The acts of brigandage committed in Italy must not be 
laid entirely to the charge of Bonaparte. He was obeying 
such orders received from the Government as the following : 
" Leave nothing in Italy which our political situation will 
permit you to carry away, and which may be useful to us." 
It is true that he proved an active and willing agent. 

To THE DIRECTORY. 

'' TORTONA, 6ih May, 1796. 

" I have received your answer. I beg you will express 
to the Corps Legislatif the thanks of the army for the 
honourable decree which it has voted ; it is the most 
grateful recompense that the army can receive. As for 
myself, nothing can add to the esteem and devotion I 
have shown on all occasions to the constitution. I saw 
it established in the midst of the most revolting passions, 



PASSAGE OF THE PO. "J^ 

all tending towards the destruction of the Republic. I 
have been of some utility to it by my zeal during its first 
steps. My desire shall always be to die in its defence. 

'' Bonaparte." 

On the 6th May, 1796, Bonaparte announced to the 
Directory his intention to cross the Po, " by which measure 
I shall turn the three lines of defence which Beaulieu has 

had the precaution to occupy To-day I march on 

Placentia. Pavia is turned, and should the enemy prove 
obstinate enoughto defend that town, I shall get' between 
him and his supplies." The general then complained that 
he had no pontoons, but added : " Be sure we shall do 
all that it is possible to do, and I am certain that I can 
depend on your justice. I know you are better able than 
any one to estimate the difficulty of obstacles which 
cannot be easily overcome by any one, and that you 
are far from listening to the soldiers of the clubs, who 
believe we can swim across broad rivers. I may be accused 
of temerity but not of slowness ; and yet one must so 
calculate as to have the chances in one's favour." And in 
spite of his celerity, v/hich bewildered his antagonists, 
every movement, as his letters, orders, and despatches 
prove, was in the first place most carefully worked out 
and considered. Bonaparte deceived Beaulieu by means 
of false intelligence, and crossed the Po without opposition, 
and without pontoons. 

To CARNOT. 

" Placentia, ^th May, 1796. 
" We have at last crossed the Po. The second campaign 
has commenced. Beaulieu is disconcerted ; he miscalcu- 
lates, and continually falls into the snares I set for him. 
Perhaps he wishes to give battle, for he has both audacity 
and energy, but not genius. The 6,000 men which we de- 
feated yesterday and obliged to recross the Adda, weaken 



78 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

him greatly. Another victory and we shall be masters of 

Italy If we had a good administrator we should 

be as well off as it is possible to imagine. The soldiers 
have a sufficient quantity of good bread, meat, and wine. 
Discipline is being established, hut frequent exeeutiojts are 
necessary, as there are men so intractable that they cannot 
be commanded. 

'' What we have taken from the enemy is incalculable. We 
have hospital effects for 15,000 sick, several magazines of 
corn and meal, &c. The tnore men you send me the easier 
shall I find it to nourish them. 

*'I send you twenty pictures by the first masters, 
Correggio and Michael Angelo. 

" I owe you special thanks for your attentions towards 
my wife. I recommend her to you; she is a sincere 
patriot, and I love her to madness. 

"I hope, if things go well, to be able to send you 
10,000,000 francs to Paris, which will not be amiss for 
the army of the Rhine. 

'' I cannot conceal the fact that since the death of 
Stengel I have not a fighting cavalry commander. I 
wish you would send me two or three adjutant-generals 
who have served in the cavalry, who have been under 
fire, and who have the firm resolution never to make 
skilful retreats, 

'' Bonaparte." 

During this campaign the French cavalry, which acquired 
such high reputation afterwards, did nothing. Murat on 
one occasion showed the white feather, and only retrieved 
his character when charging Mamelukes in Egypt. 

Bonaparte had been married only two days when he 
was obliged to hurry off to assume the command of the 
army of Italy. Even his brief honeymoon, spent at 
Josephine's house in the Rue Chantereine, had been 
passed in the study of maps and the preparations for his 
coming campaign and speedy departure. When Josephine 



LOVE LETTERS. 79 

knocked at his door, he opened it for an instant, gave her 
a kiss, and sent her away. 

He had hardly left the capital before he commenced 
writing a series of passionate letters, only legible for 
Josephine and M. de Menval. For some time he was 
unable to persuade Josephine to join him in Italy. She 
was loth to quit the pleasures of Paris for the dangers of 
a campaign ; and this had the effect of increasing the 
ardour of the young general, who at last insisted that his 
wife should join him, and directed Murat, who had been 
sent to the Directory with captured standards to bring her 
back with him. Murat, not without difficulty, accomplished 
this task. 

Some of these letters contain expressions which it would 
be difficult, and perhaps as well not, to translate ; others 
betray a deep and rather poetic affection, in which despair 
and jealousy are quaintly blended. We give a few speci- 
mens of this amorous correspondence, carried on amid the 
noise and bustle of war. It has been suggested by one 
French historian that Bonaparte's brilliant military con- 
ceptions were in all probability heightened by his passion 
for Josephine, which stimulated his genius and rendered 
him all the more anxious to distinguish himself 

To JOSEPHINE, AT Milan. 

" RovERBELLA, 6/^ July, 1796. 
*' I have beaten the enemy. Kilmaine will send you an 
account of the affair. I am dead with fatigue. I beg you 
will start at once for Verona ; I have need of you, for I 
feel I am very ill. 

** A thousand kisses. I am in bed, 

'* Bonaparte." 

The indisposition was not dangerous, and Josephine 
remained at Milan, where she received a series of epistles 
which might better have been written by an inflammable 
subaltern than by the commander-in-chief of an army — 



So THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

letters on the nth, 17th, i8th, 19th, 21st, 22nd July con- 
taining such passages as these : *' Ever since I left you 
I have been sad. I unceasingly recall your kisses, your 
tears, your amiable jealousy ; and the charms of my in- 
comparable Josephine kindle in my heart and my senses 

a bright and burning flame Get well and come to 

me, so that at least before dying we may say — We were 
so many days happy." 

Sometimes enabled to pass a few days together, the 
lovers were often sundered by the events of the war, and 
this gave rise to a fresh correspondence. 

On the loth August Bonaparte wrote to his Josephine, 
complaining of her indifference, and saying : — 

'' Three days and no letter, and yet I have written 
several. This absence is horrible ; the nights are long, 

wearisome, and insipid : the day is monotonous 

Think of me, live for me, be often with your well-beloved, 
and believe there is only one misfortune which frightens 
him, that of no longer being loved by Josephine." 

And : '^ You are unkind and ugly — as ugly as you are 
frivolous. How perfidious to deceive a poor husband — a 
tender lover ! Should one lose one's rights because one is 
far away ? One of these nights your doors will be thrown 
open with noise, and, like a jealous fellow, behold me in 
your arms." 

Then : " I was in bed all yesterday with fever. This 
hindered me from writing, my adorable friend ; but I 
received your letters, and pressed them to my heart and 
my lips, and the pain of absence and 100 miles distance 
disappeared. At that moment I beheld you near me, not 
capricious and angry, but sweet and tender. It was but 
a dream ; judge if it cured my fever." 

On another occasion : '' What important affair deprives 
you of time to write to me ? What affection stifles the 
tender and constant love you vowed to me ? Who is this 
merveille2Lr, this new lover who engrosses all your time } 



THE BATTLE OF LODI. 8 1 

.... Of a truth I am uneasy : write me four pages of 
those amiable things which fill my heart with pleasure." 

Some days later : " When I sacrifice all my desires, all 
my thoughts, to you, I obey the ascendency which your 
charms, your character, your person, have assumed over 
my unfortunate heart/' 

On the loth May the battle of Lodi was gained by 
Bonaparte, who thus concluded the report which he 
forwarded to the Directory: — 

" Beaulieu is flying with the remains of his army ; 
already all Lombardy may be considered as belonging 
to the Republic ; he is at this moment crossing the states 
of Venice; several towns have closed their gates to him. I 
hope soon to send you the keys of Milan and Pavia. 
Although, since the commencement of the campaign, we 
have had some warm affairs, and it has been necessary 
for the army of the Republic to exhibit great audacity, 
nothing can be compared to the terrible passage of the 
bridge of Lodi. 

" If we lost only a few men, that was due to promptitude 
of execution, and the sudden effect produced on the enemy 

by the redoubtable fire of the attacking column 

'* Bonaparte." 

However Bonaparte, even after his brilliant success at 
Lodi, which made him master of Lombardy, was ill at 
ease. What if the French armies on the Rhine were idle, 
and had prolonged the armistice } In that event, as he 
wrote to Carnot, the army of Italy was in danger of being 
annihilated. Nothing, however, could long damp the 
energy of the young general, whose marvellous activity 
was equal to every contingency both in war and politics. 

At Lodi, Bonaparte, hoping to cut off two Austrian 

divisions, instead of turning the bridge over the Adda, 

attacked it in front. The success of this daring operation 

had a most demoralising effect on the enemy, and obliged 

VOL. I. G 



82 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

Beaulieu to fall back on the Mincio. Nor was this the 
only result of a victory which, as the young general said, 
placed Lombardy at his discretion. It fortified his own 
position at home. As regards the armies commanded by 
Moreau and by Jourdan, respecting whose operations Napo- 
leon expressed anxiety, they were accomplishing nothing, 
and this supineness greatly added to the popularity of the 
commander-in-chief of the army of Italy. 

The Directory was always urging Bonaparte to march 
upon Rome, but for strategical or other reasons he avoided 
executing these orders as long as possible. 

To CITIZEN CARNOT. 

"LODI, I4^A Afay, 1796. 

" On the reception of the letter from the Directory your 
intentions were executed, and the Milanais is ours. I 
shall march soon to carry out your views with regard to 
Leghorn and Rome. That will not take much time. 

'' I have written to the Directory on the subject of 
dividing the army. I swear that I had only the interest 
of the country in view. Besides, you will always find me 
straightforward. I owe to the Republic the sacrifice of 
all my ideas. If people search to injure me in your 
opinion, my answer is in my heart and my conscience. 

''As it is possible that my letter to the Directory may 
be misunderstood, and as you have shown me friendship, I 
beg you will do whatever your prudence and your attach- 
ment may suggest in my favour. 

" Kellermann will command the army as well as I can, 
for no one is more convinced than I am myself that our 
victories are due to the courage and bravery of the troops ; 
but I think that to join Kellermann and myself in Italy 
would be to sacrifice everything. I cannot willingly serve 
with a man who considers himself the first general in 
Europe ; besides which I believe that one bad general is 
better than two good ones. War, like government, is an 
alTair of tact. 



ENTHUSIASM IN PARIS. 83 

" I can be useful to you only as long as I am invested 
with the same esteem which I enjoy in Paris. That I 
should be employed here or elsewhere is indifferent to 
me : serve our country, merit a page in our history, ^\v^ 
the Government proofs of my attachment and devotion — 
this is all my ambition. But I have greatly at heart not 
to lose in a week the fruit of two months of fatigue, danger, 
and trouble, and to find myself hampered. I have com- 
menced with some glory, and I desire to continue to be 
worthy of you. Believe me, besides, that nothing will alter 
the esteem with which you inspire all who know you. 

"Bonaparte," 

The Directors were already alarmed at the popularity of 
the young general whose victorious bulletins, published 
morning after morning in the Mo7iiteur^ excited the wildest 
enthusiasm in Paris. They had also some inkling of his 
ambitious projects. Under these circumstances, on the 
7th May they wrote a despatch informing Napoleon of 
their intention to divide the army of Italy into two corps, 
one of which was to be commanded by Kellermann. 
This despatch reached Bonaparte just after the victory 
of Lodi, and it is easy to imagine how deeply it irritated 
him. Instead, however, of braving the decision of the 
Government, as he might probably have done with im- 
punity, he merely asked to be recalled. When he pleaded 
in favour of unity of command he forgot that on a previous 
occasion he had objected to the armies of the Sambre 
and Meuse and that of the Rhine being confided to the 
sam.e general, and this on political grounds. The Govern- 
ment replied to Bonaparte's letter only on the 28th, 
before which date fresh triumphs had rendered it im- 
possible for them to accept his resignation. Their answer 
was equivalent to the most abject apology. In the 
meantime Bonaparte kept them in good humour by 
constantly replenishing their coffers. 

G 2 



84 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

ORDER OF THE DAY. 

^^ Milan, i^th Maf, 1796. 

" The general-in-chief takes the opportunity of a tem- 
porary lull to recommend the generals of division to 
procure all that is necessary for the troops so that they 
may be in a position to resume operations. He is 
persuaded beforehand that the army desires to fly to 
new victories, but in the midst of the abundance obtained 
by our successes the Republican soldier must know how 
to form a proper estimate of his good luck, and must not 
tarnish his laurels : he should respect and protect the in- 
habitants of the country he has conquered. The general- 
in-chief has too lively an interest in the honour of the army 
to allow any individual to violate the rights of property." 

This order of the day was followed by a letter to the 
Directory giving a list of the pictures, vases, and manu- 
scripts, '* which General Bonaparte had selected to be 
transported to Paris," from Milan, Parma, and Placentia, 
and this notice to the Directory : — " I have sent to 
Tontona at least 2,000,000 francs in jewelry and silver ingots, 
derived from different contributions." And — '' We shall 
levy 20,000,000 francs upon this country, which is one of 
the richest in the world, but which has been entirely 
exhausted by five years of war." Only two days before 
Bonaparte wrote this despatch the inhabitants of Milan 
had hailed his entry into that city with universal delight. 
Five days later there was an open revolt at Pavia and 
latent revolt at Milan. Binasco was burned, the in- 
habitants put to the sword, and 400 hostages, selected 
from the richest families of Lombardy, were sent to 
France. 

The following is a pretty illustration of the suaviter in 
modo and the fortiter in re policy in which Bonaparte was 
already an adept. 



CONTRIBUTIONS LEVIED IN LOMBARDY. 85 

PROCLAMATION TO THE PEOPLE OF LOMBARDY. 

"Milan, \^th May, 1796. 

"The French Republic which has sworn hatred to 

tyrants has also sworn fraternity towards people 

The despot who so long enslaved Lombardy has caused 
great mischief to France, but the French know that the 
cause of kings is not that of the people. . . . If the French 
are conquerers, they wish to consider the people of 
Lombardy as brothers. Respect for property, for persons, 
for religion, these are the sentiments which animate the 
French Government and the victorious army of Italy. 
The independence of Lombardy depends on the success 
of the French. In order to insure the march of the troops, 
provisions, which cannot be drawn from France, are 
necessary ; they ought to be found in Lombardy ; the 
right of war might seize them, friendship should offer 
them. 

"A contribution of 20,000,000 francs is laid on the differ- 
ent provinces of Austrian Lombardy ; the army requires this 
sum .... which is a very slight impost 'for so fertile a 
country when all the advantages which will result from a 

French occupation are considered 

'' Bonaparte. 
'' Salicetti.'' 

On the same day Bonaparte drew up the following 
remarkable document, which one is rather surprised to see 
figuring in the correspondence. But perhaps it was useless 
to attempt to hide decisions with which history had already 
dealt. A few French artists, but a very few, disapproved, 
and to-day Republican writers blush to think that Carnot 
should have sanctioned such brigandage. 

DECISION. 

" Milan, \c^th May, 1796. 
"Art. I. An agent shall be attached to the French 
army in Italy to extract and forward to the territory of the 



86 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

French Republic the objects of art, science, &c., found in 
\h^ conquered tow7is,\h.^ choice and number to be submitted 
to the general-in-chief. 

" Art. 2. He shall also be charged to extract and trans- 
port the objects of art and science, &c., accorded by the 
powers of Italy in virtue of treaties or suspensions of arms 
with the French Republic." 

Follow numerous articles concerning mode of transport ; 
and the appointment of Jacques Pierre Tinet as agent. 
The enthusiasm of the towns which thought they had been 
liberated was of short duration. 

To HIS BROTHERS IN ARMS. 

"Milan, 20th May, 1796. 

" Soldiers, — You dashed like a torrent from the summit 
of the Apennines ; you have overthrown, dispersed, and 
scattered all who opposed your march. 

" Piedmont, delivered from Austrian tyranny, has given 
vent to her natural sentiments of peace and friendship 
towards France. 

'* Milan is ours, and the Republican flag floats over all 
Lombardy. 

*' The Dukes of Parma and Modena owe their political 
existence entirely to your generosity. 

'* The army which menaced you with such arrogance 
finds nothing to protect it against your courage. 

'' The Po, the Tessin, the Adda, did not stop you a 
single day ; those boasted bulwarks of Italy were found 

wanting Shall posterity reproach us with having 

found a Capua in Lombardy } . , , . Let us be doing ; we 
have still forced marches to make, enemies to subdue, 

laurels to gather, insults to avenge 

" Bonaparte." 

This manner of addressing the soldiers, and giving them 
the credit of the great exploits in Italy due to his own 



PENURY OF THE ARMY, 87 

genius, made Bonaparte extremely popular with the army, 
which was at once interested and flattered. There was 
a fair prospect, too, of more booty, which was much 
needed owing to the rapacity of the home Government. 



To THE MINISTER OF FINANCES. 

" Milan, iist May, 1796. 

'* The army of Italy is in the greatest distress 

It is every day reinforcedy and its necessities increase in pro- 
portion. When the Directory gave me the command of 
this army it drew up a plan of offensive warfare necessitat- 
ing prompt measures and extraordinary resources. The 
advance of two sous in silver and of eight francs for 
the officers has not been paid, which discontents and 

discourages the army 

*' Bonaparte." 

And an urgent appeal is made for payment of sums 
over due. The same day came the following decree : — 

'' The various provinces of the Milanais will furnish for 
the wants of the army : — P'irst, 2,000 draft horses ; second, 
cloth enough for 15,000 coats, 50,000 vests, and 50,000 
breeches ; third, 100,000 shirts ; fourth, 20,000 hats ; — to 
be all delivered in one week." 

And yet on the 22nd May, in spite of this penury, 
specie and valuables were sent to Paris where gold was 
scarce, and where men in power had to be kept in good 
humour. Peter was robbed to pay Paul. With assignats 
at such a fearful discount, gold and silver were absolutely 
necessary in France, and no doubt the civil commissioners 
who accompanied the army had strict orders with regard 
to the precious metals. It is, however, difficult to reconcile 
Bonaparte's letter of the 21st with that of the following 
day. 



88 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

To THE DIRECTORY. 

" Milan, 22nd May, 1796. 

** . . . . Commissioner Salicetti will forward you a list of 
the contributions we have imposed. You can at present 
count upon from 6,000,000 to 8,000,000 francs in gold or 
silver, ingots, or jewels which are at your disposal at 
Genoa at the house of one of the first bankers. You can 
make use of that sum as it is the surplus of the wants of 
the army (!) If you desire I can send a million to Bdle 

for the army of the Rhine The troops are satisfied ; 

they receive half their pay in money. Pillage is repressed, 
and discipline, with abundance, once more flourishes in 
this glorious army I send you a copy of the sus- 
pension of hostilities accorded to the Duke of Modena ; 
you will see this is 10,000,000 francs more for the Republic. 

'' Bonaparte." 

Pillage was certainly not repressed, frequent mention 
being made of it in subsequent letters. The prospect of 
the 10,000,000 francs atoned for the crime of according 
a suspension of arms which was contrary to instructions. 

PROCLAMATION TO THE INHABITANTS OF 
LOMBARDY. 

" Milan, 25//^ May, 1796. 

"A misguided multitude without any real means of 
existence commits the greatest excesses in several parishes 
in contempt of the Republic and the army which has 
triumphed over several kings. This unaccountable delirium 
is worthy of pity ; these unfortunate people are led astray. 
The general-in-chief, faithful to the principles adopted by 
the French nation, which does not make war on people, 
wishes to leave a door open to repentance ; but those who 
do not lay down their arms and take a new oath to the 



SEVERE REPRESSION. 89 

Republic, within twenty-four hours, shall be treated as 
rebels, and their villages burned. Let the terrible example 
of Binasco open their eyes. Such shall be the fate of all 
the towns and villages which remain in a state of revolt. 

" Bonaparte." 

The exactions of the army of Italy had driven the people 
of Lombardy to despair, but Bonaparte had no idea of 
being trifled with by the slaves he came to liberate from 
a hateful despotism, and who failed to appreciate the 
benevolent intentions of the French Republic. 

To GENERAL DESPINOY, at Milan. 

" Pavia, 26M May, 1796. 
** I suppose that by this you have shot the persons 
taken in arms. It is indispensable that you should send 
all the State prisoners you have arrested, under strong 
escort, to Tortona. You will also arrest all those persons 
who have sent a portion of their family into the Tyrol 

although not connected with the last conspiracy It is 

necessary that some of the 200 hostages, whom I propose 
to take from Milan, should start for Pavia during the day. 

" Bonaparte." 

After taking these and other violent measures, quite 
in keeping with those Jacobin practices which were no 
longer in vogue in Paris, Bonaparte wrote : — 

To THE inhabitants OF THE MILANAIS. 

^'Brescia, iZth May, 1796. 
"The nobles, priests, and agents of Austria lead the 
people of these splendid countries astray. The French 
army, as generous as it is strong, will treat all peaceful 
inhabitants with fraternity ; it will be as terrible as the 
fire from heaven towards rebels." 



go THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

Several comminatory articles follow, calculated to strike 
terror into the hearts of persons guilty of even speaking 
against France in private. The Italians were to allow their 
chains to be broken in silence, and were to submit without a 
murmur to the exactions of their strange friends, or rather 
of their new masters. 

On more than one occasion Bonaparte, in his procla- 
mations, and evidently to excuse the excesses committed 
by his own troops, denounced the infamous exactions of 
the Austrians even in a friendly country. Now here is 
what Nelson wrote on this subject : — 

To ADMIRAL SIR JOHN JERVIS, K.B. 

^' Genoa, (^th April, 1796. 

*'.... The secretary was full of praises of the late 

Austrian army ; not a sixpence of debt had been 

left behind, nor an individual injured by their stay in 

the Riviera ; contrasting it with the conduct of the 

French 

" Horatio Nelson." 

Bonaparte was now able to turn his attention for a 
moment in another direction. 

To THE REPUBLIC OF VENICE. 

*' Brescia, 29//^ May, 1796. 
'' It is to deliver the finest country of Europe from the 
iron yoke of the arrogant house of Austria that the French 
army has braved the most difficult obstacles. Victory, 
in harmony with justice, has crowned these efforts. The 
remains of the enemy's army have fallen back behind the 
Mincio. The French army, in pursuit, is about to enter 
the territory of the Republic of Venice, but it will not 
forget the long friendship which unites the tzvo Republics. 
Its religion, government, customs, and property shall be 
respected. Let the people have no anxiety, the severest 



VENICE VIOLATED. 9 I 

discipline shall be maintained, and everything furnished to 
the army shall be paid for in money. 

*'.... Faithful in the road of honour, as in that of 
victory, the French soldier is terrible only for the enemies 
of hberty and of his Government. 

'' Bonaparte." 

This violation of territory was most unjustifiable. Venice 
had refused to join the coalition, and had assumed an 
attitude of unarmed neutrality — attitude which proved 
fatal to her political existence, but which had been till 
then respected by Austria. The Venetians protested, but 
Bonaparte was not to be diverted from his course by 
the representations of a feeble and unarmed State. The 
treatment of Venice ought to have acted as a salutary 
lesson, and have taught Prussia, Naples, and Spain the 
dangers to which neutrality would expose them in their 
turn. 

On the 30th May Bonaparte, having crossed the Mincio 
at Borghetto, and forced the Austrians to fall back into 
the Tyrol, wrote : — 

To THE DIRECTORY. 

'^ ij-/ J^une, 1796. 
'*.,.. The Austrians are completely driven from Italy. 
Our advanced posts are on the mountains of Germany. 
I shall not cite the names of the men who distinguished 
themselves by their bravery [did cite Generals Murat and 
Leclerc destined to become his brothers-in-law], — I should 
have to mention all the grenadiers and carabineers of the 
advanced guard. They play and laugh with death ; to-day 
they are quite accustomed to cavalry, and smile at it. 
Nothing can equal their intrepidity if it is not the gaiety 
with which they undertake forced marches ; they sing turn 
about of love and country. You would think that on 
reaching their bivouacs they would go to sleep ; not at all ; 
each one tells his story or relates his plan of operations for 



92 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

the morrow, and one often comes across men who see very 
clearly. The other day I was looking at a demi-brlgade 
which was marching past when a chasseur approached 
my horse : * General,' he said, ' you must do this and 
that.' * You scamp,' I replied, ' will you hold your tongue } ' 
He disappeared directly ; I have in vain caused search to 
be made for him ; it was just what I had ordered should be 
done. 

" Bonaparte." 

In Paris the victories of Bonaparte were celebrated by 
speeches in the Champ de Mars, by cantatas by Lebrun- 
Pindare, by dances, banquets, torch-light processions, and 
other manifestations which greatly troubled the repose of 
the Directory. 

The Austrian cavalry were a great thorn at this period 
in the side of Bonaparte. He had nothing to oppose to 
them. Marmont, writing to his father after Lodi, said, " It 
would be difficult to depict the little courage shown by our 
horse soldiers." The story about the chasseur is probably 
a fable. 

To THE DIRECTORY. 

"Verona, 2)^d June, 1796, 
" I have just reached this city, which I propose to quit 
to-morrow. It is very large and very fine. I intend 
leaving a strong garrison here in order to remain master of 
the three bridges over the Adige. 

'*I did not conceal from the inhabitants that, if the king 
of France had not evacuated their city before I crossed the 
Po, I should have set fire to a place bold enough to believe 
itself the capital of the French kingdom. 

*' I have just been to visit the amphitheatre ; those 
remains of the Romans are worthy of them. I could not 
help feeling humiliated at the shabbiness of our Champ de 
Mars. Here 100,000 spectators could sit down and hear 
easily all that an orator said. 



FEIGNED INDIGNATION. 93 

*'The emigres are flying from Italy; more than 1,500 
left before our arrival. They rush to Germany, whither 
they convey their remorse and their poverty. 

" Bonaparte." 



It is true that Verona had accorded hospitality to the 
Comte de Provence, afterwards Louis XVI 1 1., but Venice 
had first of all obtained the authorisation of the Committee 
of Public Safety, and had received the formal assurance 
that France would not regard this matter as a violation of 
neutrality. Then the Comte de Provence had left the 
Venetian States two months before Bonaparte threatened 
to burn down Verona I 

Having himself violated the neutrality of Venice in spite 
of the long friendship which had existed between the two 
Republics, Bonaparte expressed great indignation that 
the Austrians should have imitated him — an indignation 
simulated for the occasion. 

To THE DIRECTORY, 

"Milan, 'jth June, 1796 

" When M. Beaulieu knew that we were going to cross 
the Mincio, he seized on the fortress of Peschiera which 
belongs to the Venetians, a7td entered it without resistance. . . 
As soon as I learned that the Austrians were in the place, 
I knew that it must be invested at once so as to prevent it 
from being provisioned. A few days' delay would have 
obliged me to undertake a three months' siege, i 

'^ The combat of Borghetto, and the passage of the 
Mincio, made us masters of this place two days later. The 
'Proveditor' came in great haste to justify himself; I 
received him very badly, and told him that I should march 
upon Venice and complain to the senate of his manifest 
treason. While we were talking Massena had orders to 
enter Verona, at no matter what price. The alarm at 



94 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

Venice was extreme ; the archduke of Milan, who was 
there, at once fled to Germany. 

" The senate of Venice has just sent me two sages to find 
out how matters stand. I renewed my complaints and 
spoke of the reception given to Monsieur (Louis XVIII.). 
I said I had counted upon finding in Venice a faithful 
ally, and that it was with great regret, owing to what had 
happened at Peschiera, that I was obliged to think other- 
wise ; that I considered, however, the storm might be 
averted. In the meantime the Venetians furnish everything 
the army requires zvith the best possible gi^ace. 

'* If your intention is to wring 5,000,000 or 6,000,000 francs 
from Venice, I have arranged this kind of a rupture in 
a way which will facilitate matters, and you can demand an 
indemnity for the battle of Borghetto which I was obliged 
to fight. If you have other intentions, it will be well to 
keep this quarrel open, and I will take the first favourable 
opportunity for carrying out your wishes, for we must not 
dispute with every one at the same time. 

'' The truth of the Peschiera affair is that Beaidiett basely 
deceived the Venetians ; he de7nanded a passage for fifty 
men and then seized on the town. I am placing Peschiera 
in a state of defence, and before a fortnight it will require 
heavy guns and a regular siege to take it. 

''Bonaparte." 



The language of Bonaparte towards the Venetians was 
excessively arrogant and severe : he threatened to march 
upon Venice in order to punish them for their treason, he 
exacted supplies for his army, and he occupied Verona and 
Legnago, the two keys of the Adige. The Austrians not 
being in a position to resume hostilities, the French were 
masters of the country, and proceeded to treat it as they 
had treated the Milanais. Venice was only at the beginning 
of her troubles. There was something astounding in the 
idea of making the Venetians pay for a battle by which 



ARMISTICE WITH NAPLES. 95 

Peschiera was wrested by one violating power from another 
on neutral territory. 

On the same day Bonaparte sent to the Directory a copy 
of an armistice concluded with Naples pointing out its 
various political and military advantages thus — 

'* It will place us in a position to dictate any terms we 
like to Rome; already the Papal Court is engaged in 
drawing up a Bull against those who, under the pretext of 
religion, preach civil war in France. 

'^ From the conversation which I had this morning with 
M. d'Azara, minister of Spain, envoy of the Pope, it 
appears to me that he had orders to offer us contributions. 
I shall soon be at Bologna. Would you like me then to 
accept from the Pope, in exchange for an armistice, 
25,000,000 francs in money, 5,000,000 francs in merchandise, 
300 pictures and statues, and manuscripts in proportion ; 
and that I should set at liberty all the patriots arrested for 
revolutionary acts ? ... Be persuaded that once you tell 
me positively what your orders are they will have to be 
very difficult if I cannot execute them. 

'' Bonaparte." 

In concluding an armistice with Naples, Bonaparte again 
acted in direct opposition to the orders of the Government, 
and exhibited great independence. He spoke very freely 
to Prince Belmonte Pignatelli, and asked him if he thought 
" he was fighting for those scamps of lawyers," as he called 
the Directory. It is true that the armistice was most ad- 
vantageous, as it deprived the coalition of the Neapolitan 
cavalry, which Napoleon admitted to be very formidable ; 
and it also dispensed the French army from a march to 
Naples which would, at the moment, have been extremely 
hazardous. Although Bonaparte more than once chastened 
the Church well, he loved her after a fashion ; not only 
because he admired her discipline and liked to dispute with 
her, but because he never could shake off a certain amount 
of superstition. If he now spoke of marching on Rome he 



g6 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

avoided carrying out the intentions of the Directory as 
long as possible, and never fully carried them out. The 
Directory wished to ignore the Pope altogether, while 
Bonaparte treated with him as with a spiritual and temporal 



To THE INHABITANTS OF THE TYROL. 

^'TORTONA, 14M ytme, 1796. 
" I am about to enter your territory, brave Tyrolians, in 
order to force the Court of Vienna to conclude a peace 
necessary for Europe and for her own subjects ; it is your 
own cause that I am defending. . . The French army love 
and respect all people, more especially the simple and 
virtuous inhabitants of the mountains. Your religion, your 
customs, shall be respected. . . But should you ignore 
your own interests, and take up arms, we shall be terrible 
as the fire from heaven ; we shall burn the houses and lay 
waste the territory of the villages which take part in a war 
that does not concern them. . . . 

'' Bonaparte." 

It is curious to find a liberator obliged to resort to such 
threats as these ; but the immortal principles of the French 
Revolution were ill-understood b}^ simple mountaineers, 
whose homesteads were ruthlessly plundered by an invading 
army, whose chief occupation appeared to be to levy con- 
tributions, and to indulge in rapine. Priests and nobles 

1 Nelson, too, about this time had some idea of paying a visit to the 
Eternal City if he could only aid in driving the French out of the 
country, as proved by the following letter : — 

To MRS. NELSON. 

''Leghorn RoAjys, 2^rd At^gus^, 1796. 
"... I do not think he (the Pope) will oppose the thunder of the 
Vatican against my thunder ; and you will, I dare say, hear that I am 
at Rome in my barge. If I succeed, I am determined to row up the 
Tiber and into Rome. 

" Horatio Nelson." 



THE CARDINAL OF FERRARA. 97 

were generally accused of being at the bottom of every 
hostile movement against the armies of the Republic, but 
the fact is that nothing but a system of terror, and terrible 
reprisals, could preserve even the indolent races of Italy in 
nominal subjection. Had Bonaparte experienced a serious 
reverse, the French troops would have been massacred to a 
man, and of this Bonaparte was well aware. 

A few days afterwards the French came into contact 
with the Papal army. 



To THE DIRECTORY. 

'^Bologna, 21st June, 1796. 

** General Augereau's division passed the Po yesterday 
and arrived at Bologna on the 19th ; he found 400 soldiers 
of the Pope there and made them prisoners. . . We have 
captured the Cardinal Legate, all the officers of the staff, 
and taken four flags ; also the Cardinal Legate of Ferrara, 
together with the commandant of that fort, who is a knight 
of Malta." 

After alluding to the pictures furnished by Parma 
and Modena, the report continues — 

" Monge, Berthollet, and Thouin are at Pavia, where 
they are busy enriching our Jardin des Plantes and cabinet 
of natural history. / imagine they will not forget a com- 
plete collection of serpents which appeared to me worthy of 
making the voyage. I think they will be here the day after 
to-morrow ; they will find an abundant harvest. 

"An intercepted letter from Vienna announces that 
General Wurmser is coming to command the army of Italy. 
. . . Italy is to-day entirely French, With a middling 
army we have to face all emergencies ; to hold the German 
armies in check, to besiege forts, to protect our rear, to 
overawe Genoa, Venice, Florence, Rome and Naples ; we 
must be in force everywhere. Military, political, and 

VOL. I. H 



98 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

financial unity is therefore necessary. Here^ one must 
burn and shoot iit order to establish terror, and there one 
must prete7id not to see because the time has not arrived 

for action. 

''Bonaparte." 

Bonaparte sadly wanted to get rid of the Government 
commissioners, who somewhat resembled our political 
officers in India. They no longer accompanied the army 
as in the days of the Terror, furnished with a portable 
guillotine, but they hampered his operations and offended 
his dignity. 

To THE DIRECTORY. 

'' Bologna, 21st June, 1796. 

'' I spoke in my preceding letter of our military position ; 
I wish now to talk over our poHtical situation with the 
Pope and the Senate of Bologna. 

" The Cardinal Legate whom we made prisoner here has 
been sent to Rome on parole. I told him that if the Pope 
makes proposals convincing us of his resolution to repair 
the insult done to the French Republic by the assassination 
of Basseville, and pays us a contribution to enable us to 
meet the enormous expense occasioned by the war, he will 
perhaps find a refuge in the French Republic. . . . 

" The Republic of Bologna used to enjoy great privileges, 
which successive Popes have infringed. In order to make 
the Court of Rome tremble and feel that its magic has no 
effect on us, I have authorised the senate of Bologna to 
regard as null and void all the decrees violating its liberty. 
This has given great pleasure here and is severely felt at 
Rome. During the time that the armistice lasts we shall 
have no need to keep troops here ; for, seeing the manner 
in which I have embroiled the Bolognese with the Court of 
Rome, they will always dread its vengeance. . . . The heat 
of the weather is excessive. . . . This armistice is concluded 
rather with the dog days than with the Papal army ; my 



ARMISTICE WITH THE POPE. 99 

opinion is that you should be in no hurry to conclude 
peace, so that in September, if affairs go well in Germany 
and North Italy, we may seize on Rome. 

'' Bonaparte." 

Basseville had been assassinated during a popular rising 
in 1793, and from that date no French diplomatic agent 
had appeared at Rome. Now, however, Count Miot de 
Melito was sent there to negotiate, having first received 
the positive assurance of S. d' Agara and the Pope that he 
might present himself without danger at the Papal Court. 

On the 23rd June was concluded the '^Armistice between 
the French Republic and the Pope. " His Holiness was 
to pay 21,000,000 fr. in money and goods, '' independent of 
the contributions which have been, or which may be, levied 
on the Legations of Bologna, Ferrara, and Faenza!' 

" Art. 6. The citadel of Ancona is to be handed over to 
the French army in six days. 

"Art. 7. The city of Ancona is to remain under the civil 
government of the Pope. 

" Art. 8. The Pope will ^hand over to the French 
Republic 100 pictures, busts, vases, or statues selected by 
commissioners sent to Rome; among these objects will be 
comprised the bronze bust of Junius Brutus, and the marble 
one of Marcus Brutus, both placed in the Capitol, and 500 
manuscripts chosen by the aforesaid commissioners. 

" Bonaparte," &c. &c. 

It is to be doubted whether Bonaparte, seeing the high 
estimation in which he held Caesar, had any real admiration 
for his murderer, but for the moment Marcus Brutus was a 
popular character whose memory was dear to Lucien 
Bonaparte and other Jacobins. Aware that the Directory 
would be dissatisfied with this armistice, Bonaparte soothed 
them with the assurance that it would produce 34,000,000 
fr., and declared that but for the interference of the civil 
commissioners he would have obtained much better terms. 

H 2 



lOO THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

The Directors on their side wished to see the Papacy 
entirely destroyed, but they no longer enjoyed any real 
power in Italy. 

Three days later Bonaparte wrote again complaining of 
the baneful influence of the civil commissioners. It is 
difficult to read without a feeling of indignation the passages 
which concern the pillage of manuscripts. 

To THE DIRECTORY. 

*' PiSTOjA, 26/^ Jime^ 1796. 
'' You will find inclosed the conditions of the armistice 
concluded with the Pope. M. d'Azara, who is the person 
with whom we have really negotiated, had the impudence 
to offer us 5,000,000 fr. in money and 3,000,000 fr. in goods, 
whereas I demanded 40,000,000 fr., of which 10,000,000 fr. 
in goods. Seeing he could obtain no diminution he 
went to the commissioners, and succeeded va worming out 
our secret, to wit, our inability to go to Rome. It then 
became impossible to get more than 20,000,000 fr. by 
making a night march on Ravenna. I had inserted a 
clause that the treasures of Notre Dame de Lorette should 
be given up to us, and I thought that this had been agreed 
to, but M. d'Azara so twisted about that it became neces- 
sary to accept 1,000,000 fr. instead. This fashion of 
negotiating by three is most prejudicial to the interests 
of the Republic. . . . This is all very disagreeable for 
me ; the Republic has lost 10,000,000 fr., and I have lost 
a portion of the result of my movement on Bologna. 
. . . There was little difficulty about the other conditions 
with the exception of the manuscripts; there, we were 
obliged to reduce our demands from 2,000 or 3,000 to 

500 

'' Bonaparte." 

In all, Rome and the legations were called upon to pay 
in money and goods, 34,700,000 fr. An amusing con- 
troversy arose in consequence of Bonaparte having levied 



CORSICAN PATRIOTS. lOI 

a contribution on the Legation of Faenza (which did not 
exist) instead of Ravenna. But the general was not a man 
to allow his plans to be thwarted by special pleading. On 
the 2nd July he wrote again to the Directory, saying that 
''eighty waggons left yesterday laden with hemp and 
silk. ... I am collecting all the jewels and silver plate 
at Tortona. . . . The savants have reaped an abundant 
harvest at Pavia. We are much embarrassed as to what 
to select at Rome. The statues can only be transported 
by sea, and it would be dangerous to trust them on board 
ship [owing to the English]. . . . Send orders," &c. 

To THE DIRECTORY. 

'^ROVERBELLA, 6M July^ 1 7 96. 

" For some months past, Citizen Directors, the Corsican 
patriots have been in a state of insurrection against the 
English. I have sent them some fowling-pieces and barrels 
of powder, with twenty Corsican refugees belonging to the 
cantons which have shown the most energy. To-day we 
are masters of Leghorn, and it will be easy to drive the 
English from Corsica without sending a single soldier." 
Merely more refugees, guns, powder, and Commissioner 
Salicetti, " also some pamphlets written in a proper style 
[and very different to the celebrated * Letter to Buttafuoco'\ 
It will further be necessary for you to authorise me to 
promise a general pardon to the islanders. 

'' Bonaparte." 

In virtue of a capitulation concluded with Admiral Hood, 
Corsica had been annexed to the British Crown, and was 
governed by Sir Gilbert Elliot as viceroy. As for the last 
King of Corsica, poor Theodora, whose romantic career 
was traced by Boswell in his history of the island, he died 
in London, like Paoli ; but unlike Paoli, who lies entombed 
in Westminster Abbey, he sleeps in St. Anne's, Soho, after 
having been released from the King's Bench. His funeral 



I02 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

expenses were paid by an oilman, and Horace Walpole 
wrote his epitaph. 

Nelson, who was at first enthusiastic about Corsica and 
the advantages which would accrue from its possession, soon 
altered his mind, as the following letter will show, when he 
became better acquainted with the inhabitants. 

To WILLIAM LOCKER. 

" Captain at Sea. November ^th^ 1796. 
*' ... We have now done with Corsica ; I have seen the 
first and the last of that kingdom. Its situation certainly was 
most desirable for us, but the generality of its inhabitants 
are so greedy of wealth, and so jealous of each other, that 
it would require the patience of Job and the riches of 
Croesus to satisfy them. They say themselves they are 
only to be ruled by the Ruling Power, shooting all its 
enemies, and bribing all its friends. They already regret 
our departure from them, for no more silver harvest will 
come to their lot. I remember when we quitted Toulon 
w^e endeavoured to reconile ourselves to Corsica, now we 
are content with Elba — such things are ; however, we have 
a fine port, and no expenses for the government of the 
island. The conduct of the Pope is extraordinary ; although 
he is at war with the French, yet he has not opened his 
ports to us ; he is fearful of a turn in the present happy 
prospects. In short, Italy has been lost by the fear of its 
princes ; had they expended half the money to preserve 
their territories which they have paid the French for 
entering them, their countries would have been happy, 
instead of being filled with present misery and diabolical 
notions of Government." 

" Verona, \i.th July, 1796. 

*'.... For several days past we have been in observation 
along the Adige. Woe to him who miscalculates ! 

** We are now engaged in besieging Mantua. I propose 
making a bold stroke. The boats, Austrian uniforms, and 



FRENCH REVERSES. IO3 

batteries will be ready by the 28th. Ulterior operations 
will entirely depend on the success of this sudden attack, 
which, like all of a similar nature, will depend upon luck — 

a dog or a goose You will find inclosed the copy of 

a letter written to the Venetian Senate and the reply. 
However, I am master of all the strong places of the 
Republic along the Adige. Perhaps you may deem it 
advisable to commence a little quarrel with the Venetian 
ambassador in Paris, so that after the fall of Mantua, and 
when I have driven the Austrians from Brenta, I may find 
it easier to put forward the demand for a few millions which 

you intend to make 

'' Bonaparte." 

Neither slumbering dog nor cackling goose had aught to 
say to the fate of Mantua in July, 1796. That fortress was 
saved for the moment by Wurmser, who swept down on the 
Adige with 60,000 men. In the centre of the French line 
Joubert and Massena were driven out of Corona and Rivoli. 
On the left Sauret was obliged to evacuate Salo, and 
Quasdanowich occupied Brescia, while on the right an 
Austrian corps made its way to Verona. 

How desperate was the condition of French afifairs at this 
juncture may be gathered from the following letter. 

To GENERAL AUGEREAU {besieging Mantua). 

" . ... ^Qth July J 1796. 
"You must fall back upon Roverbslla, abandon your line, 
destroy the bridge of Porto Legnago, burn the carriages of 

your siege-guns, and carry off everything possible 

Every moment is precious. I confide to your ability and 
ordinary prudence the execution of these measures. 
This is the unfortunate position of the army — the enemy 
has broken our line at three places ; he is master of the 
important points of Corona and Rivoli ; Massena and 
Joubert have been obliged to yield to force. Sauret has 
abandoned Salo and fallen back on Desenzano; the enemy 



104 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

has seized upon Brescia and the bridge of San Marco. 
You will see that our communications with Milan and 
Verona are cut. Await fresh orders at Roverbella, whither 
I shall go. 

"Bonaparte." 



These orders must have been promptly obeyed, for when 
Wurmser reached Mantua the blockading force had entirely 
vanished, to the great disappointment of the Austrian 
general. 

With wonderful rapidity Bonaparte concentrated his 
forces. He first fell upon Quasdanowich at Lonato and 
drove him from Salo and Brescia, and then attacked and 
defeated the two other Austrian corps before they had 
completed their junction. 

To CITIZEN SALICETTI. 

^^ Brescia, 2nd August^ 1796. 
" Fortune appears adverse for the moment. So many 
events have happened within the last few days that it is 
impossible for me to send you a detailed report. Thanks, 
however, to the victory of Lonato and to the vigorous 
measures I have adopted, matters will soon be set right. I 
have raised the siege of Mantua and am here with nearly 

all my forces Louis (Bonaparte) will furnish you 

with full information See that Milan, Tortona, 

Alessandria, and Pavia are well supplied. I am very 
much fatigued, and have ridden five horses to death. I 
cannot write to the Directory. 

'' Bonaparte." 

Bonaparte did, however, write to the Directory the same 
day, saying: *'We have experienced a reverse. Citizen 
Directors, but already victory has returned to our standards. 
If the enemy had the good luck to surprise us at Salo and 
to take Corona, we have beaten him at Lonato and have 



FRENCH VICTORIES. IO5 

recaptured Salo. The Austrian army is very strong ; we 

have 30,000 men under arms and 12,000 in hospital 

It is under these difficult circumstances that I have reason 
to admire the courage and the devotion of the troops." 

The French recovered the line of the Adige and drove 
Wurmser and the remaining half of his army into the 
Italian Tyrol. The Austrians in this brief campaign had 
20,000 men killed or wounded, and lost 15,000 prisoners 
and 70 guns. 

On the 6th August Bonaparte furnished the Directory 
with a full report of his more recent operations, and his 
triumphs at Lonato and Castiglione after the Salo-Corona 
affair. In this very long despatch he thus relates one of 
the most curious episodes of this splendid campaign. 

*' During the whole of the 17th Thermidor (or 4th August) 
Wurmser was engaged in getting together the remnants of 
his army, bringing up his reserve, and drawing all his dis- 
posable forces from Mantua, in order to set them in battle 
array in the plain between the village of Golferino, on 
which he rested his right, and the Chiese, which already 
protected his left. The fate of Italy was about to be 
decided. He concentrated some 25,000 men and a large 
force of cavalry, feeling that he might still change the fate 
of the campaign. 

'* On my side I issued orders for the concentration of all 
the columns of the army. I went myself to Lonato to see 
what troops I could draw thence; but what was my 
surprise on entering that place to receive an Austrian 
parlementaire^ who summoned the commandant of Lonato 
to surrender, because, he said, he was surrounded on all 
sides ! In fact, the cavalry vedettes informed me that some 
Austrian columns touched our grand guards, and that 
already the road from Brescia to Lonato was intercepted at 
the bridge of San Marco. I quickly perceived that this 
could only be the remnant of one of the enemy's divisions 



I06 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

which had been cut off, and which, having wandered about 
in the hope of being able to rejoin the main body, was 
endeavouring to find a way of escape. The circumstance 
was sufficiently embarrassing, for I had only about 1,200 
men at Lonato. I sent for the parlementahx^ and after 
having his eyes unbandaged, told him that if his com- 
manding officer had the presumption to capture the general- 
in-chief of the army of Italy he would do well to advance ; 
that he ought to have known I was at Lonato as my whole 
army was there, and that all his general and field officers 
should be held personally responsible for the insult. I 
declared that if in eight minutes his division had not laid 
down its arms, I would not spare a man. TY\% parle7nentaire 
appeared much astonished to find me there, and an instant 
afterwards the whole column laid down its arms. It was 
4,000 strong, with two guns and 50 cavalry." 

The Austrian general, somewhat bewildered, and, in fact, 
engaged in endeavouring to effect his escape, was totally 
deceived by the presence of Bonaparte, whose ready wit 
saved him from falling into the clutches of the enemy. 
After giving a few details concerning the battle of Cas- 
tiglione, Bonaparte continued : 

'^ In five days, therefore, another campaign has been 
finished. Wurmser has lost, during these fiv^ days, 70 
field-pieces, all his infantry caissons, from 12,000 to 15,000 
prisoners, 6,000 men killed or wounded, and almost all the 
troops drawn from the Rhine. Independently of this, a 
great portion of his force has been dispersed, and we are 

picking up men in pursuit 

'' Bonaparte." 

Attacked again on the 7th August, the enemy was obliged 
to raise the siege of Peschiera and to abandon the line of 
the Mincio. 

'* The Austrian army which for weeks," wrote Bonaparte, 



JOSEPHINES TERROR. IO7 

"threatened the invasion of Italy, has vanished like a 
dream." 

In his narrative of the above affair Bonaparte made no 
allusion to Josephine, whom he had summoned to Brescia by- 
means of the most tender entreaties, and who narrowly 
escaped capture. In her terror she wept. *' Wurmser," 
said her husband, embracing her, ^' shall pay dearly for 
those tears." In the end Josephine, more dead than alive, 
managed to reach Lucca in a state of terrible anxiety, as 
she had left Bonaparte surrounded by foes, and had herself 
been exposed to the fire of the enemy. 



To CITIZEN CARNOT. 

'^Verona, 9/^ August^ 1796. 

" One of my brothers, who is war commissary at Mar- 
seilles, has gone to Paris without permission. This young 
man combines some talent with a good deal of obstinacy ; 
he has all his life had the mania of meddling with politics 
[had assumed the name of Brutus under the Terror]. At 
a moment when it appears that a great many persons 
desire to injure me, and when every intrigue is employed to 
attach credit to rumours as stupid as they are malevolent, 
I beg you to render me an essential service and to order 
him to join some army. 

" I recommend you tJie one {id est^ Louis) who was my 
aide-de-camp, and whom I sent to you on the eve of the 
battle of Lonato. This gallant young man deserves all 
the attention you can bestow on him. 

" The heat is excessive here, and my health has suffered. 
If there be in France a single pure-minded and honest 
man capable of suspecting my political intentions, I shall 
at once renounce the happiness of serving my country. 
Three or four months of obscurity will calm envy, re- 
establish my health, and place me in a position to fill any 
post to which the confidence of the Government may call 
me. It was only by leaving Paris at the proper time that 



I08 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

I have been able to serve the Republic. By leavmg the 
army of Italy at the right mojnent I shall be able to devote 
the rest of my life to the defejice of the Republic. The 
great art of Government is not to let men grow old. In 
entering a public career I adopted for principle, ^ Every- 
thing for the country 1 ' 

'' Bonaparte." 

After losing the battles of Roverdo and Bassano, 
Wurmser managed, much to the disappointment of 
Bonaparte, to cross the Adige and to throw himself into 
Mantua, defeating the detachments which endeavoured to 
stop him. Bonaparte afterwards gave his venerable oppo- 
nent great credit for this feat of arms. Under the walls of 
Mantua Wurmser once more delivered battle (St. George's), 
but he was repulsed and obliged to shut himself up in the 
fortress, the siege of which he had forced the French to 
raise a few days previously by the impetuosity of his 
attack on their lines. 

On the 1 6th September, 1796, Bonaparte despatched 
Marmont to Paris with twenty-two captured standards, 
and a detailed account of the combats of Cerea, Castellaro, 
Porto Legnago, Due Castelli, and the battle of St. George's, 
in which the French took a whole regiment of cuirassiers, 
a division of hulans, and twenty-five guns, in addition to 
infantry. 

And yet, with all his victories, Italy was so little French, 
that Bonaparte's mind was filled with apprehensions for 
the future. The Papal Court had rejected the additional 
stipulations which the Directory had attempted to impose. 
It positively refused to cancel all the briefs fulminated 
against the French Republic and the civil constitution of 
the clergy, and to abolish the Inquisition. The waggons 
containing the 21,000,000 francs, and which had started for 
France, were ordered to return, and Cardinal Mattei took 
possession of Ferrara. Naples, too, was restive, the Venetians 
more discontented than ever, and affairs with Genoa, 



ENGLISH SHIPS AT LEGHORN. IO9 

Modena, and Tuscany in the most unsatisfactory condition. 
However, Wurmser was shut up in Mantua, and it was not 
probable that Austria w^ould give any further trouble for 
•some weeks to come. 

Tuscany had been alienated by the most cruel injustice. 
That state was at peace with France, there was no pretext 
for attacking it, and it enjoyed the mildest of governments. 
But Tuscany was feeble, at Leghorn lay forty English 
merchant vessels, and the Directors had been assured that 
heaps of gold were to be found there. The temptation 
was too strong, and Napoleon determined to pounce by 
stealth on this rich prey. The Grand Duke was living in 
fancied security when he heard that a French division 
had crossed the Apennines and was marching on Pistoja. 
Bonaparte, who accompanied this force, declared that it 
was on the way to Rome to intimidate the Pope, and on 
the earnest representations of Manfredini, the Grand Duke's 
minister, he consented that it should pass through Sienna 
instead of through Florence. In conformity with this 
promise, the division marched under the orders of Murat, 
but it had not gone far before it changed its direction and 
hurried to Leghorn. The English had fortunately taken 
alarm, and when Murat and the two Government commis- 
sioners, Salicetti and Gareau, thought to sieze on their 
booty, great was their mortification at beholding the forty 
vessels standing out to sea. Bonaparte in a very respectful 
letter explained this flagrant violation of territory by his 
desire to " maintain neutrality." He assured the Tuscans 
that their flag, their garrison, and their property would be 
respected, but his instructions to General Vaubois were in 
direct contradiction to these assurances. On the nth 
Bonaparte wrote to Faypoult that it was his firm intention 
" to maintain the harmony existing between himself and 
the Grand Duke," and on the 12th he wrote to Miot de 
Melito, the French minister at Plorence, to warn him of 
the Grand Duke's departure for Vienna, so that he might 
have him seized^ en route. It was naturally supposed that 



no THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

the Grand Duke would fly to the court of his brother, who 
was organising another army. 

Bonaparte had now time to turn his attention once more 
to Rome during the siege of Mantua. 

To CARDINAL MATTEL 

" Milan, 26/A September^ 1796. 
" Your character, sir, which all who know you praise, 
induces me to permit you to return to Ferrara and to 
throw the veil of oblivion over your conduct of last month. 
L flatter myself that you have too much intelligence and 
too great a knowledge of the New Testament for that 
conduct to have been anything but a temporary forgetful- 
ness ; a priest who mixes himself up in political ^.fifairs 
does not deserve the respect due to his profession. 

'' Return to your diocese and practise that virtue which 
it is unanimously agreed you possess ; but never interfere 
with politics. Be persuaded, besides, that the clergy, and 
all persons connected with public worship, will be specially 
respected by the French Republic. 

" I am, sir, with esteem and consideration, &c., 

*' Bonaparte." 

The Cardinal had been made prisoner and thrown into 
a convent for having re-occupied Ferrara in the name of 
the Pope, but now he was to go to Rome with pacific 
assurances, in company with a French agent, whose 
instructions were to gain time. 

To THE directory. 

" Milan, \st October^ 1796. 
'' After the battle of St. George's we endeavoured to 
entice Wurmser to fight another battle, so as to weaken his 
garrison extra muros. . . I have now 18,900 men acting as 
an army of observation, and 9,000 laying siege to Mantua. 
I leave you to think, if I do not receive reinforcements, how 
I shall be able to resist the Emperor this winter, who will 



MATTERS LOOK GLOOMY. I I I 

have 50,000 men in the field in six weeks. . . Reflect that 
you require in Italy, to be able to sustain a winter cam- 
paign, 35,000 infantry for the army of observation, and 
18,000 infantry for siege operations. These two forces 
united make 53,000 men, and at present we have only 
27,000; cavalry, gunners, sappers, drivers, etc., were also 

needed, and 

'' If the preservation of Italy be dear to you, Citizen 

Directors, send me all this aid 

"Bonaparte." 

Things were again looking black, and an attempt to 
cajole the King of Sardinia into an offensive alliance had 
failed — his Majesty had demanded too much ; nothing less 
than Lombardy, which the Directory now wished to offer 
to Austria in exchange for Belgium, on the conclusion of 
peace. Overtures made to Venice had also broken down 
and everything was going wrong on the Rhine. 

To THE DIRECTORY. 

'' Milan, 2nd October^ 1796. 
*' The Republic of Venice is alarmed, and is plotting with 
the King of Naples and the Pope. Of all the people of 
Italy the Venetians hate us the most; they are all armed, 

and in some of the cantons the inhabitants are brave 

The King of Naples has raised a force of 60,000 men, and 
if he is to be attacked and dethroned that will require 18,000 

infantry, and 3,000 cavalry Rome is strong owing to 

her fanaticism, and if she declares against us she will greatly 
augment the force of the King of Naples, and will oblige 

me to protect my rear with 3,000 men I think that 

6,000 infantry and 500 cavalry will be able to keep Rome 

in respect Should we be beaten on the Rhine [where 

Moreau and Jourdan were being severely handled by the 
Archduke Charles] it will be necessary to conclude peace 

with Rome and Naples 

" Bonaparte." 



112 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

To HIS MAJESTY THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY. 

" Milan, 27id October, 1796. 
^' Majesty, Europe desires peace. This disastrous war 
has lasted too long. I have the honour to notify to your 
Majesty that if you do not send plenipotentiaries to Paris 
to offer negotiations for peace, the Directory has ordered 
me to fill up the port of Trieste, and to ruin all your 
Majesty's establishments in the Adriatic. Up to the 
present I have refrained from executing this plan in the 
hope of not increasing the number of innocent victims of 
this war. I hope that your Majesty will be alive to the 
misfortunes which menace your subjects, and will restore 
that repose necessary for the tranquillity of the world, 
&c., &c. 

" BONAPARTE." 

When Bonaparte wrote the above hectoring demand, 
which received no answer, he was hard pressed and in a state 
of great anxiety, as is proved by the following letter to the 
Directory — 

*' Milan, %th October, 1796. 
*' We shall not be able to take Mantua before February ; 
you will perceive that our position in Italy is uncertain, and 

our political system very bad We were negotiating 

with the Pope when the armistice was broken, and 
10,000,000 francs, pictures, and merchandise were about to 
be handed over to us. Rome is arming, and arousing the 

fanaticism of the people I consider peace with 

Naples most essential, and an alliance with Genoa and with 
the court of Turin necessary. Make peace with Parma ; 
take Lombardy, Modena, Reggio, Bologna, and Ferrara 

under your protection, and above all send troops 

Our situation is very precarious ; you should adopt a system 
capable of insuring us friends amo7ig princes as well as among 
peoples. Diminish our enemies. The influence of Rome is 
incalculable ; it was a great mistake to quarrel with that 



ARMY CONTRACTORS. I I 3 

Power. Had I been consulted I should have delayed 
negotiations as I did with Genoa and Venice. Whenever 
your general in Italy is not the centre of everything you 
will run great risks. This language will not be imputed to 
ambition ; I have only too many honours, and my health is 
so impaired, that I think I shall be forced to demand a 
successor. I can no longer get on horseback ; my courage 
alone remains, and that is not sufficient in a position like 
this. 

'' Bonaparte." 

The indisposition complained of was not serious, nothing 
more was heard of it, and the general continued to display 
his usual restless activity. Before Bonaparte received any 
reply to the above letter he deposed the Duke of Modena, 
and turned his State into a Republic, in direct contradiction 
to the positive instructions of his Government. Other States 
soon shared the same fate. 

On the 1 2th October, 1796, Bonaparte sent to the 
Directory a terrible complaint against the army contractors. 
He wrote : — 

'* Since I arrived at Milan I have waged war with the 
swindlers. I have had several tried and punished ; others 
I denounce. In making this declaration of war a thousand 
voices will be raised against me, and will endeavour to 
pervert opinions. If two months ago I wished to be Duke 
of Milan, to-day I desire to be King of Italy ! [only 
assumed the iron crown at Milan in May, 1805] but as long 
as my strength remains, and I enjoy your confidence, I 
shall show the swindlers no more pity than the Austrians. 

** The company Flachat is a nest of robbers [Flachat was 
afterwards tried and acquitted] without money, and without 
morality.'' 

After giving a long list of "horrors which made him 
blush to be a Frenchman " Napoleon added : — 
VOL. I. I 



114 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

" You no doubt supposed that your administrators would 
rob, but that they would perform their duty and exhibit 
some sense of shame ; they plunder in a manner so 
ridiculous and impudent, that if I had a month's time I 
would have every one of them shot. I never cease having 
them arrested and tried by court-martial, but they buy the 
judges ; it is a regular fair here, where everything is sold. 
.... Thevenin is a robber ; he indulges in insolent luxury ; 
he made me a present of several fine horses, of which I was 
in need, and would not accept anything for them [a generous 
thief]. Have him arrested, and keep him six months in 
prison ; he is able to pay a war tax of 500,000 francs 

(i^20,ooo) in money 

"Bonaparte." 



And much more did Bonaparte write in a similar strain. 
What most troubled him was to see the people emi- 
grating en massCy and whole districts depopulated. If this 
continued where were his supplies to come from .-* 

To GENERAL WURMSER. 

"MODENA, i6th October, 1796. 

" The siege of Mantua, sir, is more disastrous for 
humanity than two campaigns. Brave men ought to affront 
danger, but not the pestilence of a marsh. Your cavalry, so 
precious, is without forage ; your garrison, so numerous, is 
ill-fed ; thousands of sick men require change of air, 

medicines, and wholesome nourishment Restore to 

the Emperor your person, your cavalry, your infantry ; glvQ 
us Mantua ; we shall both of us be gainers, and more 
especially humanity. 

** However, as you may believe, I have special reasons 
beyond the interests of humanity .... there will be no 
inconvenience in allowing you to make yourself acquainted 
with the position of my army, &c., &c. 

"Bonaparte." 



THE COURT OF ROME. I I 5 

The next day, In a letter to the Directory announcing 
the meeting of the Congress of Bologna, Modena, Reggio, 
and Ferrara, &c., Bonaparte added : — 



" I await with some Impatience the reinforcements you 
have announced. I have summoned Wurmser to surrender- 
.... As soon as I know if the English have passed the 
Straits, and learn your Intentions concerning Naples, I 
shall assume a suitable tone with Rome ; I hope to make 
^kios^ fellows restore the money which they sent and then 
took back." 



Probably finding resistance useless the Directory now 
consented to allow Bonaparte to act as he deemed fit with 
the Pope, 

To CARDINAL MATTEL 

" Ferrara, zut October^ 1796. 

" The Court of Rome has refused to accept the conditions 
of peace offered by the Directory ; it has broken the 
armistice by suspending the execution of my conditions ; it 
is arming ; it desires war ; it shall have it. But before 
accomplishing the ruin and death of the madmen who 
would oppose the Republican phalanxes, I owe it to the 
nation, to humanity, and to myself to make a last effort to 
induce the Pope to return to sentiments more moderate and 
more in conformity with his true interests, his sacred 
character, and common sense. You are aware. Cardinal, of 
the strength of the army I command : in order to destroy 
the temporal power of the Pope, the will alone is wanting. 
Go to Rome, see the Pope, enlighten him with regard to his 

true interests The French government permits me 

once more to reopen negotiations, and everything may be 

arranged 

"Bonaparte," 
T 2 



Il6 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

Three days afterwards Bonaparte wrote to citizen Cacault 
from Verona to continue negotiations with Rome, adding : — 

^' I only wait for a favourable moment to fall upon Rome 
and to avenge the national honour. The chief object is 

to gain time The great art at present is to indulge 

in a little mutual recrimination in order to deceive that old 
fox. It would be well to obtain a commencement of the 
execution of the armistice. . . . Victory is returning to our 
standards." 

To THE DIRECTORY. 

''Verona, 2^th October^ 1796. 

*'.... There appears to be some intention of according 
an amnesty in Corsica. I think it would be well to except 
— first, the four deputies who took the crown to London ; 
second, the six members composing the Council of State of 

the Viceroy, and lastly the emigres I have caused 

citizen Panatieri, Paoli's secretary, who came from London 
to intrigue, to be arrested at Leghorn. 

'' Bonaparte." 

The next letter reveals the fact that at a very early date 
Bonaparte was considered capable of committing any crime 
to further his own ends : — 

To CITIZEN CARNOT. 

"Verona, 25/^ October, 1796. 
'* You have seen by the letter of my brother Lucien in 
what a state of exaltation he is. He compromised himself 
in '93 several times in spite of my reiterated advice. He 
wished to play the Jacobin. . . . His sojourn at Marseilles 
would be dangerous for himself and the public weal as 
intriguers would get hold of him. Corsica being free 
to-day, you would much oblige me by sending him there, 
since his hot head will not permit him to remain with the 
army of the Rhine." 



THE ISLAND OF ELBA. II J 

Napoleon was sorry to trouble Carnot with his domestic 
affairs, but felt that he must keep a lookout on the 
political conduct of his relations, since people had such a 
bad opinion of him that, " when a man was assassinated 
at Lyons, it was at once given out it was by one of my 
emissaries or parents — a man I had never heard of ! " 

" We are anxiously expecting reinforcements 

Things have taken a favourable turn. The peace con- 
cluded with Naples and Genoa has filled our enemies with 
despair. It is unfortunate in our treaty with Naples that 
we did not obtain the cession of the Island of Elba. / have 
given orders at Leghorn for the occupation of Elba directly it 

is evacuated by the English / shall obtain the island 

in return for our equivalent indemnity taken from the Papal 
States, Porto-Ferrajo is necessary to us, &c. 

''Bonaparte." 

Porto-Ferrajo, which Nelson, with the consent of theGrand 
Duke of Tuscany had occupied by way of compensation 
when the French seized on Leghorn. Porto-Ferrajo, with 
which Napoleon was destined to make a closer acquaintance 
in later years.^ 

Having received instructions from Paris, Bonaparte wrote 
once more to citizen Cacault to reopen negotiations with 
the Pope, saying : — 

"You may assure him that I was always opposed 
to the treaty, and especially to the manner in - which 
it was negotiated [had suggested that only a portion of 
it should be revealed to his Holiness at first, so as not to 
frighten him], that it is owing to my special and reiterated 

1 To ADMIRAL SIR JOHN JERVIS, K.B., Captain. 

" Porto-Ferrajo, \oth July, 1796. 

" Sir, — I have the pleasure to inform you that the troops under the 
command of Major Duncan took possession of the forts and town of 
Port-Ferrajo this day, at ten o'clock. . . ." 



Il8 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

demands that the Directory has empowered me to open up 
new negotiations. My ambition is rather to be the saviour 
than the destroyer of the Holy See. You know we have 
always held the same ideas on this subject, and in con- 
sequence of the unlimited powers given to me by the 
Directory if they will only act with wisdom at Rome, we 
may assure peace to this lovely portion of the world and 
tranquillise the timorous consciences of many people." 

We have several letters about this date complaining of 
the state to which the army was reduced. "The army is 
without shoes, without money, without uniforms ; the 
hospitals are devoid of everything, and our wounded are In 
the m.ost horrible state of destitution. All this owing to 
want of money, at a moment when we have acquired a^^ooo.ooo 
francs at Leghorn, when the merchandise at Tortona and 
Milan offers a real resource. Modena, too, should pay us 
1,800,000 francs, and Ferrara considerable contributions.'' 
And the next day, writing to the Directory : — '^ We are in 
such a state of penury that, unless some remedy be adopted, 
you will have to send money to feed the army." On the 
30th November, 1796, appeared a decree at Milan calling on 
Lombardy to pay up 20,000,000 francs ; ordering the sale of 
the property belonging to the House of Austria, abbey 
lands, church plate, &c. ** Seeing the state of destitution to 
which the army has been reduced." Napoleon attributed 
this condition of affairs to the mal-administration of those 
Government commissioners who were such thorns in his 
side, and the probability is that he made the picture more 
gloomy than it really was. The country, however, was evi- 
dently becoming exhausted. M. Lanfrey admits that never 
had such plundering been seen since the Romans despoiled 
Corinth. The Corinthitmi ces was represented by silver 
madonas, sacred vessels, and church bells. 

At the beginning of November, Alvinzi was at Pavia 
with 40,000 men and Davidowich was coming through the 
Tyrol with 18,000. Bonaparte marched against Alvinzi 



TWO DEFEATS. 119 

and inflicted a check upon him at Carmignano, but bad 
news arrived from the Tyrol where Vaubois had been 
beaten and Bonaparte had to fall back on Verona. On the 
I ith he once more attacked Alvinzi at Caldiero, but without 
being able to carry the position. The situation of the army 
appeared desperate, but the incomparable firmness and 
decision of its general were equal to the occasion and 
saved it. 

To THE DIRECTORY. 

*' Verona, \ith November, 1796. 
" I must give you an account of the operations of the 
army since the 2nd ; if it be not satisfactory the army must 
not be blamed ; its exhaustion and its inferiority in the 
way of men inspire me with alarm. Perhaps we are on the 
point of losing Italy. None of the expected reinforcements 
have arrived." After many gloomy predictions comes the 
account of the corps of General Vaubois being seized with 
panic and losing 1,300 prisoners and guns, and the check 
experienced at Caldiero ; all this and the death of so many 
brave men " renders me circumspect ; I no longer dare to 
expose myself as my death would discourage the troops 
and be a misfortune for those who are the object of all my 
care. In a few days we shall make a last effort " 

And that last effort was at Areola. 

To THE DIRECTORY. 

"Verona, 19//^ November, 1796. 
" I am so overcome with fatigue that it is impossible for 
me to narrate the movements that preceded the battle of 
Areola, which has just decided the fate of Italy." The 
fighting was long and sanguinary, and it was a desperate 
affair crossing the bridge ; Generals Verdier, Bon, Verne, 
and Lannes were all put hors de combat in the attempt. 
" Augereau, seizing a standard, shouted to the troops 
* Cowards, do you fear death } ' — and he remained at the 



I20 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEONo 

extremity of the bridge for several minutes without pro- 
ducing any effect I went there myself and asked 

the soldiers if they were the conquerors of Lodi ; my 
presence had such an effect on them that I determined to 
make another effort to cross." 

After many fluctuations the enemy was beaten, but " I 
cannot conceal that I did not find in my phalanxes the 
soldiers of Lodi, Millesimo, and Castiglione ; fatigue, and 
the absence of the gallant fellows who have fallen, have 
deprived them of that impetuosity which would have given 
me a right to expect the capture of Alvinzi and the greater 

portion of his army The field and staff officers 

displayed an activity and a bravery without example ; 
twelve or fifteen were killed ; not one but had his uniform 

riddled with bullets 

" Bonaparte." 

There is a celebrated painting of Bonaparte, standard in 
hand, crossing the bridge of Areola at the head of his 
grenadiers, but the legend appears to have been taken 
from the picture instead of the picture from the fact. One 
finds, on the other hand no mention in "the Corre- 
spondence" of Napoleon having tumbled into a morass 
during the action and being rescued from his perilous 
position by his brother Louis as was the case. 

The fighting at Areola lasted three days and it was hoped 
that the result would lead to peace. The Directory sent 
General Clarke to negotiate ; he was to conclude an 
armistice, but Bonaparte strongly protested, pointing out 
that much better terms might be procured after the fall of 
Mantua, which was in extre^nis. " Send me 30,000 men," he 
wrote, *' and I will march upon Trieste, carry the war into 
the states of the Emperor, revolutionise Hungary, and go 
to Vienna. You will then have a right to expect millions, 
and a good peace." 

Under these circumstances hostilities were resumed. 
Lord Malmesbury, too, who had been sent to Paris to 



CITIZEN HERCULES. 12 1 

negotiate on the basis of the status quo ante bellum, returned 
to London, for the British Government would not consent 
to restore the Cape to Holland, nor would France renounce 
her views upon Belgium. 

Venice, having protested against the conduct of the 
liberating army, received the following reply : — 

To THE PROVEDITEUR-GENERAL OF THE REPUBLIC 
OF VENICE. 

" Milan, Zth December, 1796. 
^* In the note which you have sent me, sir, I do not 
recognise the conduct of the French troops on Venetian 
territory, but that of the troops of the Emperor who, 
wherever they have passed, have committed horrors which 
make one shudder." Napoleon then criticised the style of 
the document forwarded to him, comparing it to the effort 
of an indifferent schoolboy, and added, '' Good God ! the 
ills inseparable from a state of war, and the shock of 
passions and interests are already so great and so afflicting 
for humanity, that it is not worth while augmenting them 
a hundredfold by adorning them with fairy tales which are 
either malicious, or extremely ridiculous. I give the lie in 
the most formal manner to any one daring to say that in 
the Venetian States a single woman has been violated by 
the French troops BONAPARTE.'' 

At other moments the atrocities committed by his own 
soldiers made him blush to be a man ! It must be 
remembered that Venice was not at war, but at peace 
with France. 

To GENERAL BERTHIER. 

" Verona, i\st December, 1796. 

'* The citizen Hercules is promoted to the rank of captain. 
I grant a gratification of seventy-two francs to each of the 
twenty-five guides who accompanied him at the battle 
of Areola. BONAPARTE.^' 



122 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

Citizen Hercules had been sent round to the rear of 
the Austrian army at Areola at the head of twenty-five 
troopers armed with trumpets, and had there blown a 
blast such as had never been heard since the fall of Jericho, 
to the utter bewilderment of the enemy. This stratagem, 
worthy of my Lord Peterborough, had a great influence 
on the fortunes of the day. 

It is more than probable that in the following despatch 
Bonaparte, in accordance with custom, misrepresented 
numbers on both sides: — 

To THE DIRECTORY. 

" Milan, iWi December, 1796. 
"The army of General Alvinzi is on the Brenta and in 

the Tyrol, and that of the Republic along the Adige 

Mantua is invested with the greatest care You will 

see by the Emperor's letter that Wurmser must be in 

extrernis The army returns which you have sent 

are full of errors The army of Italy, properly so 

called, consisted primitively of 38,500 infantry. It has 
been reinforced by 10,000 men. We should therefore have 
51,100 infantry had the army experienced no losses; but 
4,000 men have been killed on the field of battle, there are 
1. 000 wounded, unfit for further service, 2,000 men have 
died in hospital ; total, 7,000. In all, your army has been 
reinforced by only 12,500 men, and that in a campaign 
during which so many battles have been fought, and where 
the same troops have destroyed the Sardinian army and 
that of Beaulieu, 73,000 strong ; the army of Beaulieu, 
reinforced by 20,000 men from the Rhine, commanded by 
Wurmser; the army of Wurmser, reinforced by 18,000 
men drawn from Poland, 6,000 from the Rhine, and 12,000 
recruits commanded by Alvinzi. And we are on the eve 
of an affair with the debris of all these armies, reinforced 
by 4,000 volunteers from Vienna, 3,000 men from the 
Rhine, 3,000 recruits who have already arrived, and 1,500 
expected in January. 



BONAPARTE S POSITION. I 23 

" It required good luck, and good play, to beat Alvinzi. 
How hope to beat, with the same troops, Alvinzi rein- 
forced by 30,000 men, while we have as yet received only 
3,000 ? '' Dwelling then on the merits of the troops — '* I 
say with true satisfaction that no army more desires the 
preservation of the sacred Constitution, sole refuge of the 
liberty of the French people. Here, we hate and are ready 
to fight against the new revolutionists, no matter what 
their aim. No more revolution ; this is the hope of the 
soldier. He does not demand peace, which he mentally 
desires, because he knows that is the only way not to 
obtain it, and that those who do not desire it ask for it 
loudly so as not to get it. The soldier prepares himself 
for new battles, and if he sometimes ponders over the 
feeling which animates "several towns in France, his chief 
regret is to see deserters received and protected and the 

laws without force 

" Bonaparte." 

At the close of 1796 Bonaparte therefore found himself 
in a critical position, in spite of a series of brilliant feats 
of arms, which elicited the astonishment and admiration of 
friend and foe. In the course of a few months he had 
accomplished marvels, but his victories still required to be 
consolidated. He had beaten all the generals sent against 
him, had broken up a formidable coalitiun, had enriched 
his country with plunder, and had made and unmade 
governments. Bonaparte himself desired to go on with 
the war, while France and the Directory were in favour 
of peace. General Clarke had been directed to conclude 
an armistice and to discuss conditions with Austria. Bona- 
parte protested against an armistice on military grounds, 
and he very soon managed to gain Clarke over to his 
views and to enlist him on his side. The agent of the 
Directory, in fact, soon became the agent of Bonaparte. 

It will be well to remember the conditions which Clarke 
was empowered to make to the Emperor. First condition 



124 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

or combination : '* France to keep Belgium ; to restore to 
Austria her possessions in Italy, and to allow her to seize 
upon certain German archbishoprics and a portion of the 
Palatinate.'' Second combination : " France to keep 
Belgium and the Milanais, and to cede to Austria the 
Papal States, with the title of King of Rome for the 
Grand Duke of Tuscany " ! (the brother of the Emperor 
of Austria). In a third combination, Bavaria was to be 
offered to Austria. 



CHAPTER III. 

THE YEAR 1797. 

At the beginning of this eventful year Bonaparte 
prevented the junction of Alvinzi and Provera and gained 
the battle of Rivoli. Provera was then forced to lay- 
down his arms, and that gallant veteran, Wurmser, was 
obliged to open the gates of Mantua. The Pope, terrified 
by the crushing reverses of the Austrians, consented to 
sign the treaty of Tolentino, by which he lost Avignon 
and the other Papal territories in France, together with 
Bologna, Ferrara, and the Romagna ; he engaged to pay 
30,000,000 francs to the French Republic, and to hand over 
a stipulated number of pictures, statues, and manuscripts. 
The Archduke Charles in vain attempted to turn the tide 
of victory ; he was driven back under the walls of Vienna, 
and forced to sign the preliminaries of Leoben, which 
ended in the treaty of Campo Formio. Hoche and 
Moreau passed the Rhine, and Kray was in a most 
critical position, when the news of the armistice put a 
stop to further operations, to the great disappointment of 
the French generals. England offered to negotiate for 
peace, and a conference was opened at Lille, which, in 
consequence of the exorbitant demands of France, led to 
no result. In September there was a coup d'etat operated 
by General Augereau, who saved the Directors from the 
Royalists who had conspired to upset the Republic and 



126 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

restore the Monarchy. General Pichegru and fifty-two 
deputies were transported, and Carnot only escaped the 
same fate, owing to the eminent services he had rendered 
to his country. Bonaparte was intimately mixed up in 
this affair. 

One of the most striking and curious events of the 
year was the iniquitous destruction of the old Venetian 
Republic, which was almost contemporary with the com- 
mencement of the Christian era. Venice, although a 
Republic, was handed over by the French RepubHc to 
the Austrian Empire. At the close of the year we find 
Bonaparte engaged in preparing to invade England, or 
rather seemingly making preparations to effect a landing 
on our shores. His ambitious and restless character had 
so alarmed the Directors that they desired at any price 
to employ his military talents at a secure distance from 
the seat of government. 

We see that both France and Austria gained by this 
war. If Austria ceded Belgium to France, recognised her 
right to the Ionian Islands and the left bank of the Rhine, 
and acknowledged the Cisalpine Republic, France, on her 
side, handed over to the House of Hapsburg Venice, 
Istria, Friuli, and Dalmatia. 

As regards the negotiations at Lille, where one of the 
principal points disputed was the right of the King of 
England to style himself King of France, it was not 
expected that much good would arise. The negotiations 
were hardly serious, nor was their rupture much regretted. 

At the close of the year the army of England was 
formed, and the Congress of Rastadt opened, the result 
of which was to deprive England of her great ally on the 
Continent, to wit, Austria. 

On the 1st January, Bonaparte wrote a letter to M. 
Battaglia commencing thus: — '*The French troops have 
occupied Bergamo in order to anticipate the enemy, who 
intended to seize upon that essential point. I frankly 
acknowledge that I was glad of this opportunity to drive 



THE COMMAND OF LOMBARDY. I2j 

out the emigres who had sought refuge in the city, and to 
punish the libelists who, since the commencement of the 
campaign, have not ceased to recommend the assassination 
of the soldiers of the French Republic. The Bergamesques 
have assassinated more Frenchmen than all the rest of 
Italy put together." If this w^ere the case surely Bona- 
parte had no need to plead as an excuse for his violation 
of Venetian neutrality the necessity of anticipating the 
Austrians. The fact is that Bergamo was an important 
military position, and the Venetians were to be goaded 
into acts of despair so as to furnish Bonaparte with an 
excuse for seizing on the country. It was useless for 
M. Battaglia to protest or complain. 

A letter of the Sth January shows us that Bonaparte 
upon that date confided the command of Lombardy to 
General Kilmaine, an Irish officer of considerable merit, 
born in Dublin. It is certain that Lombardy had little 
reason to congratulate itself on the appointment of this 
Milesian commandant, whose rapacity was only surpassed 
by that of Massena. As for the conduct of the French 
troops, that still left much to be desired. 



To GENERAL BERTHIER. 

" Milan, 2>th January, 1797. 

*'You will have citizens Bockty, Chevilly, and Des- 
crivains, who are employed in the administration of the 
army, brought before a court-martial for having robbed 
and compromised the safety of the army. It is this 
infamous conduct which has compromised our operations 
and caused the loss of a great number of our comrades. 
... I consequently demand that these three men be 
condemned to death in order to alarm their accomplices, 
who are only too numerous in the army of Italy. 

" Bonaparte." 



128 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

To THE DIRECTORY. 

" Milan, (ith January^ 1797. 
'' The more I examine, during leisure hours, the incurable 
defects in the administration of the army of Italy, the 
more I am convinced of the necessity of applying a prompt 
and infallible remedy. The accounts of the army are in 
the greatest disorder ; to the well-earned reputation of the 
controller for swindling is joined the incapacity of his 
subordinates. Everything is sold. The army consumes 
five times more than is necessary, because the storekeepers 
make out false orders and share the profits with the con- 
tractors. The principal actresses of Italy are all living with 
employes of the French army ; luxury, depravation, and 
embezzlement are at their height. The laws are insuf- 
ficient. There is only one remedy — the constitution of a 
court with power to shoot any army administrator. Mar- 
shal Berwick had the intendant of his army hung because 
provisions failed ; and in the midst of abundance, and 
when paying five times more than is necessary, we are 
often in want. . . . 

" Bonaparte." 

It is curious to contrast the penury to which the army 
was often reduced with the amount of money furnished to 
the home Government, and with the official and non-official 
plunder. The army contractors were not the only guilty 
parties. The rapacity of most of the commanding officers 
was notorious. Some of them were always followed by 
waggons which contained their ill-gotten gold, which they 
were afraid to send home or to allow out of their sight. 

To GENERAL RUSCA. 

" Milan, 7M January, 1797. 
" Some unfortunate people have allowed themselves to 
be seduced by perfidious agents, who excite them to revolt 
and draw down upon them the horrors of war. You will 



THE AULIC COUNCIL. I 29 

march to Castelnovo and shoot the chief of the rebels, 
and send twenty hostages to Milan ; you will destroy the 
house of the confessor of the Duke of Modena, who is the 
author of this rebellion, and on the ruins you will cause a 
pyramid to be erected with this inscription : Punishment 
of an infuriated priest who misused his position as a minister 
to preach revolt and assassination. You will assemble the 
magistrates, the heads of the various convents, and the 
cures, and tell them from me that as long as they are 
animated by the true principles of religion, like Cardinal 
Mattei and the bishops of Modena and Pavia, I shall 
respect them and their property ; but if they become 
instruments of civil war, I shall have their convents de- 
stroyed, and I shall cause the cures of revolted villages to 
be personally punished. . . . 

" Bonaparte." 

Considering the fearful exactions to which the Italians 
were subjected, and the manner in which their religious 
sentiments were offended, it is not astonishing that they 
should now and then have broken into revolt, and have 
shown a decided preference for the yoke of their old 
masters. Cardinal Mattei was now a docile instrument in 
the hands of the French general, but rather through fear 
than through love. 

To GENERAL CLARKE. 

"Verona, \2th January^ 1797. 

" I had hardly left Roverbella, when I learnt that the 

enemy had presented himself at Verona. Massena made 

his plans, which were very skilful ; we have captured 600 

prisoners and three guns. General Brune received seven 

bullets in his uniform without being wounded, which was 

good luck. 

" Bonaparte.** 

Alvinzi, acting on the orders of the Aulic council, had 
suddenly attacked the French at several points. On the 
VOL. I. K 



130 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

same day, in addition to the attack on Verona, other 
attacks were directed against Corona and Legnago, while 
Provera threatened the lower Adige. The Aulic council 
hoped to be able to deceive Bonaparte as to the point 
where the real attack was to be made, to force his lines, 
and to oblige him to raise the siege of Mantua. The 
Austrian plan was at first successful, but Bonaparte was 
too prudent a general to act before learning with certainty 
the intentions of the enemy. During the whole of the 
1 2th and 13th January he remained to the rear of Verona, 
at an equal distance from Rivoli and Legnago, ready to 
march on either point, and waiting for the reports of his 
lieutenants. At 10 P.M. Joubert, who had been driven out 
of Corona, sent Bonaparte a despatch which removed all 
nncertainty and induced him, without a moment's delay, 
to hurry with all his available resources to Rivoli, where 
he arrived at 2 A.M. on the I4rh. The next day the 
celebrated battle of Rivoli was fought, which ended in the 
almost total destruction of Alvinzi's army, and brought 
about the capitulation of Mantua. 

On the 17th January, 1797, Bonaparte wrote to the 
Directory from Roverbella : — 

" Operations of such importance, and military actions so 
numerous have happened here since the 12th, that it is 
impossible for me to send you a detailed report before 
to-morrow. 

*' On the 1 2th January the enemy attacked General 
Massena's division before Verona, was completely beaten, 
and lost 600 prisoners and three guns. 

''On the 13th the enemy moved a strong column by 
way of Montagna and Caprino, and obliged General 
Joubert's division to evacuate Corona and to concentrate 
at Rivoli. I foresaw this movement, marched there during 
the night, and this gave rise to the battle of Rivoli, which 
we gained on the 14th and 15 th after an obstinate re- 
sistance, during which we captured 13,000 prisoners and a 



MORE AUSTRIAN DEFEATS. 



L3I 



great number of standards and guns. General Alvinzi, 
almost alone, escaped with great difficulty. . . The enemy 
fell back on Mantua. At a cannon shot from the place he 
attacked St. George's, a suburb which we had carefully 
entrenched, and which he could not carry. I arrived 
during the night with reinforcements, and this brought on 
the battle of La Favourite, the fruit of which was 7,000 
prisoners, with guns, standards, all the baggage of the 
army, a regiment of huzzars, and a considerable convoy 
of corn and cattle which the enemy wished to throw into 
Mantua. Wurmser attacked our left wing, but he was 
received as usual and forced to retire. In three or four 
days the fifth army of the Emperor has been entirely 
destroyed. 

'' We have made 23,000 prisoners ; among them a 
lieutenant-general, two generals, 6,000 men killed or 
wounded, 60 guns, and 24 standards. All the battalions 
of the Vienna volunteers have been captured ; their 
standards were embroidered by the hands of the Em- 
press. . . . 

" Bonaparte." 



During these affairs, four regiments of Massena's division, 
after fighting all day at Verona and deciding the battle of 
Rivoli, marched sixteen leagues during the night in order 
to cover Mantua ; a feat reminding one of our light brigade 
in the Peninsula which, about to bivouac after a march of 
twenty miles, pushed forward on hearing that Wellington 
was engaged at Talavera, and got over sixty-two English 
miles in twenty-six hours, leaving only seventeen stragglers 
behind, in spite of bad roads, a burning sun, and a scarcity 
of water. Reminds one also of Prince Henry's march 
when he vanished from Daun, halting only thrice for 
three hours at a time, during fifty-six hours — a march 
much admired by Prince Henry's brother, Frederick the 
Great. 

K 2 



132 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

To THE DIRECTORY. 

"Verona, 10th January^ ^797- 
''You will find inclosed, Citizen Directors, some inter- 
cepted letters which are exceedingly curious, showing the 
obstinacy and bad faith of the Court of Rome, and the 
refusal on the part of the cabinet of Vienna to accept the 
alliance of the Pope, which no doubt arises from its desire 
to conclude peace. I have caused these letters to be 
printed in the Bologna gazettes, so as to convince all Italy 
of the idiotic doting of these old cardinals. To-morrow I 
shall pass the Po, near Ferrara, and march on Rome. . . . 

'' Bonaparte." 

To CARDINAL MATTEL 

"VERONi^, 22nd January^ 1797. 
" The foreigners who influence the Court of Rome wish 
to ruin that beautiful country ; the words of peace which 
I charged you to convey to the Holy Father have been 
stifled by those men for whom the glory of Rome is 
nothing, but who are sold to the courts which employ 
them. We are drawing to the close of this ridiculous 
comedy. You are a witness of the price I attached to 
peace, and of my desire to spare you the horrors of war. 
The letters which I sent you, the originals of which are in 
my hands, will convince you of the perfidy, the blindness, 
and the temerity of those persons who at present influence 
the Court of Rome. No matter what may happen, I beg 
you. Cardinal, to assure his Holiness that he can remain in 
Rome without the least uneasiitess. The first minister of 
religion will find, in this title, protection for himself and the 
Church. Assure also all the inhabitants of Rome that 
they will find friends in the French army who will con- 
gratulate themselves only on victory insomuch as it will 
ameliorate the lot of the people, and free Italy from foreign 
domination. I shall take particular care not to suffer any 
change to be made in the religion of our fathers, &c. 

" Bonaparte." 



LETTER TO CARNOT. 1 33 

On the 22nd Bonaparte wrote a letter to citizen Cacault, 
the French minister at Rome, telling him to leave that 
city six hours after the receipt of his despatch. Bonaparte 
had made up his mind to enforce the conditions of the 
armistice signed in 1796, at all events as far as pecuniary 
matters were concerned ; but he had already determined 
not to destroy the Papacy entirely. Letters from France 
had warned him of a reaction in favour of the Catholic 
Church, and as the Directory allowed him full liberty in 
this question he proceeded to act as gently as circumstances 
permitted. 

To GENERAL KELLERMANN. 

"Verona, 26/^ January^ ^191- 
"My DEAR General, — I have not seen your com- 
missioner, but I presume that he will be at Milan. I have 
given orders for the 100,000 francs you require to be 
handed to him. I regret that the roguery of Flachat & 
Co. prevents me from sending you all the money necessary, 
but we are ourselves in very straitened circumstances ; I 
think, however, that we shall soon settle matters with 
the Pope, and this will place some funds at our disposal. . 

" Bonaparte." 

The army contractors above-mentioned were accused of 
having embezzled to the extent of several million francs. 

To citizen CARNOT. 

" Verona, 26/^ January^ 1 797. 
" I received your letter, my dear Director, on the 
battle-field of Rivoli. Formerly I saw with pity all the 
rumours spread concerning me, each one making me speak 
according to his passion. I believe you know me too well 
to suppose that any one can influence me. I have always 
felt thankful for the marks of interest you have given me, 
for which I shall ever be grateful. There are men for 
whom hate is a necessity, and who being unable to over- 
throw the Republic, console themselves by sowing discord 



134 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

wherever it is possible. As for myself, nothing they can 
say affects me : the esteem of a small number of persons 
like yourself, that of my comrades and of the soldier, 
sometimes also the opinion of posterity, and, above all 
my conscience and the prosperity of my country, are the 

sole objects which interest me I have ordered 

citizen Cacault to leave Rome ; you can have no idea 
of the bad treatment which this pi^etraille [term of con- 
tempt for the priesthood] made him undergo. ... I told 
Manfredini the last time I saw him, that if the Emperor 
desired a proof that Thugut was sold to France when 
he was ambassador at ConstantinoiDle, I could easily 
procure it. . . . 

" Bonaparte." 

The language of Bonaparte, the amount of independence 
he assumed, and the court he held in Italy sorely troubled 
the home government. Hence a profusion of professions 
on the part of the General-in-Chief and frequent but 
insincere demands to be relieved. Nothing more appears 
in the correspondence on the subject of Thugut's venality. 
The Pope having refused to execute the articles of the 
armistice, Bonaparte issued the following : — 

PROCLAMATION TO THE ARMY. 

^^ Bologna, \st February^ i797- 
"The French army is about to enter the territory of the 
Pope ; it will be faithful to the maxims it professes, and 
will respect the religion of the people. The French 
soldier carries a bayonet in one hand, sure guarantee of 
victory, and with the other he offers peace, protection, and 
safety." 

Then come threats in case of resistance, and — 

" Art. I. — Every town or village which at the approach 
of the French army shall sound the alarm bell, shall at 
once be burned and the municipality shot. 



INVASION OF THE PONTIFICAL STATES. I35 

'^Art. 11. — The Commune in which a Frenchman is 
assassinated will be subjected to martial law ; a flying 
column will be sent there, hostages taken and an extra- 
ordinary contribution levied. 

"Art. III. — All priests, monks, &c., shall be protected 
and maintained in their present position if they conduct 
themselves according to the principles of the New Testa- 
ment ; but if they be the first to transgress them they will 
be treated in military fashion, and more severely than 
other citizens, 

" Bonaparte." 

On the same day Bonaparte informed the Directory 
that Wurmser had at last offered to capitulate, also that 
General Victor had marched on Imola, the first town in 
the Pontifical States — " Can we not," added Napoleon, 
" if we go to Rome, unite Modena, Ferrara, and the 
Romagna, and form them into a powerful Republic ? 
Might we not give Rome to Spain on the condition that 
she guarantees the independence of the new Republic .^ 
We might then restore the Milanais and Mantua to the 
Emperor, and even give him Parma if necessary. The 
Emperor would lose nothing, Spain would gain a great 
deal, and we should gain still more, for we should have 
a natural ally in Italy. . . ." 

The notion of giving Rome to Spain was only a fugitive 
idea, supposing it to have been really entertained. The 
principle, however, of mixing up the court of Madrid in 
Italian affairs was not abandoned, as was proved when 
Napoleon established the son-in-law of the King of Spain 
on the throne of Tuscany. 

In a letter of the 3rd of February, addressed to the 
Directory, Bonaparte said : — 

** I applied myself to show French generosity towards 
Wurmser, a general seventy years of age, towards whom 
fortune, during this campaign, has been so cruel, but who 



136 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

never ceased to exhibit a constancy and a courage which 
history will chronicle. Enveloped " on all sides at the 
battle of Bassano, losing at a single blow both a portion 
of his army and of the Tyrol, he dared to conceive the 
hope of being able to seek refuge in Mantua, from which 
he was four or five days distant, of passing the Adige, of 
defeating our outposts at Cerea, and of crossing the 
Molinella. Shut up in Mantua he headed three sorties. . .'* 

Bonaparte then gave an account of the defeat of the 
Roman army by Lannes. The troops of his Holiness 
encamped wdth great care on the river Senio made no 
stand — '* although during the fight several priests crucifix 
in hand preached to these wretched troops." The French 
captured 14 guns, 11 flags, and 1,000 prisoners. 

Faenza offered some resistance. The chiefs, however, 
and notably the bishop, were the first to fly. The town 
having been taken, Bonaparte instead of pillaging it, sent 
fifty Roman officers who had been made prisoners to 
remonstrate with the citizens on the folly of their conduct. 
*'This morning," added Bonaparte, ** I sent for the monks 
and priests and reminded them of the principles of the 
evangelists. . . ." 

To THE DIRECTORY. 

"FORLI, yd February^ i797- 
"You will find inclosed the memorandum sent to me by 
citizen Faipoult ; you will shudder with indignation when 
you see with what impudence the Republic is robbed. I 
have given orders for the arrest of Legros, Controller of 
the Treasury, and Lequesne of the commissariat. I have 
also recommended Faipoult to have citizens Payan and 
Pergallo arrested at Genoa. You will never permit the 
robbers of the army of Italy to find refuge in Paris. 
While I was away from Milan fighting, citizen Flachat left, 
taking with him 5,000,000 francs ; he has placed us in the 
greatest embarrassment. . . . 

"Bonaparte." 



THE REPUBLIC OF SAN MARINO. 1 37 

On the same day Bonaparte ordered Berthier to have 
an inventory made " of all the effects taken from the 
Pope." Official and organised plunder was evidently 
regarded in the same light as those '* big wars which make 
ambition virtue." 

The French troops had been specially recommended to 
respect Papal territory, but a despatch addressed to 
General Victor shows that this order was disregarded. 
On the 5 th February the general was reminded that he 
was at the head of an army corps and not of a horde of 
pillagers. 

Rimini having been occupied and looted, a sharp note 
was addressed to the Regent of the Republic of St. Marino, 
in whose territory Monsignor Ceretti, Bishop of Rimini, 
had taken refuge. Bonaparte expressed his desire to live 
on good terms with the Regent, but he must at once arrest 
Monsignor Ceretti, who, after preaching discord and 
assassination, had fled carrying all his treasures with him. 
If not immediately given up 2,000 men were to be sent in 
search of the fugitive. 



To THE MINISTER OF WAR. 

'^ Pesaro, Zth February, ^797' 
*' The General-in-Chief directs me to send you the flags 
captured at Mantua by General Augereau. These new 
trophies close the campaign. While the general is engaged 
in bringing Rome to its senses, he is also making arrange- 
ments for the next campaign. 

''By Order." 

To THE DIRECTORY. 

^' Ancona, lot/i February, \7<^7. 

"We have conquered the Romagna, the Duchy of 
Urbino, and the marches of Ancona in a very short time. 
At Ancona we captured 1,200 Papal soldiers. They were 



138 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

posted very skilfully on the heights in front of the city ; 
General Victor surronnded tJiein and took tlieni all prisoners 
zvithont firing a shot. The Emperor of Austria had just 
sent to the Pope 3,000 excellent muskets and 120 heavy 
guns which we found in the fortress. . . . No government 
was ever so despised, even by the people who obey it, as 
this one. To the first feeling of terror inspired by the 
entry of our troops succeeded the joy of being delivered 
from the most ridiculous of governments. 

'' I send you some despatches taken from a courier 
coming from St. Petersburg and addressed to the Grand 
Master of the Order of Malta. I think some use might 
be made of them by sending them to our ambassador at 
Constantinople. . . . 

'' We are masters of Notre Dame de Lorette. There 
was gold and silver in the treasury to the value of 7,000,000 
francs, and corn, which we took. Before the arrival of 
Colli there was 8,000,000 or 9,000,000 francs. 

''Bonaparte.'' 



It was probably by the despatches mentioned above 
that Bonaparte became aware that the Emperor Paul was 
negotiating with the Grand Master Homspesch for the 
sale of Malta, a piece of information of which he took 
advantage the following year by outbidding Paul. 

Colli, thus tacitly accused of having plundered the Santa 
Casa to the extent of one or tvv^o million francs, after having 
fought for his country with distinction, took service nrst 
under the Emperor of Austria then under the Pope, and 
finally under Napoleon. As for the image of Notre 
Dame de Lorette, after having been transported by angels 
from Nazareth to Italy, to escape from the infidel, it was 
transported by French soldiers to Paris, and remained in 
the National Library until the signing of the Concordat, 
when it was restored to Pius VII. to console him for the 
loss of the Legations. 



NEGOTIATIONS WITH THE POPE. 1 39 

To CARDINAL MATTEL 

"Ancona, I2,th Febrtcary, 1797. 
*' In the letter which you have given yourself the trouble 
to write to me, I recognise that simplicity for which you 
are distinguished." 

After enumerating the only conditions upon which he 
would cease hostilities, Bonaparte added : — 

" These clauses fulfilled, his Holiness may hope to save 
his states by reposing more confidence in the generosity of 
the Republic. ... I know that his Holiness has been 
deceived, and I am willing to prove to Europe once more 
the moderation of the French Repubhc by granting him 
five days, so that he may send a negotiator to Foligno 
whither I shall repair, and where I hope to be able to 
contribute personally to an arrangement, and to give the 
Holy See a marked proof of my esteem. . . . 

'' Bonaparte." 

There was not a word in this letter of the proposal to 
hand over Rome to Spain, and the ^' most ridiculous of 
governments " now enjoyed the esteem of the young 
general. 

In a despatch to the Directory of the 15th February, 
Bonaparte related how he had come to the aid of the 
French priests who, driven from France, had taken refuge 
in the Papal States, and who cried at the sight of a French- 
man. If his measures were not at variance with general 
principles, he added, that he thought he might be able to 
make use of these ecclesiastics. He went on to say : — 

" Ancona is an excellent port from whence one can sail 
to Macedonia in twenty-four hours, and to Constantinople 
in ten days. My project is to collect there all the Jews 
possible. I am having the forts placed in a state of 
defence. We must manage to keep Ancona at the general 
peace so that it may remain French for ever ; this will give 



140 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

US great influence over the Porte, and will render us 
masters of the Adriatic, as Marseilles, Corsica, and St. 
Pierre, render us masters of the Mediterranean. 

" Loretto contained about 3,000,000 livres tournois. 
They left us about a million francs out of seven million. 
I send you the Madonna with all the relics.^ . . . The 
Madonna is in wood. 

^^ This is what I intend doing. I mean to make peace 
with the Pope in exchange for the legations of Bologna, 
Ferrara, and Romagna, the Duchy of Urbino and the 
Marches of Ancona; and he must pay us the 3,000,000 
livres (the value of the treasury of Loretto). 2nd. 15,000,000 
francs, money remaining due on the armistice; he must 
give us all his cavalry and artillery horses ; he must dis- 
miss Colli and all his Austrians, &c. If these conditions 
be not accepted I shall march on Rome. 

" I prefer an arrangement to going to Rome, ist, because 
that will avoid a dispute with the King of Naples which 
may become serious ; 2nd, because if the Pope and all the 
princes were to fly from Pome I should never be able to 
obtain what I have demanded ; 3rd, because, deprived of 
her finest provinces, Rome cannot long exist ; 4th, because 
the court of Rome ceding to us all its rights over the 
provinces above-named will not be able, at the general 
peace, to regard this as a temporary arrangement. . . . 

'' Bonaparte/' 

The Pope had been deserted by all the Catholic powers, 
beginning with Spain which had cast her lot in with 
revolutionary France. If Bonaparte now desired, on the 
eve of resuming hostilities with Austria, to avoid any 
difficulty with the King of Naples, it was not a religious 
but a territorial difficulty which was feared. Both Naples 
and Austria coveted the Papal States. 

1 Among the relics was a cannon ball, which had nearly killed 
Julius II. ; offered by that Pope. At a later date a king of Sweden 
left in the Santa Casa his coat, vest, and flesh-coloured breeches. 



OPINION CONCERNING ROME. I4I 

To THE DIRECTORY. 

"TOLENTINO, i()th February, 1797. 
" The Committee of Savants has reaped a good harvest 
at Ravenna, Rimini, Pesaro, Ancona, Loretto, and Perugia 
which will be at once forwarded to Paris. Joined to what 
is to be sent from Rome we now possess everything that is 
beautiful in Italy, with the exception of a small number 
of objects at Turin and Naples. 

'' Bonaparte." 

On the same date Bonaparte transmitted to the Directory 
the treaty of peace concluded with the Pope. In his letter 
he said : — 

*' My opinion is that Rome deprived of Bologna, Ferrara, 
and the Romagna, and the 30,000,000 francs which we take 
from her will not be able to exist ; this old machine will go 
to pieces of itself. 

" It is possible that I may have erred in the decision I 
have taken, but no one will accuse me of having sacrificed 
the interest of my country to my own glory. 

" The King of Sardinia asks to make an offensive treaty 
with us, &c. 

*' Bonaparte. '* 

To the Sovereign Pontiff Napoleon wrote, also on 
the 19th :-- 

" The French Republic will in future be one of the 
sincerest friends of Rome. All Europe is aware of the 
pacific intentions and the conciliatory virtues of your 
Holiness. I send you my aide-de-camp to express to your 
Holiness the esteem and veneration which I entertain for 
your person, and I beg you will believe in my desire to 
give you, on all occasions, the proofs of respect and 
veneration with which I have the honour to be, &c., &c. " 



142 THE CORRESPONrJENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

The day before Bonaparte had written to Joubert in a 
rather different strain, saying : — '^ The army is within three 
marches of Rome. I am engaged in negotiating with 
this pretraille, and once more St. Peter will save the 
Capitol. . . ." 

On the 23rd February, the Pope ratified the treaty of 
Tolentino, and thus avoided two great dangers — that of 
seeing Rome stormed by the French, or sacked by the 
revolutionary party. 

It was only some months later, and when Austria was 
negotiating at Leoben, that the treaty with the King of 
Sardinia was signed. Flis majesty signed this treaty 
because he had reason to be dissatisfied with Austria, and 
because, like the Pope, he dreaded the ultra-Liberals. 

In the beginning of March Bonaparte sent Generals 
Casalta, Gentili, and Cervoni, to Corsica to aid in expelling 
the English. 

PROCLAMATION TO THE SOLDIERS OE ITALY. 

'^ Bassano, loth March, 1797. 

" The capture of Mantua has just terminated a campaign 
which entitles you to the eternal gratitude of your country. 
You have triumphed in fourteen pitched battles, and in 
seventy combats; you have taken more than 10,000 
prisoners, 500 field - pieces, 2,000 siege guns, and four 
pontoons. 

*' The contributions levied on the countries you have 
conquered have fed, kept, and paid the army during the 
whole campaign ; you have, in addition, sent 30,000,000 
francs to relieve the public treasury at home. 

''You have enriched the museum of Paris with more 
than 200 objects ; masterpieces of old and new Italy, and 
which it required thirty centuries to produce. . . . 

The remainder of this proclamation was filled with in- 
vectives against the Emperor of Austria, who had degraded 
himself into being '' the paid servant of the merchants o{ 



HOSTILITIES WITH AUSTRIA RESUMED. 1 43 

London/' and against those perfidious islanders, who, 
"strangers to the ills of war, smile with pleasure at the 
woes of the Continent." 

Having settled matters with the Pope, Bonaparte, having 
issued this address, determined to resume hostilities with 
Austria. For the moment he had nothing to dread from 
Sardinia or Naples. He had received a strong reinforce- 
ment commanded by Bernadotte from the army of the 
Rhine, and Mantua had capitulated. Bonaparte has been 
blamed by some writers for having opened this campaign 
before he could count upon the assistance of the armies of 
Moreau and of Hoche, which were unable to pass the 
Rhine for want of money. Moreau went to Paris, and 
v/ent there in vain, to solicit a few thousand pounds for the 
purchase of pontoons. It is supposed that Bonaparte was 
induced to commence operations alone, in the hope of being 
able to com.pel Austria to sue for peace before Moreau 
and Hoche could take the field. At the same time from 
the letters which Bonaparte addressed to the Directory, 
blaming the dilatory conduct of the army of the Rhine 
and that of the Sambre et Meuse, it is conjectured that he 
wished to excuse a possible failure by showing that he had 
been left to carry on the war against Austria single-handed. 
There can be no doubt that more than once during the 
brief and brilliant campaign of '97, Bonaparte entertained 
serious fears with regard to the result of his temerity, and 
hence his eagerness to open negotiations with the enemy, 
and to agree to terms which Austria could never have 
expected had not the signature of the preliminaries of 
peace checked the victorious advance of Hoche and Moreau. 

On the 17th March Bonaparte sent to the Directory an 
account of his victory over Prince Charles at Tagliamento. 
The Archduke had only just time to escape. The Austrians 
left six guns, one general, several field officers, and 400 
men in the hands of the French. Again Bonaparte pressed 
on the Directory the necessity of Moreau crossing the 
Rhine, as the Emperor was concentrating his best troops 



144 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

in Italy. A few days afterwards he crossed the Isonzo 
and boldly entered Austrian territory. 

To THE PEOPLE OF THE PROVINCE OF GORITZ. 

" GORITZ, 2ist March, 1797. 
" An unjust terror has preceded the French army ; we 
have not come to conquer you, or to change your customs 
or your religion. The French Republic is the friend of all 
nations. Perdition to those kings who are mad enough to 
do it battle. 

'' Priests, nobles, citizens, people, banish your uneasiness ; 
we are good and humane, &c. &c." 

And before the inhabitants of Goritz had time to look 
round, they found themselves in the enjoyment of a con- 
stitution and a central government. Judging by the severe 
orders of the day, which Bonaparte felt it his duty to issue 
against officers and men who indulged in pillage, it is clear 
that the terror of the inhabitants of the newly invaded pro- 
vince was justified, and that they required assurances with 
regard to the humanity of the invader. 

To CITIZEN BOUDET. 
" Head- Quarters, Goritz, 21st March, 17(^7. 
" Write to citizen Boudet to approve of his putting on 
the colours of the 57th demi-brigade, 'The terrible 57th 
demi-brigade which nothing can stop/ 

'' By order of the General-in-Chief" 

On the 25th March Bonaparte again reported proceedings 
to the Directory, and was able to announce further suc- 
cesses. The Austrians had been driven into the Noric 
Alps, and a battle had been fought at Jarvis, above the 
clouds, upon heights which overlooked Germany and Dal- 
matia. In several places the snow was three feet deep, and 
the cavalry had to charge over ice. " It is indispensable 
that the armies of the Rhine should enter Germany." 



THE ARCHDUKE CHARLES. 1 45 

Bonaparte added : ** Up to the present Prince Charles 
has manoeuvred worse than BeauHeu and VVurmser ; he has 
committed faults at every step, and extremely big ones. 
They have cost him dear, and would have cost him more 
dearly still if his reputation had not imposed upon me to a 
certain extent, and hindered me from taking advantage of 
certain blunders which I perceived, but which I attributed 
to plans which never existed in reality." 

Several years afterwards the Archduke Charles, under 
the walls of Vienna, allowed himself to be imposed upon 
and completely paralysed by the reputation of Bonaparte. 
But for the timidity of the Archduke in the presence of 
Bonaparte, the French Emperor would never have crossed 
the Danube, or recovered from the check he experienced 
at Essling. 

It is, however, only fair to observe that while Bonaparte 
was his own master, the Archduke w^as constantly hampered 
by the orders of the Aulic council. In this campaign, too, 
his forces were numerically weaker than those of his 
opponent. 

To CITIZEN CARNOT. 

"GORITZ, 25M Marchj \7<^7. 
". . . . Has the Rhine been passed ? It is clear that in 
a few days my movement will be unmasked, and that the 
enemy, perceiving his danger, will abandon the Rhine, in 
order to attack me. If Moreau does not then push forward 
by forced marches, I shall be beaten, and obliged to fall 
back into Italy. You will see by the intercepted letters I 
forward that the enemy hopes to open the campaign on 
the Rhine at once ; but he calculates, as usual, without 
taking into consideration what we may do. If Prince 
Charles commands the armies of the Rhine and Italy, it 
will be necessary for us to have unity of command in 
Germany. ... If I had 20,000 men more, I think I could 
reach Vienna in a fortnight. . . . 

*' Bonaparte." 

VOL. I. L 



146 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

To THE BURGOMASTER OF LIENZ. 

" ViLLACH, 2%th March, 1797. 
'^ The General-in-Chief Bonaparte sees with pain the 
terror which has preceded the French army. Let the in- 
habitants be tranquil, and without fear. The General-in- 
Chief will protect your religion, your persons, your properties, 
and your customs." 

On the 31st March Bonaparte wrote a long letter to the 
Archduke Charles, calling upon him to prove himself the 
benefactor of the human race, and to bring the war to a 
close. "As for myself," added Bonaparte, "if the overtures 
which I have the honour to make, can save the life of a 
single man, I shall be more proud of the civic crown I 
shall have deserved than of the sad glory which attaches to 
military successes," &c. &c. Bonaparte, when he wrote this 
strange letter, must have been well aware that the Arch- 
duke had no power to conclude peace, and he received a 
reply to this effect. This appeal to humanity was owing 
to the difficulties by which he found himself surrounded. 

On the 1st April Bonaparte had pushed on to Klagen- 
furt. He was still without news of Moreau, and impatiently 
waiting to hear of the passage of the Rhine. He announced 
to the Directory his intention of signing the preliminaries 
of peace in the event of the Archduke returning a favour- 
able answer. In a proclamation to the inhabitants of 
Carinthia, he said that the cabinet of Vienna would not 
allow the Emperor to make peace ; that the ministers, 
corrupted by English gold, betrayed their prince and their 
country, and were at the beck of those perfidious islanders 
who were hated by the whole of Europe. After the usual 
assurances concerning religion, property, &c., the procla- 
mation added : *^ Innocent victims, have you not already 
sufficiently suffered through the folly of others } All the 
taxes which you used to pay to the Emperor will serve to in- 
demnify you for the damage inseparable from the march of 



THE AUSTRIAN DELEGATES. 14/ 

an army^ and to pay for the provisions with zvJiich you have 
provided ms!^ And as in the province of Goritz, so in 
Carinthia, a central government was established and got 
into working order. 

On the same day Bonaparte announced that he had sent 
40,000/. to the Army of the Sambre and Meuse, 40,000/. to 
the Army of the Rhine, 20,000/. to the Army of the Alps, 
and that he was about to send 40,000/ to Toulon for the 
Marine. 

On the 4th April Bonaparte announced the conclusion 
of an offensive and defensive treaty between the French 
Republic and the King of Sardinia, the two most remark- 
able articles being that his Majesty was to cede the island 
of Sardinia to France, and to be compensated for this ces- 
sion on the conclusion of the general peace ; and that for 
the present he was to be permitted to maintain neutrality 
towards England while taking an active part in the war 
against Austria. 

The Directory refused to ratify this treaty. 

On the 7th April Bonaparte consented to an armistice 
with the Austrians, and announced this fact to the 
Directory, adding explanations of his conduct. He said 
that the Austrian delegates had assured him that the 
Emperor rather than lose everything in Italy, would leave 
Vienna and would run the risk of continuing the war. 

" Our armies," he added, " have not yet passed the Rhine, 
and we are within twenty leagues of Vienna ; the army of 
Italy is, therefore, exposed alone to the efforts of one of 
the first powers of Europe. 

"The Venetians are arousing their peasants, bringing 
their priests into the field, and setting in motion with fury 
the whole mechanism of their antiquated government. 
Venice has at present 20,000 armed men in my rear.'' 

Thus neatly did Bonaparte prepare the plan he had 
conceived for handing over the Venetian Republic to 
the tender mercies of Austria. 

**In the Papal States, too," continued Bonaparte, "con- 

L 2 



148 THE CORRESrONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

siderable numbers of peasants are descending from the 
mountains and threatening to invade the Romagna. 

" The different nationalities in Italy, reunited by a spirit 
of liberty, and excited in various ways by the most glow- 
ing passions require to be restrained and supervised/' 

And in fact, so long as the struggle with Austria was 
doubtful, the whole of Italy was openly hostile to the 
liberating army. 

On the 9th April Bonaparte wrote a comminatory letter 
to the Doge of Venice, threatening war unless he at once 
disbanded his armed peasants. 

'' Do you think," he asked, ** that because I am in the 
heart of Germany, I am powerless to cause the first nation 
in the universe to be respected ? Do you think that the 
legions of Italy will tolerate the massacres you have 
encouraged ? The blood of my brothers in arms shall 
be avenged. ... If, contrary to the manifest desire of the 
French Government, you oblige me to make war, you must 
not suppose that, in imitation of the troops you have armed, 
the French soldiers will ravage the properties of the inno- 
cent and unfortunate people of the mainland. I shall 
protect them, and one day they will bless even the crimes 
which obliged a French army to deliver them from a 
tyrannical government. BONAPARTE." 

Junot was the bearer of this missive to the Doge, and he 
was to insist upon receiving a reply within twenty-four 
hours. In a despatch of the same date, General Kilmaine 
was instructed how to act. He was to secure hostages at 
Padua, Verona, Treviso, Bassano, Brescia, and Bergamo, 
and he was to fell unexpectedly on some village where the 
rebels were not in force, and to burn it. All the Venetian 
nobles and all the persons attached to the senate were to 
be arrested, &c. &c. Verona, which was in a position to 
resist, resisted, and before the French could subdue that 
city they lost 300 men. But "the first nation in the 
universe" was not to be braved with impunity. 



THE SEDUCTIONS OF PARIS. 1 49 

To THE GENERAL ADMINISTRATION OF LOMBARDY. 

"Gratz, i2th Aprils 1797. 
*' You ask for assurances for your future independence ; 
but those assurances, are they not to be found in the vic- 
tories which the army of Italy gains every day ? . . . Each 
of our victories is a Hne in your constitutional charter ! . . . 
Facts assume the place of declarations. . . . You cannot 
doubt the interest and the desire of the French Government 
to render you free and independent." 

At this very moment Bonaparte was advising the 
Directory to restore Lombardy to Austria in exchange 
for her possessions on the left bank of the Rhine. Mantua 
was to be exchanged for Mayence, &c. 

To THE DIRECTORY. 

" Leoben, 16/^ Aprils 1797. 
" I send you by General Leclerc some interesting 
despatches concerning the situation of the army and the 
negotiations which have been commenced. In passing 
through Germany General Leclerc will be able to observe 
the various movements of the enemy, and to afford infor- 
mation to Generals Moreau and Hoche on reaching the 
Rhine. I beg you will send him back at once. AH. the 
officers whom I despatch to Paris remain there too long ; 
they spend their money, and over-indulge in pleasure. I 
send you, by a captain of huzzars, who has seen eighty 
years service, several colours captured from the enemy. 

'' Bonaparte." 

The venerable huzzar was one Francois Jantzon, who 
had joined the army in 1738, who had fought in Flanders 
and Bohemia from 1741 to 1748, then through the cam- 
paigns of the Seven Years' War, and afterwards through 
those of the Revolution. On the 1 6th April, 1797, Jantzon 
was eighty-five years of age, and reckoned sixty years of 
active service and twenty campaigns. The campaigns 



150 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

counting double made the eighty years referred to in 
Bonaparte's letter. 

In another voluminous despatch to the Directory, in 
which he reviewed the various measures open to adoption 
in the event of his negotiations with Austria being broken 
off, Bonaparte again complained of Moreau. He said : — 

" The best troops and the best generals are opposed to 
me. When a general is anxious to take the field nothing 
can stop him. Ever since history has commenced to chroni- 
cle military operations, a river has never been considered a 
serious obstacle. If Moreau wishes to cross the Rhine he 
will cross it, and if he had already passed it, without raising 
so many objections, we should now be in a position to 
dictate peace in an imperious manner, and without running 
any risk ; but the person who is afraid of losing his glory 
is sure to lose it. I crossed the Julian and the None Alps 
when the snow was three feet deep. . . . Every one be- 
lieved the feat impossible. If I had only considered my 
private interests, I should have halted after crossing the 
Isonzo ; I flung myself into Germany, in order to dis- 
engage the armies of the Rhine, and to prevent the 
enemy from assuming the offensive ; I am at the gates 
of Vienna, and this insolent and arrogant court has sent 
its plenipotentiaries to my head-quarters. The armies of 
the Rhine can have no blood in their veins. If they leave 
me here alone, I shall fall back into Italy, and Europe will 
judge the difference between the conduct of the two armies : 
they will afterwards have to support the entire weight of 
the forces of the Emperor ; they will be overwhelmed, and 
it will be their fault.'' 

Bonaparte, in fact, was at Leoben, and his advanced 
guard could see the spires of Vienna from the top of the 
Ssemmering. Under these circumstances, the Emperor of 
Germany and the Marquis de Gallo and General Merfeldt 
repaired to his head-quarters at Leoben with full powers 



THE MARQUIS DE GALLO. 15I 

At first Bonaparte objected to the Marquis because he was 
Neapolitan minister at Vienna, but he added, in a report 
to the Directory : " I did not consider it right to persist in 
this opposition, because it would have been productive of 
delay, and because the Marquis appeared to enjoy the full 
confidence of the Emperor of Austria ; also, because the 
Austrians and Hungarians are greatly irritated at seeing 
foreigners play the chief part in so important an affair, and 
because, should we break off negotiations, this will be an 
excellent means of exciting discontent against the Govern- 
ment of Vienna." 

Bonaparte found the negotiators great sticklers in matter 
of etiquette. The Marquis de Gallo insisted on the pavilion 
in the centre of a garden, where the deliberations took 
place, being declared neutral. Bonaparte consented to this 
fiction, although, as he remarked, "this neutral point is 
surrounded on all sides by the French army, and is in the 
midst of our bivouacs." 

On the 17th April the General-in-Chief issued the fol- 
lowing order, which was to be applied to Bernadotte's 
division : — 

" All the women who have not been authorised by the 
Council of Administration must leave the division within 
twenty-four hours ; in default of which they will be 
smeared with soot and exposed for two hours in the 
market-place. The General-in-Chief is informed that the 
disorders which are committed are owing to these 
abominable women, who excite the soldiers to pillage." 

Now the soldiers belonging to the army of the Rhine, 
who were drawn from the north of France, prided them- 
selves on their steady behaviour and their discipline. 
They were of quite a different temperament to the soldiers 
of the army of Italy. A good deal of jealousy existed 
between the forces under Hoche and Moreau and those 
under Bonaparte. The probability is that the above order 



152 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

of the day was undeserved, and was issued with the view 
of reducing, in appearance, the moral qualities of Berna- 
dotte's division to a level with those of the remainder of 
the army. It is certain that the disorders complained of 
existed before Bernadotte's division reinforced the troops 
under General Bonaparte. An Italian writer has left it 
on record that Bernadotte's soldiers conducted themselves 
with so much steadiness and moderation that the different 
towns disputed which should have them for garrison. 

On the 1 8th the preliminaries of peace were signed, and 
the news of this important event was at once despatched, 
not only to the Directory, but to Generals Hoche and 
Moreau, whose operations were thus suddenly interrupted 
to their great mortification. 

On the 19th April Bonaparte, in a further despatch to 
the Directory, made such remarks as these respecting the 
negotiations with Austria : ** As for the renunciation of 
our rights over Bologna, Ferrara, and Romagna in ex- 
change for the Venetian States, those provinces will always 

remain in our power The Government of Venice is 

the most absurd and tyrannical of governments, and it is 
beyond doubt that it wished to take advantage of our 

being in the heart of Germany to fall upon us By 

ceding Venice to Austria the Emperor will be bound to 
France, and, at least for a time, will be obliged to be 
friendly towards us." After some further remarks with 
regard to the astute character of his policy, which he very 
highly appreciated himself, Bonaparte entered into an 
explanation of his rnilitary movements. He said : "If at 
the commencement of the campaign I had persisted in 
marching on Turin, I should never have crossed the Po ; 
if I had persisted in marching on Rome, I should have lost 
Milan ; if I had persisted in marching on Vienna, I should 
perhaps have lost the Republic. The real plan for destroy- 
ing the Emperor was the one I adopted, but I required 
6,000 cavalry and 20,000 infantry in addition to the force 
under my command. The plan, too, would have succeeded 



TENDERS HIS RESIGNATION. 1 53 

had the Rhine been passed at the same time that I crossed 
the Tagliamento, as I thought would be the case, since two 
couriers in rapid succession ordered me to open the campaign!' 

Referring once more to the negotiations, Bonaparte said 
that if peace were concluded " it will be a monument of 
glory for the French Republic, and an infallible sign that 
it can, in two campaigns, subdue the Continent, provided 

it has strongly organised armies I have not levied a 

single contribution in Germany^ and there has not been a 

single coinplaint against us In a few days I will send 

you the ratification of the Emperor. I shall canton my 
army in the Venetian provinces, where its wants shall be 
supplied until I receive your orders. As for myself, I ask 
for repose. I have justified the confidence you reposed in 
me. I have always considered myself as nothing in the 
operations I have directed, and I pushed on to Vienna 
after having acquired more glory than is necessary to be 
happy, leaving behind me the superb plains of Italy, just 
as I marched forward at the beginning of the last campaign 
in search of bread for the army which the Republic could 
not feed. 

" Calumny will endeavour in vain to attribute perfidious 
intentions to me ; my civil career shall resemble my 
military career, by its simplicity. However, you must feel 
that I ought to leave Italy, and I beg that, when returning 
the ratification of the preliminaries of peace, you will give 
me permission to return to France. 

" Bonaparte." 

Bonaparte was well aware that his presence was not 
desired in Paris, and that he could even treat with Austria 
with impunity, although that duty really belonged to 
General Clarke, the political officer of the Directory. As 
for not having levied any contributions in Germany, that 
was a strange and also a false statement. It was strange 
that Bonaparte should boast of sparing a country with 
which he was at war, and of levying his contributions and 



154 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

drawing his resources from territories which had done their 
best to observe a strict neutrality. It was false, because 
he levied 3,000,000 francs on Goritz, a similar sum on 
Trieste, and because he seized stores and appropriated the 
taxes in those places. If no complaints were made against 
the conduct of the army, why the order of the day aimed 
at Bernadotte's division ? Why the order that all pillagers 
were to be shot? Why did Bonaparte write on the 21st 
March that " the General-in-Chief receives complaints from 
all sides," adding that he would render generals responsible 
for the conduct of their men ? It was true, however, that, 
anxious not to drive Austria to despair, Bonaparte had 
avoided treating Germany as he had treated Venice, Genoa, 
Lombardy, Modena, &c. He showed himself as lenient 
to the strong as he showed himself merciless towards the 
weak. It was not altogether V(F victis with him. 

To GENERAL DELMAS. 

" Leoben, 2o//^ Aprils "^1^1- 
The General-in-Chief is informed that you have beaten 
several soldiers with a cane. As this mode of punishment 
is contrary to our principles and the system of discipline 
established in the army of Italy, you are directed to 
conform to one and the other." 

On the 22nd April Bonaparte, in a despatch to the 
Directory, said that Austria, which refused compensation 
in Germany, was very anxious to conclude a definitive 
peace. He afterwards remarked that ''the house of 
Austria has immense resources. It has waged war with 
the money of England ; its subjects are not opp7^essed, and 
are attached to the Government. In offering favourable 
conditions to Austria we become independent of the King 
of Prussia, and able to hold the balance between the two 
powers. The Emperor will lose Belgium, Milan, and 
Modena, but he will obtain Venice ; he will have less 
regret at being obliged to conclude peace, and there will 



JEALOUSY OF MOREAU. 1 55 

remain behind no national hatred If you desire to 

continue the war, you must send me 25,000 infantry 
and 5,000 cavalry, so that I may be independent of the 

Rhine 

" Bonaparte." 

In another despatch, dated the 30th, Bonaparte, evidently 
feeling that it was necessary to excuse himself in the eyes 
of the Directory, wrote that his plan for levying contribu- 
tions in the faubourgs of Vienna had totally failed, owing 
to the inaction of the army of the Rhine. He added : " If 
Moreau had been willing to march, we should have made 
the most astonishing campaign, and have entirely changed 
the situation of Europe. Instead of that, he went to Paris 
and would do nothing ; and when I saw by your letters 
that your only hope was in making Hoche move alone, I 
thought the campaign was lost, and I believed we should 
have been beaten one after the other. 

" As for me, I flung myself without hesitation into the 
heart of Germany ; I made more than 24,000 prisoners ; 
I forced the Emperor to evacuate Vienna ; and I concluded 
peace at my head-quarters. The conditions of this peace 
are no doubt advantageous to France and to the Emperor ; 
that is the beauty of it. It delivers us from the influence 
of Prussia.'' 

This jealousy of Moreau broke out upon every occasion, 
and yet Moreau had sent Bernadotte and his best troops 
to reinforce Bonaparte. Carnot was so enchanted with 
this disinterestedness that he wrote to the Commander-in- 
Chief of the army of the Rhine, " Oh, my dear Fabius, how 
great you were on that occasion ! " 

On the 20th April a French captain called Laugier, in 
spite of regulations, insisted upon mooring his vessel along- 
side the powder magazine near the Lido. Having refused 
to listen to the remonstrances of the commandant of the 
fort that officer opened fire, and Laugier and a few men 
were killed. This was a most unfortunate affair for Venice, 



156 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

and it was speedily turned to account by Bonaparte, who 
sent a very exaggerated report of the episode to the 
Directory on the 30th. He wrote : " If you wish French 
blood to be respected in Europe a terrible example must 
be made of Venice. We must have blood ; and the noble 
Venetian admiral who presided at this assassination must 
be publicly punished. M. Quirini may carry on intrigues 
in Paris, but the infamous treason of the Venetians is too 
notorious." As for the Venetian Government, it was called 
upon to dismiss the British ambassador ; to deliver up all 
the British merchandise ; to pay 20,000,000 francs, and to 
arrest the assassins ; and although the French ambassador 
had not left Venice, Bonaparte ordered all the Venetian 
ships in Leghorn and Ancona to be seized, and Bernadotte 
was directed to embark 300 grenadiers on board five 
frigates, and to capture a vessel of war belonging to the 
Republic, which was lying at Trieste. 

Bonaparte had not to complain of the city of Venice and 
of Verona only, but of Padua, Castiglione, and Mantua. 
By a decree dated May 6th, we see how Verona was 
chastised for endeavouring to shake off the yoke of the 
liberators of Italy. It was to pay iyo,ooo sequins, all the 
objects in the pawn-office pledged for more than fifty francs 
were to be confiscated ; fifty of the chief culprits were to 
be garotted and sent to Toulon for transportation to 
Cayenne ; all their property was to be seized. By Art. 8, 
all the plate in the churches and other public establish- 
ments was to be appropriated; and by Art. li, all the 
pictures, collections of plants and shells belonging to the 
city or to private individuals, were to be confiscated for 
the benefit of the French Republic. 

A deputation of the Venetian senate had gone to Gratz 
to apologise for what had passed and to endeavour to save 
the existence of the Republic. But before this deputation 
arrived, and before Bonaparte had heard of the Laugier 
affair, he had given Venice to Austria. He now declared 
war against the Republic, and in every place occupied by 



POPES ON DEMOCRACY. 1 57 

the French troops the Lion of St. Mark was torn down 
and replaced by a tree of liberty. 

In a letter from Milan, addressed to the Bishop of Como, 
Bonaparte said : '' Throw water and not oil on human 
passions ; remove prejudices, and fight with ardour against 
false priests, who degrade religion by making it the instru- 
ment of the ambition of kings. The doctrine of the 
Evangelists is that of equality, and hence it is most favour- 
able to that Republican form of government under which 
your country is about to exist.'' 

It is curious to find two Popes afterwards expressing 
themselves in very similar language. In December, 1798, 
during the French occupation of Italy, Cardinal Chiara- 
monte. Bishop of Imola, who the year following became 
Pius VII., wrote a pastoral letter in which he said : "The 
democratic form of government adopted by you, my dear 
brethren, is not repugnant to the Gospel ; it necessitates, 
on the contrary, all the sublime virtues which are only to 
be learned in the school of Jesus Christ, which, if devoutly 
practised, will conduce to your happiness and to the glory 
of your Republic." 

Just half a century later Leo XII. said to M. de Chateau- 
briand, who had been sent to Rome to try and settle a 
dispute between Charles X. and the French bishops : 
** Jesus Christ never pronounced in favour of any peculiar 

form of government The Catholic religion has 

prospered in the centre of republics as well as in the 
bosom of the monarchy," &c. 

Embezzlement continued to reign everywhere. On the 
6th May Bonaparte complained to the Directory that the 
gendarmes in Corsica had revolted in consequence of not 
having been paid ; the funds sent for that purpose had 
been misappropriated. "And yet," added Bonaparte, " since 
Corsica has been restored to France we have sent there 
700,000 francs and large quantities of corn." 

On the 9th May Bonaparte ordered the arrest of Com- 
missary Bouquet, who was found guilty of having robbed 



158 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

the pawn-offices of Padua and of Vicenza, and who was 
sentenced to five years in chains. On the same date 
Bonaparte, writing to Berthier, said : " I see with indigna- 
tion the thefts which are committed by several French 
agents, who place seals on the Venetian pawn-offices so as 
to be able to rob them at their leisure." 

To THE DIRECTORY. 

" Milan, 14//2 May^ 1797. 
*^ I am organising the Cisalpine Republic To- 
morrow I shall conclude a treaty with the Venetian 

deputies. I hope this affair will end well The 

marine will gain four or five line-of-battle ships, three or 
four frigates, and from three to four millions of cordage, 

wood, &c The million for Toulon will be despatched 

to-morrow ;' another million, half in gold and half in silver, 
will be sent to Paris the day after to-morrow, and may be 
usefully employed at Brest. The two millions for which 
the Minister of Finance drew upon Citizen Andre will be 
paid \n merchandise or in land ; this, joined to a million 
for the army of the Sambre and Meuse, 500,000 francs 
for the army of the Alps, and 500,000 francs which Corsica 
costs us, will form a sum of 7,000,000, which the army of 
Italy has furnished since the commencement of the cam- 
paign. We have sent to Toulon from Trieste 25,000 
quintals of corn and 100,000 francs of hemp and steel. 
The Pope has given us eight millions in diamonds, which, 
according to valuation at Modena, are worth not more 
than 4,500,000 francs. 

" Bonaparte." 

On the 1 6th May the treaty of peace was concluded 
with Venice, which renounced its ancient form of govern- 
ment. By Art. 3, the French RepubHc, in accordance 
with request, and in order to guarantee the tranquillity of 
Venice and the happiness of its inhabitants, accorded a 
division of French troops to maintain order and to protect 



SPLENDOURS OF MONTEBELLO. 1 59 

persons and property. Venice was to pay 15,000,000 francs 
twenty pictures, and 500 manuscripts, ships, stores, &c. 
A provisional government was named. This treaty was 
concluded simply to enable Bonaparte to obtain possession 
of Venice without fighting. He had no idea of respecting 
it himself. 

To GENERAL BERNADOTTE. 

" Milan, iZth May, 1797. 

" In a few days negotiations for a definitive 

peace will be opened, and it will be impossible for you to 
go to Paris before that date. I have no intention of 

quitting the army After the signature of peace it 

is proposed that an expedition shall be undertaken against 
England or Portugal. You shall have the choice of one 
or the other. 

*^ I salute you, 

'' Bonaparte." 

Bonaparte now established himself in the splendid 
chateau of Montebello, close to Milan, with his wife, his 
mother, his brothers Joseph and Louis, his sister Pauline, 
and his uncle Fesch. Count Miot de Melito has left an 
account of the brilliant court held by the young general. 
A severe etiquette was observed ; his aides-de-camp were 
no longer received at his table ; he was most particular in 
the choice of his guests ; he dined as it were in public, 
after the manner of the French kings ; his saloons were 
constantly filled by the great nobles and by all the dis- 
tinguished men in Italy, who came to solicit the favour of 
a glance or of a moment's conversation. Bonaparte was 
no longer the general of a triumphant Republic, but a con- 
queror on his own account, imposing his laws on the 
vanquished. Among other persons were the two Austrian 
plenipotentiaries, Count Merfelt and the Marquis de Gallo. 
The marquis was also Neapolitan ambassador at Vienna ; 
he was afterwards ambassador at Paris, and then minister 
of foreign affairs, first to Joseph Bonaparte, King of Naples, 



l6o THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

and then to Murat. A number of officers from other armies 
and distinguished French civilians flocked to Montebeilo. 

To Miot de Melito Bonaparte spoke very plainly. He 
said: "What I have accomplished up to the present is 
nothing. I am only at the commencement of my career. 
Do you think that I have triumphed in Italy for the honour 
and glory of the lawyers of the Directory, for Carnot, and for 
Barras ? Do you think that it is in order to found a Republic ? 
What an idea ! A Republic of 30,000,000 souls, with our 
customs and our vices ! Where would be the possibility ? 
It is a chimera with which the French are enamoured, but 
which will pass like many others. They require glory, and 
their vanity must be satisfied ; but they have no conception 
of liberty. Look at the army ! The victories we have 
gained have restored to the French soldier his veritable 
character. I am everything for him. Let the Directory 
endeavour to deprive me of my command, and it will see 
who is master. The nation requires a chief who has 
acquired glory, and not theories and phrases. Give them 
playthings and they will allou' themselves to be led 
anywhere," &c. &c. 

To THE DIRECTORY. 

" MoNTEBELLO, 2o//i May, 1 797. 

''General Baraguey d'Hilliers has taken possession of 
Venice. That unhappy city was a prey to anarchy and 
civil war. The French were acclaimed by the people. 
T/ie confidence zvJtich those pej^sons who have seen the anny 
of Italy have in its discipline and the good spirit which 
anijnates officers and tneUy is one of the most pleasant fruits 
of good conduct ; it forms a better title to the gratitude of 
hiufianity than the victories it has gained. The ambassadors 
of England and of Russia, and M. d'Antrigues, have fled 
from the city. 

'' I beg you will send me instructions concerning Rome. 
The health of the Pope is very bad, and he may die at any 



THE COMMITTEE OF ARTS. l6l 

moment All the merchandise in Venice belonging 

to the English, Russians, and Portuguese has been 
confiscated. 

" Bonaparte.'' 

To CITIZEN HALLER. 

"MONTEBELLO, 2oth May, 1797. 
"You will find inclosed an order given to General 
Baraguey d'Hilliers. My intention is that if you can 
procure 3,000,000 or 4,000,000 francs you shall carry out 

the confiscation The order must be executed gently, 

and as little cause of discontent as possible must be given 
to the Venetians. 

*' As for the Duke of Modena, if you can get 6,000,000 
francs out of him, you must make sure of the money, so 
as to be able to seize it on the demand of the inhabitants 
of Modena, who have claims to make on this subject. . . . 

'* Bonaparte." 

To CITIZEN HALLER. 

" MONTEBELLO, 2ist May, 1797. 

" I have approved of the sale of the Abbey St. Nicholas, 

on condition of the price being paid in four months. You 

must obtain 500,000 francs down for the property of St. 

Martin, and must arrange to pay the other million to 

Citizen Andre Should the confiscation of the 

English merchandise create too much dissatisfaction, and 
not promise more than 3,000,000 or 4,000,000 francs, it 
need not be effected. I beg that the Venetians may be 
treated in general with generosity, and not made to hate 
us like the inhabitants of Ancona, 

'' Bonaparte." 

To THE committee of arts. 

"MONTEBELLO, 2ist May, iy()7. 
"Berthollet and Appiani are at Verona and Venice, 
where they are collecting various art treasures. I am 
VOL. I. M 



1 62 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

glad to see that some of the objects to be furnished by- 
Rome have already started. I am expecting every 
moment a little frigate to transport them to Toulon. 

*' Bonaparte." 

On the 26th May Bonaparte again asked for instructions 
concerning Rome, adding : — 

*' Under present circumstances I think it will be well to 
ask the King of Spain to send 5poo men to Parma, so 
that in the event of anything happening I may mix the 
Spaniards with our troops, and this will have a singular 

effect on the King of Naples Spain having by her 

marine a decided preponderance over Naples, it is in- 
dispensable to entangle them a little in the affairs of Italy. 
The Emperor and the King of Naples have evidently an 
eye on the inheritance of the Pope. I think it would be 
preferable to give Spain 5,000 men more to act against 
Portugal, and to have 5,000 Spaniards in Parma." 

Bonaparte went on to say that he^ had despatched 
General Gentili to seize upon Corfu, Zante, and Cepha- 
lonia ; that the isle of Malta was most important to 
P'rance ; that the Grand Master was dying, and that his 
successor would probably be a German. He thought that 
with 500,000 francs it would be possible to arrange for a 
Spaniard being elected. There were no English, he said, 
in the Mediterranean, and a combined French and Spanish 
fleet might pass by Lavalette and take possession of it. 
" If we don't adopt these means," he added, " Malta will 
fall into the power of the King of Naples. This little isle 
has no value but for us." 

On the same day Bonaparte gave General Gentili his 
instructions. "You will act as the auxiliary of the Re- 
public of Venice. You will do all in your power to 
captivate the inhabitants. At Corfu, and at sea, you will 
seize on all the Venetian vessels of war which are 



CHURCH PLATE. 1 63 

'wavering.' If the inhabitants are in favour of inde- 
pendence, flatter their taste, and do not fail in your various 
proclamations to speak of Greece, of Athens, of Sparta.'' 
Bonaparte then informed the general that the Citizen 
Arnault, a distinguished man of letters, would follow the 
expedition. He was to draw the pay and rations of a 
brigadier ; he was to study the islands and report on all 
he saw, and also to help the general in the manufacture of 
his manifestoes. 

LIST OF CONTRIBUTIONS RAISED IN THE 
COUNTRIES CONQUERED IN ITALY. 

In this list, which was made out by Bonaparte himself 
and which is in his handwriting, we find that the Church 
plate brought in 1,500,000 francs ;; the plate of Rome and 
Verona, 760,000 francs ; golden ingots, 600,000 francs ; 
and in all 23,000,000 francs. 

To THE DIRECTORY. 

" MONTEBELLO, i^tk May, 1797. 

" You will find inclosed the ratification of the Emperor 
to the preliminary treaty. The plenipotentiary of the 
Emperor regretted that the treaty had not been drawn up 
on parchment and that the seals were not larger. I agree 
with the first remark, and think that parchment ought to 

be employed for documents meant to be preserved 

We held the first conference to-day respecting the defi- 
nitive peace, when we agreed to present the following 
plan : — 

" 1st. The Rhine boundary for France. 

" 2nd. Salzburg and Passau for the Emperor. 

" 3rd. The Duchy of Cleves or an equivalent in Germany 
to Prussia. 

*'4th. The maintenance of the German Confederation. 

" 5th. The reciprocal guaiantee of said articles. 

'' For Italy :— 

'' 1st. Venice for the Emperor. 

M 2 



164 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

"2nd. Mantua, Brescia to the Adige, for the new 
Republic. 

"As the Emperor desires an indemnity for the Duke of 
Modena, he might be offered the island of Zante 

"To destroy the German Confederation would be to 
lose the whole advantage of Belgium and of the Rhine 
boundary ; it would be to place from 10,000,000 to 
12,000,000 inhabitants in the hands of two powers which 
we equally distrust. If the Germanic Confederation 
did not exist it would be necessary to create it for our 
convenience. 

" Do you approve of our system for Italy ? 

" Venice, which has been falling into decay since the 
discovery of the Cape of Good Hope and the birth of 
Trieste and Ancona, will with difficulty survive the blows 
we have inflicted upon it. The people are incapable, 
cowardly, and in no way fit for liberty ; without land and 
without water it appears only natural that Venice should 
be left to those to whom we give the continent. 

** We shall take her vessels, despoil the arsenal, carry 
off the guns, destroy the bank, and keep Corfu and 
Ancona. . . . 

" Bonaparte." 



On the previous day Bonaparte had assured the muni- 
cipality of Venice that — " Under all circumstances I will 
do what I can to consolidate your liberty, and to place un- 
happy Italy, free and independent of foreigners, on the 
stage of the world. . . . Venice is the only population worthy 
of liberty!' 

At Corfu Gentili behaved with an amount of duplicity 
worthy of his chief. He presented himself as the agent of 
the new government, and once admitted into the fortress, 
he seized upon it, upon the fleet, and a large quantity of 
stores of all kinds. An island more valuable than the 
whole of Italy was worth this bit of perfidy. 



VAST SUMS DRAINED FROM ITALY. 1 65 

To GENERAL JOUBERT. 

" MONTEBELLO, 2Zth May, 1797. 
" I am informed that forty-five parishes of the Vicentin 
have refused to give up their church plate. I beg you 
will take measures to make them furnish it like the 

others 

" Bonaparte." 

To THE DIRECTORY. 

" MoNTEBELLO, 6th June, 1797. 
"I have just given orders for two millions in gold or 
silver to be sent to Paris for the fortification of Brest. . . . 
Since the commencement of the new campaign (against 
Austria), the Army of Italy has supplied 



1st. 


To the Army of the Rhine 


1,000,000 


francs. 


2nd. 


To the Army of the Sambre et Meuse... 


1,000,000 


» 


3rd. 


To the Army of the Alps 


500,000 


}> 


4th. 


To Toulon 


1,000,000 


J) 


5th. 


To Paris 


1,000,000 


J? 


6th. 


About to be sent to Paris 


2,000,000 


5J 


7th. 


To Toulon 

Total 


1,000,000 


7? 




7,500,000 


?) 



Bonaparte was never weary of enumerating his ser- 
vices and of whetting the appetite of his employers, who 
were able to maintain themselves in power only by means 
of bribery and corruption of the most shameless descrip- 
tion, and in this there was a strong contrast between the 
men of the Directory and their friends, and the incorruptible 
Robespierre. 

To THE MINISTER OF THE INTERIOR. 

" MoNTEBELLO, dth June, 1797. 
" I am led to suppose that the celebrated manuscript of 
Josephus, from the Ambrosian Library, which was sent to 



1 66 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

Paris from Milan has not arrived. As it is the only manu- 
script written on papyrus, it is very important that it 
should not be lost. I beg you will inform me if it has been 
sent to the National Library. 

" Bonaparte." 

This precious manuscript was duly received in Paris, but 
in 1 815 it was restored to Italy, and it is again to be seen 
in the Ambrosian Library. 

To GENERAL BERTHIER. 

" MONTEBELLO, ^th June, 1797. 
"I at first thought of sending General Kilmaine to 
Marseilles, but he has expressed the desire to take part in 
the expedition to England, should it take place. . . . 

'' Bonaparte." 

To general bernadotte. 

" MONTEBELLO, Jih June, 1797. 
•' I beg you will let me know to what sum the church 
plate of the town of Udine and of the whole of Friuli, 
amounts. 

'' Bonaparte.'' 

To citizen haller. 

" MONTEBELLO, i2th June, 1797. 

'' I thought I had informed you that I had granted to 
the city of Verona the church plate wherewith to pay its 
contribution (?) 

" If the letters of change sent to you by the municipality 
of Verona have not been paid, inform your agent of this 
fact. I authorise you to sell the Abbey of San-Zeno. . . . 
Take the plate in the churches of Venice, but let this be 
done through the medium of the provisional government, 
and let it go to pay a portion of the 3,000,000 francs which 
are due to us. 

" Bonaparte." 



dumolard's motion. 167 

On the 13th June Commodore Perree received instruc- 
tions to seize upon everything in Venice, on the pretext 
that " conformity of principles" existed between the two 
governments " Send to Toulon," wrote Bonaparte, " all 
the marine stores required in that port. By a secret article 
the Venetians are bound to supply us with stores to the 
value of 3,000,000 francs, but my intention is to seize upon 
all the Venetian vessels and all the stores possible." 

To THE DIRECTORY. 

"MONTEBELLO, 2^th June^ 1797. 
*'The Pope had an attack of apoplexy on the eve of 
Corpus Christi, and was bled several times. He is eighty- 
three years of age. I beg you will send me positive in- 
structions as to what to do in the event of his death. Am 
I to allow a new Pope to be elected } If there be a 
revolution in Rome, and the King of Italy marches on the 
city, am I to oppose him .^ . . . The Austrians have invaded 
Istria and Dalmatia. 

" Bonaparte." 

Of what use instructions since Bonaparte always antici- 
pated or disregarded them t But what could a feeble 
Directory do with this ever victorious and popular com- 
mander, be3/ond allowing his conduct to be called in 
question } 

At the end of June, a representative, called Dumolard, 
brought a motion before the Assembly, which was aimed 
at General Bonaparte. In a very able speech he protested 
against the treatment of Venice, and threw doubt on the 
crimes attributed to that country, in order to justify the 
violation of the right of nations ; he complained that the 
Assembly, unlike the British Parliament, was not kept 
aware of what was passing, and that peace and war and 
treaties were concluded without its knowledge. He also 
questioned the right of the French Republic to interfere 
with the form of government in other countries. Dumolard 



1 68 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

was no adversary of General Bonaparte, but a straight- 
forward Republican, who seems to have had some presenti- 
ment of the military tyranny in store for his country, and 
to have desired to uphold the authority of parliament and 
international law. 

Bonaparte wrote in the most indignant terms to the 
Directory on the subject of this motion, which, published 
by order of the Assembly, was clearly aimed at him. " I 
had the right to expect," he wrote, " if not civic triumphs, 
at least to be allowed to live tranquilly under the protection 
of the Republic, after having concluded peace on five occa- 
sions, and having felled the coalition. To-day I find 
myself denounced and persecuted, although my reputation 
belongs to my country.'' After a torrent of complaints 
and accusations, the General, as a proof that 400 French- 
men had been assassinated by the Venetians, sent the 
Assembly a dagger. He concluded by tendering his 
resignation. 

After writing this letter, Bonaparte proceeded to draw 
up a series of vigorous notes, in which he did ample justice 
to his great services — notes which must have had a startling 
effect on the Directory. In the first he said — " Ignorant 
and garrulous lawyers have asked why we occupied Venice. 
.... But I warn you, and I speak in the name of 80,000 
men, that the time when cowardly lawyers and wretched 
babblers guillotined soldiers, is past ; and, if you oblige 
them, the troops of Italy will march on the Clichy barrier, 
and woe to you ! " In another note, explaining his military 
operations, which had been criticised, he wrote — " It was said 
that Bonaparte entered Germany by the Tyrol, by Ca- 
rinthia, and by Carniola. But in thus dividing his forces, 
he had no fear of finding himself too weak, seeing the 
positions occupied by the enemy. . . . As soon as the 
enemy had been beaten and had fled, Bonaparte, knowing 
that he might rally his forces behind the mountains, fell 
upon his divisions, beat them in detail, concentrated his 
army on one point, and was prepared to operate in any 



EUGENE DE BEAUHARNAIS. 1 69 

direction. On the other hand, the army of Prince Charles 
was spread out between Salzburg and Vienna, and was 
weakened by detachments sent into the Tyrol and Carniola. 
. . . Prince Charles has constantly fallen into all the snares 
set for him by General Bonaparte. . . . The art of war con- 
sists in always being, with an inferior force, stronger than 
the enemy on the point of attack ; but this art is not to be 
learned in books, nor by practice ; it is a matter of tact 
which constitutes military genius." 

With regard to the crimes imputed to the Venetians, it 
should be borne in mind that in 1796 Napoleon wrote to 
the Directory, saying — " I am obliged to exaggerate the 
assassinations, 8cc. &c., so as to oblige the Venetians to 
furnish me with all I require, in order to appease me. This 
is how these people must be treated." It is not astonishing 
that one deputy should have protested against the iniquitous 
treatment of a sister Republic, which had refused to join 
the coalition against France. 

To THE MINISTER. OF WAR. 

" Milan, ^otk June^ 1797. 
" The General-in-chief begs me to inform you that he has 
appointed citizen Eugene de Beauharnais, sub-lieutenant of 
hussars and aide-de-camp. The General hopes that the 
Directory will confirm the appointment. This young 
citizen is the son of General de Beauharnais, whose loss will 
long be regretted by the country. « BONAPARTE." 

General de Beauharnais, who was a gallant and upright 
soldier, had perished, like several other distinguished 
officers, on the scaffold, and Bonaparte had married his 
widow and adopted his children. 

To GENERAL BERTHIER. 

" MoNTEBELLO, 6//^ July, 1797. 
" Be good enough to order General Dufresse to restore 
immediately all that his wife took at Mestre, to their 



170 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

different owners, and among other things the carriages 
belonging to the house where the citizen Erizzo lodged 
her. 

" Bonaparte." 



The following proclamation was issued on the anniversary 
of the capture of the Bastille. It was a warning to the 
Royalist factions in France which were threatening the 
existence of the government and the constitution. 



To THE ARMY. 

" Milan, 14//^ July-, 1797- 

" Soldiers — To-day is the anniversary of the 14th July. 
You see before you the names of your comrades who have 
fallen on the field of honour for the liberty of the country ; 
they have furnished you with a brilliant example. You 
owe yourselves entirely to the Republic, to the welfare of 
30,000,000 Frenchmen, and to the glory of that name 
which has received new lustre by your victories. 

" Soldiers, I know that you are deeply afflicted at the 
misfortunes which threaten the country ; but the country 
is in no real danger. The same men who triumphed over 
Europe coalesced, exist. Mountains separate us from 
France ; if necessary, you will cross them with the rapidity 
of the eagle, to support the constitution and to protect the 
Republican government. 

" Soldiers, the government watches over the sanctuary of 
the laws. The Royalists, as soon as they show them- 
selves, will cease to exist. Do not be alarmed ; let us 
swear by the manes of the heroes who fell beside us in the 
struggle for liberty ; let us swear on our new standards — 
Implacable war to the enemies of the Republic and of the 
constitution ! 

'' Bonaparte," 



PRESS CALUMNIES. 171 

To THE DIRECTORY. 

"Milan, \^th July, 1797. 

" Inclosed you will find the copy of a letter I have 
received from General Clarke. You will perceive that the 
negotiations are being drawn out. It is beyond doubt that 
the Emperor is waiting to see what turn affairs will take in 
France. 

"The army receives a great many newspapers from 
Paris, and more especially the worst ; but they produce the 
very contrary effect to that intended. The indignation 
of the army is at its height. The soldiers ask if for the 
price of their fatigues and of six years war, they are to be 
assassinated. ... As for myself, I am accustomed to a 
total abdication of my interests ; however, I cannot be 
insensible to the insults and calumnies spread every day by 
eighty journals, and which are not denied by a single one ; 
nor can I be insensible to the perfidy and the heap of 
atrocities contained in the (Dumolard) order of the day. 

" I see that the Clichy Club wishes to march over my 
dead body in order to destroy the Republic. . . . You will 
find accompanying this, the poinard of the assassins of 
Verona. 

" But, under all circumstances, the recollection of the 
constant proofs you have given me of your unlimited 
confidence, shall never be absent from my mind. 

" Bonaparte." 

Bonaparte frequently called upon the government to take 
active measures against the reactionary journals, to break 
their presses, and to tolerate only a few ofiScial newspapers. 

One could hardly suppose from the following letter that 
Bonaparte had no soul for music himself. 

To THE INSPECTORS OF THE CONSERVATORY. 

" Milan, 26th July, 1797. 
" I have received your letter. The music for which you 
ask is being copied in the various towns of Italy. I shall 



172 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

take the greatest care to enrich the conservatory. ... Of 
all the fine arts, music is that which exercises the most 
influence on the passions — that which the legislator should 
most encourage. A piece of moral music composed by a 
master never fails to touch the feelings, and has more in- 
fluence than a good philosophic work which convinces the 
reason without exercising any effect on our habits. 

" Bonaparte.'' 

To THE DIRECTORY. 

" Milan, 27 fA July^ 1797. 
'* General Augereau has asked for permission to go to 
Paris, whither he is called by private affairs. I take the 
opportunity of forwarding the originals of the addresses to 
the army. . . . 

'* Bonaparte." 

Augereau was going to Paris for something more im- 
portant than urgent private affairs ; he was going to act as 
the sword of Bonaparte in the coup d'etat of the i8th 
Fructidor. The Royalists were raising their heads. They 
had managed to secure the Presidence of the Five Hundred 
for Pichegru, and of the Elders for Barbe-Marbois, and had 
procured a seat in the Directory for Barthelemy. Under 
these circumstances, Barras and two of his colleagues de- 
termined to apply for armed assistance to prevent a Bourbon 
restoration. The question was whether they should appeal 
to Moreau, to Hoche, or to Bonaparte. As Moreau and 
the Army of the Rhine had exhibited but little enthusiasm 
on the anniversary of the capture of the Bastille, which had 
been noisily celebrated by the other two armies ; and as 
Bonaparte was rather dreaded, Hoche was first applied to, 
and he consented to save the Republic. However, diffi- 
culties arose, and the young General, disgusted with what 
he had seen in Paris, returned to his head-quarters. It 
was the turn of Bonaparte to step in. He had already sent 
Lavalette to Paris, with money-bags, and instructions, and 



THE ROYALIST FACTIONS. I 73 

a bargain was soon struck between Barras and himself. 
Hoche had been able to offer the government nothing 
beyond his wife's marriage portion. Bonaparte sent 
Barras 3,000,000 francs, and afterwards despatched 
Augereau to Paris to employ force. There was a law 
against any body of troops approaching the capital, but 
Augereau crossed the rubicon, surrounded and dissolved 
the Chambers. Barthelemy, who was a Royalist, Carnot, 
who was opposed to violent measures, Pichegru, and fifty- 
two other deputies, were sentenced to transportation. 

Bonaparte, at this moment, is strongly suspected of 
having lent a not unwilling ear to Royalist overtures. 
He had no sooner attained power than he recalled Carnot 
and made him war minister. Barthelemy, the other exiled 
director, made his escape from Cayenne, but was created 
a senator in 1800. Carnot was removed from office for 
opposing Bonaparte's nomination as consul for life. It 
was Barthelemy who offered him this dignity on the part 
of the Senate. Under the Empire Barthelemy became a 
count and under the Restoration a marquis. 

Bonaparte now urged upon the Directory the necessity 
of dissolving the Royalist clubs and prohibiting the Royalist 
journals in Paris. He had heard that negotiations with 
England had been opened at Lille, and, in the event of 
their success, he gave it as his opinion that Austria should 
be chastised for her bad faith. 



To THE DIRECTORY. 

" Milan, 28M July, 1797. 

" I forward the addresses of Joubert's and of Massena's 
divisions. The army is devoted to the Republic and to 
the constitution. . . . The soldiers have been greatly dis- 
tressed by the gossip of that Dumolard, which was printed 
by order of the Assembly, and sent in great profusion to 
the army. They are indignant to find doubt thrown upon 
the massacres of which they were victims. . . . As for 



174 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

myself, I am engaged in endeavouring to restrain that 
patriotic ardour which is the distinctive character of all 
the soldiers of the army of Italy. . . . 

'' Bonaparte." 

Writing from Milan on the 26th to General Clarke, who 
was endeavouring to come to terms with the Austrian 
plenipotentiaries, Bonaparte said that Talleyrand had re- 
placed Delacroix at the Foreign Office, and that the 
journals spoke of a split in the Directory between Carnot 
and Barthelemy on one side, and Barras, Rewbell and 
Revelliere-Lepeaux on the other. 

On the 3rd August Bonaparte forwarded a note to the 
Pope on the subject of an arrangement between Church 
and State. After remarking that it was a propitious 
moment to put into execution a work in which sound 
poHcy and true religion would play an important part, he 
added — 

*^ The French government has just permitted the Catholic 
Apostolic and Roman churches to be opened, and has 
granted tolerance and protection to that religion. 

" Either the priests will take advantage of this first act of 
the French government in the spirit of the evangelists, by 
lending their aid to the cause of public tranquillity, and by 
preaching those maxims of charity which form the true 
basis of religion .... or else they will act in a contrary 
manner, and be once more persecuted and expelled." 

His Holiness was then called upon for a bull, directing 
the French clergy to preach obedience to the government 
and the constitution. And " after this operation," Bonaparte 
said it would be useful to consider what measures should 
be adopted to reconcile the constitutional and the non- 
constitutional priests, between whom of course the greatest 
enmity existed. Those members of the clergy who had re- 
mained true to the Pope, and had never married or received 



GENERAL DESAIX VISITS BONAPARTE. 1 75 

salary from the Republic, naturally looked upon the con- 
stitutional clergy as renegades. Bonaparte felt the 
necessity of effecting a reconciliation between those eccle- 
siastics who had suffered for their faith, and those who had 
cast off their allegiance to Rome in her hour of need, and 
in the day of danger. 

To THE DIRECTORY. 

"Milan, zZth July, 1797. 

'' I forward you a letter from General Clarke. There is 
nothing new concerning the negotiations, and it is impos- 
sible to trifle with us in a more shameless manner. . . . 
Should the war recommence, and you send me reinforce- 
ments, &c., I will promise you to be in Vienna by harvest 
time, to form a junction there with the army of the 
Rhine, and to make the Hungarian peasants drink 
Tokay. 

*' Our troops have arrived at Corfu, and were well re- 
ceived. In Albania the people still remember Greece, 
Sparta, and Athens. I have already entered into corre- 
spondence with the chiefs of the country, and perhaps 
Greece will rise from her ashes. . . . 

" The gallant General Desaix has arrived to see the army 
of Italy. What he says concerning the army of the Rhine is 
not at all reassuring. . . . 

"Bonaparte." 

In a letter to General Clarke of the 29th July, Bonaparte 
mentioned that it had been found impossible to make 
Hoche minister of war, as he had not the requisite age, 
and that he was to go to Ireland. He informed Joubert of 
the same fact a few days later, adding — " There is a great 
deal of agitation in Paris ; the messieurs are divided among 
themselves. The army of the Sambre and Meuse has 
pronounced with the greatest vigour in favour of the 
government. General Desaix, who has been here for 



176 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

some days assures me that the army of the Rhine shares 
the opinions of the ar^ny of Italy!' 

On the 1st August Bonaparte gave an account to the 
Directory of the occupation of Corfu. The French had 
been greeted with shouts of joy, and the papa of the island 
had presented General Gentili with a book which he found 
to be the Odyssey of Homer. After saying that the tree of 
liberty had been planted in Zante, Cephalonia, and other 
islands, Bonaparte added — " The island of Corcyra was, ac- 
cording to Homer, the country of the Princess Nausica. 
Citizen Arnault, who enjoys a well-deserved reputation in 
literature, writes to me that he is about to sail, in order 
to plant the tricolour on the ruins of the palace of 
Ulysses. . . ." 

If Bonaparte could plunder Italy of her statues, he was 
capable of rewarding so renowned a sculptor as Canova, 
who ought perhaps to have refused the offer. 

To CANOVA, Sculptor at Rome. 

" Milan, 6M August, 1797. 
*' I have learned through one of your friends that you 
have been deprived of the pension you enjoyed at Venice. 
The French Republic takes a particular interest in the 
great talent which distinguishes you. As a celebrated 
artist you have a right to the special protection of the army 
of Italy. I have given orders for your pension to be paid 
at once. I beg you will let me know that this order has 
been executed, and believe in the pleasure I experience in 
being agreeable to you. 

"Bonaparte." 

To H.R.H. THE GRAND DUKE OF TUSCANY. 

'' Milan, ^th August, 1797. 
" Attempts have been made to disturb your Royal 
Highness, and to invent motives for dispute between you 
and the French Republic. 

" I consider it my duty to inform your Royal Highness 



THE GRAND DUKE OF TUSCANY. 1 77 

that the Directory having every reason to be satisfied with 
the conduct of your Royal Highness during the whole of 
the Italian war, will seize every opportunity to testify to 
your Royal Highness the manner in which it regards these 
friendly proceedings ; in my own name, having witnessed 
the reception and the care which your Royal Highness has 
always lavished on my brothers in arms, I shall always feel 
flattered at being able to be agreeable to you. To this 
feeling of gratitude must be joined a feeling of esteem. I 
have seen the states of your Royal Highness, and I said to 
myself that all the princes of Europe ought to learn in 
Tuscany how to preserve their thrones, by founding them 
on moderation and the happiness of their people. 

" Bonaparte." 

All this did not save the Grand Duke, who was treated 
with the same cruelty and perfidy as other Italian princes. 
A few years later, and we shall find Bonaparte's sister Eliza 
sitting on the Grand Ducal throne, and governing her 
husband and her other subjects in a manner which earned 
for her the nickname of Semiramis. 

To THE DIRECTORY, 

" Milan, (^th August, 1797. 

" I announced the despatch of twenty-one standards 
after the battle of Rivoli, and I sent you only fifteen or 
sixteen. I now forward the others, which were left behind 
by mistake at Peschiera, by General Bernadotte. 

" This General, who gained reputation on the left bank 
of the Rhine, is now one of the officers the most essential 
to the glory of the Army of Italy. ... I beg you will send 
him back as soon as possible. [After praising the gallantry 
and Republican ardour of Bernadotte's troops, which had 
been drawn from the army of the Rhine] — 

*' You see in General Bernadotte one of the staunchest 
friends of the ELepublic. 

" Bonaparte." 

VOL. I. N 



178 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

In a letter to the Directory of the i6th August, Bona- 
parte once more asked for reinforcements lest hostiHties 
should be renewed, in spite of all his persuasions and 
threats and his direct appeal to the Emperor. In this letter 
he wrote — " The isles of Corfu, Cephalonia, and Zante have 
a greater interest for us than the w^hole of Italy. I think 
that if we are obliged to choose, it would be better to 
restore Italy to the Emperor, and to keep the four islands, 
which are a source of wealth and prosperity for our com- 
merce. The Turkish Empire is crumbling to pieces ; the 
possession of the islands would enable us to support it as 
far as possible, or to take our share. 

'' The time is not far distant when we shall find out that 
in order really to destroy England we must seize upon 
Egypt. The vast Ottoman Empire which is wasting away 
daily renders it obligatory upon us to take measures in 
good time for the protection of our commerce in the 
Levant. ..." 

To THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS. 

•' Milan, 22nd August, 1797. 

' I have the honour of forwarding you a copy of the 
reply made by the Pope. If the Directory desires he will 
issue a pastoral letter directing the bishops to preach 
obedience to the laws of the Republic. A good deal of 
agitation reigns at Rome, and a number of persons have 
been arrested. Two porters said to the Pope a few days 
ago, * We no longer want your blessings, but not to pay 
taxes.' 

" Should the negotiations not take a favourable turn, I 
think it will be essential to ratify the treaty with the King 
of Sardinia, which will give us 10,000 men. . . . 

'' Bonaparte." 

On the 3rd September Bonaparte wrote a very sharp 
letter to the Minister of Finance, complaining of the false 



MISAPPROPRIATION OF FUNDS. I 79 

statements made by the Treasury with regard to the Army 
of Italy, and the swindling practised in that department. 
*' The Treasury," he said, '' declares that we have 30,000,000 
francs in the chest ; that is a falsehood. It is all we 
can do to pay the troops. The pay of the army is 
estimated at 1,400^00 francs, whereas it amounts to 
3,000,000 francs. The Treasury says that the Army of 
Italy only sent 100,000 francs to the Army of the Rhine ; 
another falsehood. It sent a million last year and another 
million three months ago." Bonaparte then complained 
that the million he had sent for Toulon, and the million he 
had sent for Brest, had been kept in Paris. In addition to 
providing for all its own wants., the Army of Italy, wrote 
Bonaparte, had procured for the Republic about 
;£'2, 000,000. 

On the 6th September Bonaparte wrote a long and 
amusing despatch to Talleyrand on the still pending nego- 
tiations. After giving a sketch of the Austrian negotiators 
— Gallo, Merveldt, and Degelmann — concerning whose 
individual and collective capacity he spoke in terms 
bordering on contempt, he said — " They speak very little 
and have no talent for dialectics. We always end by 
making them admit that all they say and all they do 
is at variance with common sense ; but they always have 
Thugut and their instructions in their mouth. In private 
they whisper, after looking round to see that no one is 
listening, thcit Thugut is a scamp who ought to be hung ; 
but Thugut is the real sovereign of Vienna.'' 

In reply to some exorbitant demands, Bonaparte said 
that he lost his temper ; that he accused the Emperor of 
(j^xm.'d,ny of wishing to 7nake hl^nself King of Rome (he was 
afterwards grandfather of the king of Rome), and that he 
had informed the negotiators that a fortnight after the 
opening of the campaign he would be so close to Vienna 
that the people, instead of breaking Thugut's windows as 
they had already done, would hang him. 



N 2 



l8o THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

To THE ARCHBISHOP OF GENOA. 

^* Passariano, \oth September^ ^797- 

'' I have just received your pastoral letter of the 5th. I 
thought I was listening to one of the twelve apostles. It 
was thus that St. Paul spoke. How respectable is religion 
when it has ministers like you ! True apostle of the 
Evangelists, you oblige your enemies to esteem and to 
admire you ; you convert even the incredulous. 

" How comes it that the Church which has a chief like 
you, should contain miserable subalterns who have neither 
charity nor peace .'* " And Napoleon went on to say that 
priests like these, with haggard eye, who preached revolt, 
murder and blood, who were paid with the gold of the rich, 
who betrayed the people like Judas, should be driven from 
the Church, which should call down upon them the ana- 
themas and maledictions of Heaven. " The sovereignty of 
the people, liberty, this," said the General-in-Chief, " is the 
political code of the Gospel. 

" Bonaparte.'* 

Bonaparte was quite as indignant with Naples as with 
Austria on the subject of her pretensions, and spoke and 
wrote as harshly of Acton as he did of Thugut. Naples 
wanted the Ionian islands and half the Papal states, 
especially Ancona, for which equivalents she would consent 
to cede the island of Elba. 

To THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS. 

"Passariano, 13//^ September y 1797. 
" .... I think that henceforward the maxim of the 
Republic should be never to abandon Corfu, Zante, &c. 
We ought, on the contrary, to establish ourselves there 
firmly ; we shall find immense resources there for our 
commerce, and they will be of great use to us in future 
European movements. 



DESIGNS ON MALTA. l8l 

'^ Why should we not seize upon the island of Malta ? 
Admiral Brueys might anchor there and seize upon it. 

*' Four hundred knights and a regiment of 500 men alone 
constitute the defenders of La Valette. The inhabitants, 
about 100,000 in number, are very favourable to us, and 
very much disgusted with their knights, who are dying 
of hunger. I confiscated all their property in Italy on 
purpose. With the isle of St. Peter, ceded to us by the 
King of Sardinia, Malta, Corfu, &c., we shall be masters of 
the whole Mediterranean. 

" If upon making peace with England we are obliged to 
cede the Cape of Good Hope, it will be necessary to seize 
upon Egypt. That country has never belonged to an 
European nation. The Venetians alone, some centuries 
ago, had a certain preponderance there. We could sail 
from here with 25,000 men, escorted by eight or ten ships 
of the line or Venetian frigates, and seize the country. 
Egypt does not belong to the Grand Signor. 

" I wish, Citizen Minister, that you would procure some 
information in Paris as to the effect which our expedition 
to Egypt would have on the Porte. 

" With armies like ours, for which all religions are 
equally good, Mahometan, Copt, Arab, idolatry, &c. [this 
to the ex-Bishop of Autun !], all this is quite indifferent to 
us ; we respect one like the other. 

" Bonaparte.'* 

We shall find that one of the first things which 
Bonaparte did when he got to Malta was to despoil the 
Church. 

A letter to the Directory dated the 13th September 
says that the Government Commissioners appointed to 
select works of art in Italy have terminated their labours. 
According to Bonaparte — 

" These men, distinguished by their talents, have served 
the Republic with a zeal, activity, modesty, and disin- 
terestedness without example ; solely occupied with the 



1 82 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

object of their mission they have acquired the esteem of 
the whole army ; they have given to Italy, in the delicate 
mission they were charged to fulfil, the example of virtue 
which always accompanies real talent. . . . 

" Bonaparte." 

A note at the end of the third volume of Napoleon's 
Correspondence gives a list of 860 statues, pictures, &c. 
taken from Rome. The objects marked A belonged to 
the gallery of Cardinal Albany ; those marked C B were 
taken from Cardinal Braschi ; those marked P came from 
the Vatican ; those marked I belonged to English (Inglesi) 
living in Rome, &c. 

It was at this date that the negotiations of Lille, which 
had been opened by Pitt, were broken off. Lord Malmes- 
bury was as unsuccessful as he had been the previous 
year. England agreed to restore the Cape of Good Hope 
to the Dutch, but refused to restore Ceylon. She also 
insisted on keeping Trinidad, which she had taken from 
Spain. At the same time she consented to pay half a 
million sterling for the ships which had been burned at 
Toulon. It is interesting to remark, seeing what happened 
at the treaty of Amiens, when Bonaparte was First Consul, 
that the Directory refused to sacrifice their allies. 

England, left without an ally, was in a terrible predica- 
ment. The fleets had mutinied. The bank had suspended 
cash payments. A French threat of invasion, however, 
aroused the whole energy of the nation and restored union. 

On the 1 6th September (30th Fructidor) Bonaparte 
appears to have received from Paris the news of the success 
of the coup d etat of the 4th September or i8th Fructidor. 
He at once issued an address '* To the sailors of the 
squadron of Rear Admiral Brueys," in which he said : — 

" Comrades, the emigres had taken possession of the 
National tribunal .... the soldiers rallied round the tree 
of liberty and the partisans of tyranny are m chains. 



TENDERS HIS RESIGNATION ONCE MORE. 1 83 

" Comrades, as soon as we have pacified the Continent, 
we shall join you in conquering the liberty of the seas. 
. . . Without you we shall be able to carry the glory of 
the French name only into a little corner of the Continent ; 
with you we shall cross the seas and the national glory 
will behold the most distant regions. 

" Bonaparte." 

It was on the 22nd September only that Bonaparte 
addressed a similar proclamation to the army and adhered 
to the new order of things. 

On the 19th of September Bonaparte wrote to the 
Directory once more for reinforcements. He said that the 
Austrians could oppose him with 10,000 cavalry and 
90,000 infantry, while 18,000 cavalry had been raised in 
Hungary. To meet this force he had only 4,000 cavalry 
and 45,000 infantry, 2,000 Poles, and 1,000 Italians. After 
pointing out what should be done he added : — 

^' In spite of these measures the enemy will be stronger 
than I am. If I can forestall him and assume the offensive 
the first, I shall beat him and be under the walls of 
Vienna in a fortnight. If, however, he assumes the 
offensive before me everything will become dubious." 

On the 25th September Bonaparte complained to the 
Directory that an officer had arrived from Paris with a 
circular written by Augereau to all the generals of division 
in the Army of Italy. 

*' It is clear," he wrote, " that the Government is acting 
towards me as it did towards Pichegru after the 13th 
Vendemiaire. I beg you will replace me and accept my 
resignation. No power on earth will induce me to remain 
in the service after this horrible mark of ingratitude on 
the part of the Government, which I was far from expect- 
ing. My health, which is greatly shattered, demands 
repose and tranquillity. I experience the necessity of 
mingling with my fellow citizens. Too long has a great 
power remained in my hands. I have always exercised it 



184 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

for the benefit of my country ; so much the worse for 
those persons who do not believe in virtue and who suspect 
mine. My conscience and the opinion of posterity will be 
my recompense. 

'' Bonaparte.'* 

The new Government had shown itself suspicious of 
Bonaparte in more ways than one, and thought it could 
curtail his power. Orders were sent to him which were 
equivalent to saying that he was no longer to exercise un- 
limited authority in Italy. Bonaparte retorted by tendering 
his resignation, an act which brought the Directory to its 
knees. The Government replied to the General in the 
most abject terms. It said : — 

*' How can you accuse us of ingratitude and injustice 
when we have never ceased to repose entire confidence 
in you ? " It was hinted that the Royalists, after having 
poisoned Hoche, wished to deprive the Republic of the 
genius of Bonaparte by disgusting him with the Directory. 
" You speak of repose, of your health, of resignation," added 
the Directors, " but the repose of the Republic which you 
protect forbids you to think of your own. Should France 
lose the fruit of your victories and be forced to conclude 
a disgraceful peace, we shall not only be ill, we shall 
perish," &c., &c. And the Directory positively refused to 
accept Bonaparte's resignation. 

It was clear, after the reception of this letter, that Bona- 
parte had everything in the hollow of his hand, and that 
he could treat the Government as it deserved. Pichegru 
was an exile, Moreau in disgrace, Hoche was dead. 
Bonaparte was without a military rival. 

The Directory had wished to recommence the war with 
Austria for two reasons : it objected to the terms offered 
by Bonaparte, and it dreaded the presence of the young 
general in Paris. On his side, Bonaparte, knowing that he 
could gain more popularity in France by concluding peace 
than by winning half a dozen more victories, determined 



MONARCHS FOR ALLIES. 1 85 

to go on with the negotiations. The Directory wished to 
avoid the shame of abandoning Venice to Austria. Venice 
weighed very lightly in the balance with Bonaparte where 
his own interests were concerned. He was never tired of 
inveighing ag^ainst its despotic Government and promising 
it freedom, but he had no compunction about handing it 
over to an absolute monarchy. 

On the 26th September Bonaparte urged upon the 
Directory the absolute necessity of sending him reinforce- 
ments and of ratifying the treaty he had concluded with the 
King of Sardinia. He could not understand the reluctance 
of the Directory to come to terms with the House of 
Savoy. 

" Have you any scruples," he wrote, " about forming an 
alliance with a king } We have the King of Spain for 
ally and perhaps the King of Prussia. Do you wish to 
revolutionise Piedmont and to incorporate it with the 
Republic ? The best way to accomplish this without a 
shock and without violating treaties would be to incor- 
porate the 10,000 Piedmontese troops with ours, and to 
associate them with our victories. Six months afterwards 
the King of Sardinia would find himself dethroned. When 
a giant embraces a pigmy and folding him in his arms 
stifles him, he cannot be accused of having committed a 
crime. It becomes simply a matter of difference of 
organisation ! " 

General Clarke, who had been acting as the confidential 

agent of the Government, was recalled after the i8th 

Fructidor. In more than one letter Bonaparte mentioned 

'the abilities he had displayed in his civil capacity. He 

wrote to Talleyrand on the 26th September saying : — 

" I do not care to inquire if this officer was originally 
appointed to act as a spy upon me. If such were the case 
I pardon him. I have seen him groan over the un- 
fortunate reaction which threatened to engulf liberty and 
France." And Bonaparte concluded by asking Talley- 
rand to give the general another appointment. Clarke 



l86 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

proved himself, before and afterwards, of a very pliant 
disposition; he betrayed Carnot and the Royalists in 1797 
just as, at a later date, he betrayed Napoleon for Louis 
XVIIL, in connection with Talleyrand. 

On the 28th September Bonaparte described to Talley- 
rand an interview with the Austrian negotiators. 

"After dinner," he wrote, "when the Germans speak 
freely, I had a conversation of four or five hours with 
M. de Cobenzl, who allowed me to perceive a desire on 
the part of the Emperor to adhere to our political system 
so as to oppose the ambitious projects of Prussia." An 
indiscretion which Bonaparte turned to account with 
consummate ability. 

To CITIZEN JOSEPH BONAPARTE. 

"Passariano, 29/// Septe^nber^ i'j()7. 

"Inform the Court of Rome immediately that unless 
General Provera be at once expelled, the French Republic 
will look upon this refusal on the part of his Holiness as 
the commencement of hostilities. . . . Mention in your 
conversation with the Secretary of State that the Fi^ench 
Republic was generous at Tolentmo, but it will not be so again. 
. . . For myself, who know the Italians, I attach great 
importance that the Roman troops should not be com- 
manded by an Austrian general. . . You must insist upon 
General Provera leaving Rome within twenty-four hours. 
. . . Say publicly that he has been my prisoner twice 
during this campaign, and that before long he will be my 
prisoner for the third time. ... If the Pope dies you 
should do all in your power to prevent the election of 
another Pope, and to get up a revolution. . . . The King 
of Naples will not move, but if he does on the revolution 
being accomplished you will inform his majesty as soon as 
he crosses the frontier that the Roman people are under 
the protection of the French RepubHc. You will after- 
wards have an interview with the Neapolitan general, and 



GENERAL PROVERA. 1 87 

say that the French Republic sees no inconvenience in 
opening negotiations with the Court of Naples on the 
subject of its demands. . . . 

" Bonaparte." 

Bonaparte might very well have left Provera to the Pope 
if there was truth in what he wrote of that General at St. 
Helena. 

''General Provera/' he wrote, ''who capitulated at La 
Favourite, had previously been taken prisoner at Cosseria, 
where he had shown little talent. This was the real 
reason which induced me to praise him in order to obtain 
him credit, and it succeeded. Provera was re-employed 
and was captured a second time. The praise of an enemy 
should therefore be regarded with suspicion unless given 
after the cessation of hostilities." 

On the 1st October Bonaparte wrote that matters were 
going on badly, but that the position of the French army 
in Italy was superb. Should hostilities recommence 
Venice would furnish 25,000,000 francs. He added : — 

" All the arrangements which I make at this moment 
constitute the last service I can render to my country. 
My health is entirely shattered, and good health is 
indispensable in war. 

"The Government has, no doubt, taken into considera- 
tion the demand which I made a week ago for the 
nomination of a commission of publicists to organise a 
free Italy ; of plenipotentiaries to carry on the negotia- 
tions, and a General enjoying its confidence to command 
the army. I do not know any one capable of replacing 
me in these three functions. ... As for myself, I am 
seriously affected at finding myself obliged to stop short 
at the very moment when perhaps there is nothing but 
fruit to gather ; but necessity masters my inclination, my 
will, and my reason. I can hardly get on horseback ; 
I require two years repose. . . ." 



1 88 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

This feeling of despondency, if it ever existed, was not 
of long duration, nor did it prevent Bonaparte from dis- 
playing his wonted activity in the way of despatch writing 
and laying plans for the future. 

To CITIZEN HALLER. 

" Passariano, 6th October^ 1797- 

** The negotiations are almost broken off: the Austrians 
demand too much. 

'^ Send me money with all diligence ; dip into all the 
coffers for we must have some immediately ; in twelve 
days we shall be campaigning. Look to the Brescians, I 
must have a million from them. Tell them, as well as the 
Cisalpines, that unless they furnish money I shall leave 
them in the lurch and make peace without them. . . . 

" Bonaparte. 

" P.S. — Money, money, money V 

To THE foreign minister. 

"Passariano, 7/// October^ 1797. 

" You will find inclosed, Citizen Minister, the confi- 
dential scheme handed to me by the Count de Cobenzl. 
I acquainted him with all the indignation you would feel 
on reading it. . . . In two or three days everything will be 
settled one way or the other. I acknowledge that I shall 
do all I can to conclude peace, as the season is far ad- 
vanced, and there is no hope of accomplishing anything 
important. 

" You little know these people here. They do not 
deserve 40,000 Frenchmen being killed for them. I see by 
your letters that you always start from a false hypothesis ; 
you imagine that liberty can make an enervated, super- 
stitious, pantaloon, and cowardly nation accomplish great 
things. You desire me to do miracles, and I do not know 
how. I have not a single Italian in my army with the 
exception, I think, of 1,500 scamps, picked up in the 



OPINION OF ITALIANS. 1 89 

streets of various towns, who pillage and are good for 
nothing. You must not allow yourself to be imposed upon 
by a few Italian adventurers in Paris." 

Napoleon had a different opinion of the Fiedmontese ; 
he added : — 

" If the negotiations do not take a favourable turn. 
France will ever repent her decision with regard to the 
King of Sardinia. This prince, with one battalion of 
infantry and one squadron of cavalry, is stronger than the 
whole Cisalpine. 

" Since I have been in Italy I have received no aid from 
the love of the people for liberty and equality. My only 
true auxiliaries have been the good discipline of the army, 
and the great respect we have shown for religion, w^hich has 
been carried to the extent of cajoling its ministers : justice, 
and, above all, the prompt punishment of evil-doers. This 
is history ; the remainder, which is all very fine in pro- 
clamations, printed discourses, &c., is so much romance. . . 
It is only with prudence, wisdom, and great dexterity that 
obstacles are surmounted and important ends attained. 
There is but one step from triumph to a fall. I have seen 
in the greatest circumstances that a little thing has always 
decided important events. . . . The character of our 
nation is to be too elated in prosperity. If we take as the 
basis for all operations true policy, which is nothing else 
than the calculation of combinations and chances, we shall 
long remain the grande nation, the arbiter of Europe. I 
say more ; we shall hold the balance of power in Europe, 
and, if destiny decrees this, I see no impossibility in 
attaining, in the course of a few years, those splendid 
results, of which the heated and enthusiastic imagination 
catches a glimpse, but which the extremely cool, perse- 
vering and positive man can alone grasp. ... I write to 
you as I think, which is the greatest mark of esteem I can 
give you. 

" Bonaparte." 



190 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

The above was addressed to Talleyrand, who had con- 
ceived the highest opinion of the talents of the young 
soldier, and who foresaw the brilliant destiny which 
awaited him far more clearly than any one else. 

Hoche had hardly returned to his head quarters when 
he died under the most suspicious circumstances. He is 
generally supposed to have been poisoned, but this affair 
is still shrouded in mystery. 

ORDER OF THE DAY. 

"Passariano, i']th October^ ^797- 
" Art. I. On the lOth Brumaire the army will celebrate a 
funeral ceremony in honour of General Hoche. 

" Art. 2. The name of General Hoche will be inscribed 
on the pyramids of the divisions," &c., Sz:c. 

Hymns composed by Chenier and Lebrun were to be 
sung in honour of Hoche and of the i8th Fructidor. 

On the same day Bonaparte's mind was relieved by the 
signing of the treaty of Campo Formio. In a letter to 
Talleyrand, he said : — 

*' I have no doubt the critics will depreciate the treaty I 
have just signed. All those, however, who know Europe 
and have the tact of affairs will be convinced that it was 
impossible to arrive at a better treaty without recom- 
mencing hostihties and conquering two or three more 
provinces from Austria. Was that possible } Yes. Was 
that probable t No." 

Bonaparte then recapitulated all the difficulties with 
which he would have been obliged to contend. 

" No. 6. We have war with England ; that enemy is 
sufficiently redoubtable. . . ." 

"No. 10. The Austrians are dull and avaricious; no 
people are less intriguing and less dangerous for our 
domestic affairs than the Austrians. The English, on the 
contrary, are generous, intriguing, and active. Our 



THE DESTRUCTION OF ENGLAND. I9I 

Government must therefore destroy the AngHcan 
monarchy, or expect to be itself destroyed by the 
corruption of these intriguing and enterprising 'insulars/ 
The present moment offers us a capital opportunity. Let 
us concentrate all our activity on the marine and destroy 
England. That done, Europe is at our feet." 

The occupation of Mayence and the destruction of 
Carthage were to compensate France for her generosity 
towards the Emperor. 

Bonaparte was not at all certain that the Directory 
would ratify the treaty of Campo Formio concluded in 
direct opposition to the formal instructions of the Govern- 
ment, and for this reason he sent it to Paris by Berthier 
and the savant Monge, in order that they might urge its 
acceptance. Before the Directory could come to a decision 
the news of peace having been concluded spread through 
Paris like wild-fire, and created such enthusiasm that the 
ratification of the treaty became an act of necessity. 

Bonaparte, who had formed a correct idea of public 
opinion, now turned his attention in a different direction. 

To THE DIRECTORY. 

*^ Milan, ^th November^ ^797- 
''. . I think you might leave 25,000 men in Italy, take 
36,000 to England, and order the rest to Nice, Chambery, 
and Corsica. . . . For the expedition to England we 
shall require : ist, good naval officers ; 2nd, a great number 
of troops well commanded, so as to menace several points 
at once, &c. ; 3rd, an intelligent and determined admiral — 
I think Truguet the best ; 4th, 30,ooo,ooof ready money. 
General Hoche had some very good maps of England, 
which should be obtained from his heirs. You could not 
select a more distinguished officer than General Desaix. 
Although I truly need repose, I shall never refuse, as far as 
possible, to sacrifice myself for my country. 

" Bonaparte." 



192 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

To THE DIRECTORY. 

" Milan, 12M November^ 1797. 
" You will find inclosed the distribution of the Army of 
Italy as the Army of England. . I have given all the 
necessary orders for moving our column on the ocean. I 
shall send Citizen Andreossy to Paris to-morrow, in order 
to cast guns of the same calibre as the English field-pieces, 
so that, once in the country, we may be able to use their 
cannon balls. . . I have sent Citizen Poussielgue to 
Malta under pretext of inspecting the Levant, but really to 
put a last touch to our designs upon that island. . . 

'' Bonaparte." 

It is well known that Bonaparte, at all events at this 
date, had no idea of invading England, and the above letter 
shows that even before leaving Italy his mind was bent 
upon striking a blow at our eastern possessions. The pro- 
bability is that Citizen Poussielgue entered into negotia- 
tions with Homcspech for the sale of Malta, over the price 
of which island the Czar was haggling. 

To THE ARMY. 

^' Milan, 14M November, 1797. 
'* Soldiers, I start to-morrow for the Congress of Rastadt. 
" On finding myself separated from the army, I shall 
only be consoled by the hope of soon seeing myself once 
more among you, struggling against new dangers. 

*' No matter what post the Government assigns to the 
Army of Italy, it will always be worthy to sustain the 
liberty and glory of the French name. 

" Soldiers, in talking among yourselves of the princes you 
have conquered, of the nations who owe you their liberty, 
and of the battles you have fought, say — In two campaigns 
we would have done more. 

" BONAPARTE." 



GENERAL CLARKE. 1 93 

Bonaparte had lived in regal state at the chateau of 
Montebello, but it was not without a feeling of surprise 
that the diplomats assembled at Rastadt witnessed the 
Republican General enter that town in a carriage drawn by- 
eight horses. He did not tarry long at Rastadt, being 
unwilling to take an active part in the negotiations. He 
wrote several letters to Joseph, who was French minister at 
Rome at this period, complaining of the attitude of the 
Papal Government, which he considered as anything but 
satisfactory. 

General Clarke, whom the following letter concerns, had 
formerly served in the dragoons. In 1790, however, he 
resigned his commission, and was attached to the French 
embassy in London. We have seen him acting as a spy 
upon Bonaparte, and being won over by the General. Now 
he was in disgrace and accused of being the creature of 
Carnot, which regicide minister was suspected of royalist 
designs, and was openly accused by Barras of having 
betrayed the Republic. 

To THE DIRECTORY. 

" Milan, i^th November^ 1797. 

" General Clarke, who is going to Paris, has been 
employed in Italy for several months. In all the letters 
addressed to him, and which have been intercepted, I have 
found nothing out of conformity with the principles of the 
Republic. General Clarke is a hard and conscientious 
worker. If his liasons with Carnot have rendered him 
* suspect' in diplomacy, he might be useful in military 
matters, and for the expedition to England. If he has need 
of indulgence, I beg you will accord him some. . . 

" Bonaparte." 



Bonaparte afterwards employed Clarke as his war 
minister, and made him Due de Feltre. 

VOL I. o 



194 '^^E CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

To THE FOREIGN MINISTER. 

" Rastadt, ^oth November^ 1797. 

'* To-day we proceeded to exchange the ratifications of 
the treaty of Campo Formio. . All the members of the 
Congress have arrived and have paid me a visit. The King 
of Sweden has sent the Baron de Fersen as his ambas- 
sador. . He came to see me surrounded by all the 
fatuities of a courtier of the ffi//-^^-^^^?// (Versailles). After 
the usual comphments ... I addressed him in these 
terms. . . How explain the conduct of the Court of 
Sweden, which takes every opportunity of sending to Paris 
and elsewhere ministers and ambassadors essentially dis- 
agreeable to every French citizen } The King of Sweden 
would no doubt object to receive a minister who had 
endeavoured to excite the people of Stockholm to revolt. 
No, sir ; the French Republic will not tolerate men who 
are too well known by their liasons with the ancient court 
of France to come and brave the ministers of the first 
people on earth. . . . During this discourse the Baron 
changed colour several times, but acted like a courtier. He 
replied that his Majesty would consider what I had said, 
and then he left. / naturally re-co7idiicied Jiim to the door 
with the usual ceremonies. . . . 

" Bonaparte." 



Baron de P^ersen is well known to us for his devotion to 
the unfortunate Marie Antoinette, and the effort he made 
to save the royal family on the occasion of the flight to 
Varennes. 

After having exchanged the ratifications of the treaty of 
Campo Formio, and signed the military convention by 
which Mayence and Manheim were handed over to France, 
Bonaparte left Radstadt for Paris, where he met with an 
enthusiastic reception. On the 5th December he was 
received in solemn audience by the Directors and eulogised 



PUBLIC RECEPTION. 1 95 

in the most fulsome manner. Barras, after enumerating his 
exploits and comparing him to Socrates, to Caesar, and to 
Pompey, said — " Go and chain up that gigantic freebooter 
who oppresses the seas. Go and chastise in London 
outrages left too long unpunished. Numerous votaries of 
liberty await you." The fact is that Barras and his 
colleagues were far from desiring the presence of the young 
General in Paris, as they dreaded his popularity. On his 
side, Bonaparte was soon anxious to escape from the capital, 
where nothing^ was to be done for the moment. Even at 
St. Helena he dwelt with satisfaction on, and chuckled 
over, the line of conduct he pursued at this period. He 
avoided, as much as possible, appearing in public, living 
quietly with Josephine in the rue Chantereine, now called 
the rue de la Victoire, and taking her into the country on 
Sundays. Convinced that the Directors, and especially 
Barras, wished to poison him, he carefully avoided arousing 
suspicion. On the 28th December he was elected a mem- 
ber of the Institute, and at the fetes given in his honour he 
appeared in the costume of that learned body, and affected 
to prefer the palm leaves of the savant to the uniform of 
the General-in-Chief. 

Thus closed 1797. On a flag presented to the General 
by the Directory a list of his deeds during that year was 
emblazoned — 150,000 prisoners — 170 colours — 550 siege 
guns — 600 field pieces — 5 pontoons — 9 ships of 64 guns — 
12 frigates — 12 corvettes — 18 galleys captured — Armistice 
with the King of Sardinia — Convention with Genoa — Ar- 
mistice with the Duke of Modena, the King of Naples, the 
Pope — Treaty of Campo Formio. Then followed a list of 
the peoples who had been freed, and of the chief works 
of art sent by the General to Paris. 

On the ocean the French were not so fortunate ; at least 
their allies sustained two severe defeats. Admiral Duncan 
inflicted a more serious blow on the Dutch fleet than it had 
suffered at the hands of Admiral Brisbane in the preceding 
year ; and the Spanish fleet was more ill-treated by Lord 

O 2 



196 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

St. Vincent than it had been by Rodney in 1780. With 
only 15 sail of the line the English Admiral beat 27 
Spanish ships, the smallest of which carried 74 guns. This 
will explain a certain aversion on the part of the '' gallant 
dons " to put to sea in the following years, in spite of the 
remonstrances and entreaties of Bonaparte. 



CHAPTER IV. 

THE YEAR 1798. 

The chief events of 1798 may be thus summed up. By 
the treaty of Campo Formio and the break down of the 
negotiations of Lille, England was isolated. The Congress 
of Radstadt was sitting. In February Berthier entered 
Rome, and secured the person of the Pope in consequence 
of General Duphot, who was attached to the staff of Joseph 
Bonaparte, having been killed in a riot. Declining to ven- 
ture across the Channel, Bonaparte in March was appointed 
commander and chief of the Army of the East, and on the 
19th May he sailed for Egypt. The conscription was esta- 
blished in France. In the absence of Bonaparte and his 
army, England managed to form a second coalition into 
which all the powers, with the exception of Spain and Prus- 
sia, entered. Austria desired to revenge her defeats ; Ger- 
many to recover her Rhenish provinces ; Russia, offended 
at the treatment of the kings of Naples and of Sardinia, 
accepted British subsidies and agreed to furnish troops to 
serve with the English in North Germany, and 60,000 men 
to act with the Austrians. The Emperor Paul at the same 
time offered an asylum to Louis XVIII., and received the 
title of Grand Master of the Knights of St. John. 
Suwarrow, after having been long in disgrace, was re- 
called. The invasion of Rome and of Switzerland had 
excited wide-spread indignation. In August Nelson gained 



198 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

the battle of the Nile. In September the Sublime Porte 
declared war against France, and its action was quickly- 
followed by the Barbary powers. The new Republics, ruth- 
lessly plundered by French agents, were ready to revolt 
at any moment against their liberators, whose exactions 
they continued to support with impatience. 

To GENERAL BERTHIER, at Milan. 

" Paris, ^th January, 1798. 

** I thank you for the observations you have sent me 
concerning the French establishments in the Ionian sea. 
You waste no time, and devote the hours which peace pre- 
vents you from passing on the field of battle, in instructing 
yourself. 

'^ I should much like to have you with me in England, 
but it seems the government consider your presence 
necessary in Italy. That post is so essential, that I should 
do wrong to resist, &c. 

'' Bonaparte." 

This allusion to the Ionian Islands, which Bonaparte 
considered "of more importance to France than the whole 
of Italy," shows that his thoughts were still directed 
towards the East. 

General Duphot, having been massacred at Rome, close 
by the side of Joseph Bonaparte, who had a narrow escape, 
General Brune was despatched to Naples to threaten war 
in the event of the King occupying the Papal States. At 
the same time, Bonaparte despatched detailed directions to 
Berthier, ordering him to march secretly on Rome. " When 
you are at two days' march from that city," he wrote, *^ yoy 
will threaten the Pope and all the members of the govern- 
ment, guilty of this greatest of crimes, so as to inspire them 
with terror, and make them take to flight. ... If it be 
proved that the army of the King of Naples is on the march 
to Rome, and that the General of the Emperor of Germany 



ROME AND GENEVA. 1 99 

in Italy posLtively states it to be the intention of the 
cabinet of Vienna to support the operation of the King of 
Naples, you will declare that no prince has yet put forward 
the pretension of keeping the French Republic in tute- 
lage, and of hindering it from punishing offences com- 
mitted against its ambassadors ; and that at the first 
movement nriade by the Austrian General, the French 
army will seize on Tuscany. This should be said, and 
not written. When you reach Rome you will organise 
the Roman Republic, and arrest the principal assassins of 
the 8th Nivose, especially Cardinal Albani and his family ; 
you will seize their papers and confiscate their property.'' 

A portion of the troops destined for England were to 
be employed in this expedition, and citizen Faipoult was 
to place at the disposal of the army the 8,000,000 francs 
worth of diamonds which the Pope had given in payment 
of contributions ! The venerable Cardinal Albani was very 
harshly treated, and was relieved of a splendid collection of 
paintings and marbles. 

Berthier knew his business well, for he wrote to Bonaparte 
saying — *' In sending me to Rome you have nominated me 
treasurer of the Army of England, and I shall endeavour to 
fill your coffers." As a fact, the Papal States and Switzer- 
land were to furnish funds for the expedition to Egypt — 
Rome and Geneva ! 

Berthier had no difficulty in carrying out his instructions. 
Having seized upon Pius VL, he sent that Pontiff's walking- 
stick as a trophy to the Directory. 

The same day at midnight Bonaparte wrote a second 
letter to Berthier, saying — " The Directory forwards you 
precise instructions as to all you are to do. The honour of 
taking Rome is reserved for you. . . . You are appointed 
chief of the staff of the Army of England. Of course 
you will first of all pacify Italy, and avenge the national 
honour which has been so deeply insulted." 

After renouncing the hand of Desiree Clary for himself, 
Bonaparte had recommended General Duphot in his stead. 



200 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

This match had been arranged, and the marriage was on 
the point of being celebrated when the gallant young officer 
was assassinated. 

To THE MINISTER OF WAR. 

^' Paris, ^th February^ 1798. 

*' I start to-morrow, Citizen Minister, in order to visit 
the coasts of the ocean. I shall be back in twelve days. 
General Desaix is going to Brest, and General Kleber to 
Havre. ... I beg you will place 30,000 francs at the dis- 
posal of General Desaix, Commander-in-Chief of the Army 
of England, for the extraordinary expenses of that 
army. 

'' Bonaparte." 

The appointment of Desaix was only temporary. As 
for Bonaparte, he was delighted to get away from Paris, 
where he was afraid of his popularity being compromised. 
During his stay in the capital he had avoided appearing in 
public as much as possible, and had lived the life of a 
simple citizen, with his wife. He knew that the more 
he showed himself the faster his popularity would vanish 
in so frivolous a capital as Paris. He knew that the 
slightest mistake would interrupt his career and perhaps 
cause his ruin. "The Parisians," he remarked, "retain 
no impression." 

On the 23rd February Bonaparte addressed a long report 
to the Directory on " the difficulties of an invasion of Eng- 
land." Before undertaking so bold an operation, it would 
be necessary, he said, to obtain command of the sea. It 
might be possible to escape the vigilance of the British 
squadrons blockading Brest and Texel, or during the long 
winter nights to slip across the Channel in boats. The 
whole tone of this report however, was, opposed to an 
invasion of our shores, and in favour of attacking our 
communications with India. The expedition to Egypt 



PREPARING FOR EGYPT. 201 

was soon decided upon, but it was kept secret till the 
last moment, and in the meantime preparations for the 
invasion of England were ostensibly carried on. 

To GENERAL BERTHIER. 

'^ Paris, \oth March^ 1798. 
" You ought to have received my letters relative to the 
embarkation of troops at Genoa. . . . Brune has beaten 
the Swiss, and has captured thirty colours. Inclosed you 
will find commissions for Generals Surrurier and Cervoni, 
who are appointed to the Army of England. 

" Bonaparte." 

To THE minister of the interior. 

'^ Paris, 26th March, 1798. 
" I forward you a letter from the Directory, and beg you 
will order the citizens (list inclosed) to hold themselves in 
readiness to start for Bordeaux. . . . 

" Bonaparte." 

This list included two astronomers, four geometricians, 
one aeronaut, three naturalists, one chemist, one mineral- 
ogist, one antiquary, six civil engineers, and an interpreter. 
These were the savants destined to accompany the young 
General to the East. 

On the 27th March Bonaparte, as a person conversant 
with Italian affairs, wrote very warmly to the Directory, 
protesting against the arrest of the citizens Paradisi and 
Moscati in the Cisalpine Republic. " France and liberty,'* 
he said, " had no more sincere friends. Citizen Paradisi, 
who was a celebrated professor at Reggio, is the only 
Italian, who, sword in hand, rendered any service to the 
French arm}/. . . . 

*' Citizen Moscati is known as one of the most renowned 
doctors in Europe, being very learned in the moral and politi- 
cal sciences. He devoted himself entirely to the army, and 
it is to his advice that we owe the lives of 20,000 men, who 



202 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

would otherwise have perished in hospital. The debase- 
ment of the Cisalpine Government at its birth, and the loss 
of its best citizens, would be a real misfortune to France, 
and a triumph for the Emperor and his partisans. 

"Bonaparte." 

The work of disintegration had already commenced. 

To M. J. B. SAY, Man of Letters. 

''Paris, iWi March, 1798. 

"' I thank you, Citizen, in the name of General Bonaparte, 
for your kindness in undertaking the purchase of works 
destined to form his portable library," &c. 

The list consisted of thirteen volumes of arts and sciences ; 
thirty-nine volumes of geography and voyages, including 
those of Cook ; 125 historical works, ancient and modern ; 
forty volumes of poetry, including Napoleon's old favourite, 
OssiaHy and ten volumes of light verses ; twenty volumes of 
masterpieces of the French Theatre. In the way of novels, 
four volumes of Voltaire, Heloise, Werther ; four volumes 
of Marmontel ; of English novels, forty volumes ; Le Sage, 
ten ; Prevost, ten. Then works on political and moral 
sciences — the Old Testament, the New Testament, the 
Koran, the Vedas, Mythology, and Montesquieu {Esprit 
des Lois). 

Of these works, on the voyage to Egypt, the most care- 
fully studied was the Koran. 

To CITIZEN MONGE, at Rome. 

''Paris, i7id Ap7'il, 1798. 
" I have received, my dear Monge, your letter of the 30th 
Ventose. Desaix ought to have arrived ; I beg you will 
hand him the inclosed. I count upon you and upon him 
to embark at Civita Vecchia. ... I rely upon the Arab 
printing establishment of the Propaganda, and on you, 
should I have to ascend the Tiber with a squadron in order 
to lay hold of you. BONAPARTE." 



THE ARMY OF THE EAST. 203 

Considering the sort of proclanriatlons which the General 
afterwards issued in Egypt, it is curious to find they were 
printed at Rome, in an establishment intended for the pro- 
pagation of the Christian reHgion. Monge had been sent 
to Rome to organise the new Republic. 

To THE MINISTER OF WAR. 

" Paris, 5M April, 1798. 
"General Bonaparte is informed that there exists in 
the War Office copies of Major Rennel's map of Bengal, 
and special maps of the course of the Ganges, published 
by the EngHsh. He begs you will place them at his 
disposal, &c. 

" Bonaparte." 

For Bonaparte contemplated not only capturing Malta 
and Egypt, but taking Vienna and Constantinople a revers, 
and re-establishing the Greek Empire, or invading India, 
and seating himself on the throne of the Great Mogul. 

The following decree by the Directory, but drawn up by 
Bonaparte, was published on the 12th April, when the 
expedition was almost ready to sail : — 

"Art. I. An army shall be formed called that of the 
East. 

"Art. 2. This army shall be composed of troops drawn 
from, &c., &c.. 

*' Art. 3. The Citizen Bonaparte, at present General-in- 
chief of the army of England, is named General-in-chief of 
the army of the East. He will be replaced in the command 
of the first of these armies, &c., &c. 

"The present decree is not to be printed." 

Then followed other decrees, pointing out the necessity 
of driving the English from Egypt. The Beys had formed 
intimate relations with them, and had practised cruelties 
of the most horrid description on French subjects, who 
were daily pillaged and assassinated. The English, aided 
by infamous treason, had become masters of the Cape of 



204 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

Good Hope, to the great detriment of French commerce 
with India, rendering it absolutely necessary that a new 
route should be opened to Republican enterprise, so as to 
wage war with the satellites of Great Britain, and dry up 
the sources of their corrupting wealth. 

"Art. I. The General-in-chief of the army of the East 
will seize on Egypt. 

''Art. 2. He will drive the English from all their 
possessions in the East, and above all destroy their 
entrepots in the Red Sea. 

''Art. 3. He will have the isthmus of Suez cut through> 
and will take all the necessary measures to insure the free 
and exclusive possession of the Red Sea for the French 
Republic," &c., &c. 

Next came a violent indictment against the Knights of 
Malta, and 

"Art. I. The General-in-chief of the army of the East 
is to seize on the isle of Malta,'' &c., &c. 

These and other decrees were all dictated by Bonaparte. 
Brune had succeeded Berthier in Italy, and had been suc- 
ceeded in Switzerland by Lannes. To the latter General 
Bonaparte wrote on the 1 3th April : — 

" I await with impatience the 3,000,000 francs from 
Berne. I suppose you sent me news of them by my 
courier who passed through Lyons yesterday.'' 

Art. 3. shows how Bonaparte understood that liberty 
of the seas which he so strongly advocated whenever he 
referred to England and her naval supremacy. 

To THE PRESIDENT OF THE DIRECTORY. 

" Paris, 14/^ Afiril, 1798. 
" I should like, first, a letter from the Directory author- 
ising the Citizen IMonge to embark with General Desaix 
as a savant attached to the expedition. Second, to take 



TTPPOO SAHIB. 205 

with me the Citizen Piveron, who was for some tiine 
e^nployed as agent to Tippoo Sahib, He might be sent to 
India in orde^r to re-open relations with that country. 

'' Bonaparte." 

The agents of Tippoo Sahib had been warmly received 
at Versailles at the beginning of the reign of Louis XVI. 

To VICE-ADMIRAL BRUEYS. 

'' Paris, i^th April, 1798. * 
" I have received your different letters, Citizen General. 
. . . The Government has entire confidence in you. . . . 
On the first decade of Floreal I shall be on board your 
ship. Have a good bed prepared for me, as if for a man 
who would be sick during the whole voyage. I shall have 
eight or ten aides-de-camp with me. Berthier will have 
two or three adjutant-generals, &c. Lay in a good stock 

of provisions As you are the only person to whom 

I have announced my arrival at Toulon, it will be useless 
for you to speak about it. . . . 

'' Bonaparte." 

The following curious instructions were sent to the future 
Viceroy of Italy, who, though quite a lad, was to accom- 
pany the expedition to Egypt as one of his stepfather's 
aides-de-camp ; his youthful appearance there earning him 
the nickname of Cupid. 

To CITIZEN EUGENE BEAUHARNAIS. 

"Paris, 22nd April, 1798. 
'' You will be good enough to start to-morrow at 4 A.M., 
with Citizen Fister, the chambermaid of my wife, and the 
Citizen Hebert, who will sit on the box with the coachman. 
You will go to Lyons, passing through Auxonne and 
Chalons. You will find out at both places whether my 
grooms, servants, baggage, &c., have reached those towns, 



206 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

and when they will arrive at Lyons. On reaching Lyons 
you will alight at an inn, which used to be called the 
Palais Royal, if it still exists, &c., &c. 

" Bonaparte." 

Josephine accompanied Bonaparte as far as Toulon, and 
when the expedition sailed went to take the waters at 
Aix, in the hopes they would enable her to bear her 
second husband a child. 

At this moment the fate of the expedition was held in 
suspense, and it appeared probable that Bonaparte's services 
would once more be required with the army of Italy. 
Bernadotte had been appointed French ambassador at 
Vienna, and had given such offence by hoisting the Re- 
publican flag that the people had broken his windows. 
The Directory wished to recommence the war with Austria, 
but to this Bonaparte offered a strenuous opposition. 
Words ran so high between the Government and the 
general that the latter offered his resignation. Rewbel 
handed him a pen, which Bonaparte had hardly taken 
when it was snatched from him by Merlin. After this 
violent scene matters were miore calmly discussed, and the 
young general, as on previous occasions, carried his point. 

To GENERAL BRUNE. 

''Paris, lyd April, 1798. 
'' I have given orders to General Baraguay d'Hilliers to 
disembark his troops if they have been embarked, and to 
return if he has marched. ... If affairs go wrong I think 
the chief efforts of the Austrians will be made in your 
direction, in which case I feel you will stand m need of 
more troops, and above all of a great deal of money. 

*' Bonaparte." 

Under these circumstances Bonaparte made a direct 
appeal to the Count Cobentzel to maintain the good rela- 
tions established at Campo Formio. In a letter to the 



EARLY OPINION OK METTERNICH. 207 

Minister of Foreign Affairs, he said he would never be 
able to settle anything with Messrs. Lehrbach and Metier- 
nicky who knew nothing of the intentions of their cabinet, 
and enjoyed little credit. 

When Bonaparte himself commanded in Italy he found 
means to send money home ; now money would be re- 
quired from France. The supposition is that Italy had 
been drained of her resources. 

ORDER. 

" Paris, 2Zth April, 1798. 
" Bonaparte, member of the National Institute, General- 
in-chief of the army of England (?), orders General 
Reynier," &c., &c. 

" Bonaparte." 

Bonaparte had been elected to the Institute in the place 
of his old friend Carnot, and delighted to veil his military 
aspirations under the palm-leaves of that learned society, 
whose costume he donned on public occasions. 

To GENERAL CAFFARELLI. 

" Paris, 2nd May, 1798. 
**A11 the obstacles in the way of the expedition have 
been removed. I start to-morrow evening, and shall be 
at Toulon by the 9th, &c. 

" Bonaparte." 

To CITIZEN JOSEPH BONAPARTE. 

'' Auxerre, ^th May, 1798. 
". . . . I beg you will write to me by the courier who 
will hand you this, and send me all the newspapers since 
the day I started. I have ordered my couriers to alight 
at your house ; you will see that they rejoin me at Toulon 
without delay, especially Moustache and Lesimple. 

"Bonaparte." 



2o8 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

Bonaparte was exceedingly suspicious of the intentions 
of the Government, and was convinced that Barras — who 
" was capable of anything'' — was bent on mischief. 

In the following- '' Proclamation " we see nothing of the 
celebrated ten arpents of land (twenty perches each) which 
every soldier of the army of the East was promised on his 
return to France : possibly because these arpents were 
never given. 

PROCLAMATION. 

" Toulon, loth May, 1798. 

'' Soldiers, you are one of the wings of the army of 
England. You have fought on mountain and plain, and 
besieged forts ; it remained for you to wage a maritime 
war. 

" The Roman legions, which you have sometimes imi- 
tated but not yet equalled, fought against Carthage both 
by sea and on the plains of Zama. Victory never aban- 
doned them because they were constantly brave, patient 
in the support of fatigue, well disciplined, and united. 

" Soldiers, Europe has its eyes upon you. 

"You have great destinies to fulfil, battles to fight, 
dangers to overcome. You will do more than you have 
yet accomplished for the prosperity of your country, for 
the happiness of mankind, and for your own glory. 

"Sailors, infantry, cavalry, artillery, be united, and 
remember that on the day of battle you will stand in 
need of each other, &c. 

" Bonaparte." 

After being detained at Toulon for a week by contrary 
winds and rumours of an English fleet of thirty sail cruising 
off the coast, the expedition at length got under way, 
Bonaparte still signing himself " Member of the Institute 
and General-in-chief of the army of England.'' On the 
23rd May he wrote to the Directory to say he had been 



CAPTURE OF MALTA. 209 

five days at sea, and was " betweeTi the islands of Corsica 
and Elba " — his cradle and his prison. 

To CITIZEN JOSEPH BONAPARTE. 

"On Board ^ VOriei^t/ 23rd May, 1798. 
"We have had good and bad weather. We are now 
well at sea, sailing for Elba. This evening we shall pass 
Bastia. I have not been sea-sick. Let me know all 
the news. . . , 

" Bonaparte. 

" P.S. My wife will remain a few days at Toulon, and 
will then go to take the waters " (waters supposed to be 
a cure for sterility). 

Little difficulty was experienced in getting possession of 
Malta, where the French were fortunate enough, as General 
Caffarelli remarked, to find some one to admit them. The 
Grand Master having capitulated on the condition of pro- 
perty and religion being respected, Bonaparte wrote this 
unctuous letter to the bishop, thanking him for his reception 
of the French : — 

To THE BISHOP OF MALTA. 

*'Cn Board the "Orient/ iitk June, 1798. 

"... I know of nothing more respectable and worthy 
of the veneration of men than a priest who, imbued with 
the true spirit of the Gospel, is persuaded that he is in 
duty bound to obey the temporal power, and to maintain 
peace, tranquillity, and union in his diocese, &c. 

** Bonaparte." 

ORDER OF THE DAY. 
" On Board the ' Orient.' \2th Jtme, 1798. 
*' The army is informed that the enemy has surrendered ; 
the standard of liberty floats over the forts of Malta. The 
VOL. I. P 



2IO THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

General-in-chief insists on the most exact discipline. He 
desires that persons and property be respected, and that 
the people of Malta be treated with friendship." 

The Knights of Malta were to be expelled ; but we find 
in the correspondence a list of members of the order who 
were excepted — fourteen knights, whOy six months previously , 
had furnished Napoleon with useful information y or who 
had offered patriotic subscriptions towards the invasion of 
England. These traitors to their order were allowed to 
join the French army. 

To GENERAL BERTHIER. 

"Malta, 13/A June^ 1798. 
" You will direct citizens Monge and Berthollet to visit 
the Mint and the treasury of the church of St. John, and 
other places where there may be precious objects. 

'' Bonaparte." 

And naturally all the treasures which those two citizens 
could discover were considered lawful plunder. 

To THE DIRECTORY. 

"Malta, I'jth fune, 1798. 
" You will find inclosed the original treaty concluded by 
the Order of Malta with Russia. It had been ratified only 
five days before. . . . The Emperor of Russia should thank 
us, since an occupation of Malta will save his treasury 
400,000 roubles. Had his majesty intended keeping Malta 
he ought to have concealed his designs. However, we 
now possess, in the Mediterranean, the strongest place in 
Europe, and it will cost a good deal to dislodge us. 

" Bonaparte." 

On the 1 8th June Bonaparte wrote fourteen despatches, 
orders, &c., some of them several pages in length, and gave 
a last touch to the organisation of the island. Naval, 
mihtary, and civil schools, municipal councils, and the 



MALTA ORGANISED. 2 I I 

national guard were created. Slavery was abolished, also 
liveries and titles of nobility ; and the arms of the Order 
were to be everywhere replaced by those of the Republic. 
With the exception of the bishop, all priests, monks, and 
nuns, not natives, were to leave the island ; no one was to 
take vows before being thirty years of age ; no order was 
to have more than one convent ; Latin priests were not to 
say mass in Greek churches ; the Jews desiring to establish 
a synagogue were to be protected ; no bishop or churchman 
was to receive money for administering the sacraments, 
nor to acknowledge the supremacy of any foreign prince. 
The whole judicial and administrative system was arranged ; 
the post-office, paving and lighting, public fountains, pawn- 
office, hospitals, stamp duty, tobacco, salt, house-rent, 
public instruction — nothing escaped the vigilance of this 
restless mind. The General created a central school to 
replace the university, and other chairs. It was to be 
composed of — 

1st. A professor of arithmetic and stereometry, salary 
1, 800 francs. 

2nd. A professor of algebra and stereotomy, salary 
2,000 francs. 

3rd. A professor of geometry and astronomy, salary 
2,400 francs. 

4th. A professor of mechanics and physics, salary 3,000 
francs. 

Sth. A professor of navigation, salary 2,400 francs. 

6th. A professor of chemistry, salary 1,200 francs. 

7th. A professor of Eastern languages, salary 1,200 
francs. 

Sth. A librarian, who will lecture on geography, salary 
1,000 francs. 

To this central school shall be attached — 
1st. A library and cabinet of antiquities. 
2nd. A museum of natural history. 
3rd. A botanical garden. 
4th. An observatory. 

p 2 



212 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

Having remained a month at Malta, and escaped Nelson 
by a miracle — Nelson, who could not believe a French 
army would be landed in Egypt in the middle of summer ^ 
— Bonaparte continued his voyage. 

Before landing at Alexandria he issued the following 
proclamation : — 

•' Soldiers ! You are about to undertake a conquest 
the effects of which will be incalculable on civilisation 
and the commercial world, 

"You will deal England the surest and most sensible 
blow while waiting to kill her outright. 

" We shall make some fatiguing marches ; we shall fight 
several battles ; we shall succeed in all our enterprises ; 
the fates are for us. 

" The Mameluke Beys, who exclusively favour English 
commerce, who have ill-treated our merchants, and who 
tyrannise over the inhabitants of the Nile, a few days after 
our arrival will have ceased to exist. 

" The people amongst whom we are going to live are 
Mohammedans ; the first article of their faith is * There is 
no God but God, and Mahomet is his prophet.' 

" Do not contradict them. Deal with them as we dealt 
with the Jews and with the Italians, Respect their muftis 
and their imauns, as you respected rabbins and bishops. 

"Show for the ceremonies prescribed by the Koran, and 
for the mosques, the same toleration you have always 

1 Writing a month afterwards to his wife Nelson said : — 

"Syracuse, July 20th, 1798. 

" I have not been able to find the French fleet, to my great mortifi- 
cation, or the event 1 can scarcely doubt. We have been off Malta, to 
Alexandria in Egypt, Syria, into Asia, and are returned here without 
success ; however, no person will say that it has been for want of activity. 
I yet live in hopes of meeting these fellows ; but it would have been 
my delight to have tried Buonaparte on a wind, for he commands the 
fleet as well as the army. Glory is my object, and that alone. God 
Almighty bless you. 

'' PJoRATio Nelson." 



BONAPARTE AND THE KORAN. 213 

shown for convents, for synagogues, for the reh'gion of 
Moses and that of Jesus Christ. 

" The Roman legions protected all religions.^ You will 
find customs here different from those of Europe : you 
must habituate yourselves to them. 

" The people here treat their wives differently from us ; 
but in all countries the man who commits rape is a 
monster. 

" Pillage only enriches a few men. It dishonours us ; 
it destroys our resources; it renders the people hostile 
when it is necessary to make them friendly. 

** The first town we shall enter was built by Alexander. 
We shall find at each step souvenirs worthy of exciting the 
emulation of Frenchmen. 

" Bonaparte." 

Pillage and rape were to be punished by death, and the 
most Draconian laws were to be enforced. In a letter 
to the Pasha of Egypt Bonaparte explained his presence. 
He had come to deliver him from the Beys. " You have 
no doubt been informed," he added, ''that I have no 
intention of doing anything opposed to the Koran or the 
Sultan. You are aware that the French nation is the sole 
ally which the Sultan has in Europe. Come therefore to 
me, and curse the impious race of the Beys." 

In a proclamation dated '' 14th Messidor, Year VI. (2nd 
July, 1798), 1 8th of the month of Muharrem, year of the 
Hegira 121 3," Bonaparte, after dwelhng on the baneful 
effects of Mameluke rule, added : — 

" Did we not destroy the Pope, who said it was necessary 
to wage war against the Moslems t Have we not destroyed 
the Knights of Malta, because those madmen believed that 
God desired war with the Moslems } Have we not for 
centuries been the friends of the Grand Signor (may God 
accomplish his desires !) and the enemy of his enemies ? *' 
^ Before the days of Christ, or of Mohammed. 



2 14 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

Then followed comminatory articles like those of Italy, 
and any village offering resistance and favouring the 
Mamelukes was to be burned to the ground. The slaves 
who refused to be liberated from the Mameluke yoke were 
to be exterminated without pity. 

To THE PASHA OF EGYPT. 

" Gyzeh, 2nd July, 179S. 
" I am very sorry for the violence done to you by 
Ibrahim. If you are your own master, return to Cairo, 
where you will enjoy the consideration due to the repre- 
sentative of our friend the Sultan. . . . By the grace of God, 
on which all depends, the Mamelukes have been destroyed. 
Be assured, and assure the Porte, that the same arms we 
have rendered victorious shall be always at the disposal 
of the Sultan. May Heaven fulfil his desires against ^his 
enemies. 

" Bonaparte." 

Bonaparte experienced no trouble in landing and in 
capturing Alexandria, which was taken by surprise, and 
hardly defended. 

DECISION. 

"Alexandria, \th July, 1798. 
''Art. I. The names of all the men killed at the 
capture of Alexandria shall be engraved on the column 
of Pompey. 

"Art. 2. They shall be buried at the foot of the 
column, &c. 

" Bonaparte." 

In the criticism of our operations in Egypt in 1801, 
which Napoleon wrote at St. Helena, he blamed General 
Abercrombie for having wasted four days and a half after 
landing before he attacked Alexandria. He himself im- 
mediately attacked that city with a handful of men, without 
waiting for his guns, for, as he wrote, it is one of the great 
principles in war to act with celerity, which is even 



CAPTURE OF ALEXANDRIA. 215 

preferable to artillery. He boasted that eighteen hours 
after his fleet had been signalled he stormed Alexandria. 
It must be remembered, however, that he disembarked 
with the utmost precipitation, fearing lest he should be 
caught in flagrante delicto by Nelson ; also that he ordered 
Colonel Cretin to place Alexandria in a state of defence, 
consequently the Alexandria which Abercrombie had to 
attack was not the Alexandria surprised by Bonaparte, 
and captured with hardly any loss. 

In engraving the names of the soldiers who fell at 
Alexandria he sought, as usual, to strike the imagination 
of the army. He was well aware of the excellent effect 
of this system on the Gallic mind. In the course of this 
campaign he said that the Directory could not last, as it 
did nothing for the imagination of the people. He did 
not sin in the same way himself. 

On the 24th July Bonaparte addressed a long report to 
the Directory, giving an account of his operations, his 
triumphs, and especially of the battle of the Pyramids, 
where forty centuries looked down on the French army. 
In the body of this report we find a strong recommendation 
that the Directors should keep Egypt, which " has a rich 
soil, a healthy climate, and is close at hand." But there 
were drawbacks. 

On the 25th July Bonaparte wrote a letter full of despair 
to Joseph. He said — ** You will see by the public papers 
the results of the battles and the conquest of Egypt, which 
was sufficiently disputed to add another leaf to the military 
glory of this army. Egypt is the richest country in corn, 
hemp, &c., which exists in the world. . . . There is no 
money, not even enough to pay the troops. I may re- 
turn to France in two months. I recommend you the care 
of my interests. / have a great deal of domestic affliction, 
for the veil has been entirely raised. You alone upon earth 
remain to me ; your friendship is very dear. ... It is a 
sad position when one has all one's affections centred in 
one heart. You understand this. 



2l6 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

'* Arrange so that on my arrival I may have a country 
place either near Paris or in Burgundy ; I hope to be able 
to spend the winter there in solitude, for I am tired of 
human nature. . . . Glory is insipid at twenty-nine years 
of age ; I have exhausted everything, and it only remains 
for me to become truly egotistical. I intend keeping my 
house. I shall never part with it, to no matter whom. I 
have just enough to live upon ! Adieu, my only friend ; I 
have never been unjust towards you. . . . Embrace your 
wife and Jerome." 

Bonaparte had just entered the Egyptian capital in 
triumph when he wrote this gloomy letter. Desdemona 
was unfaithful, but Othello soon consoled himself, as we 
shall see. 

To GENERAL KLEBER. 

''Cairo, 21th July, 1798. 

*^ We have at Cairo, Citizen General, a very fine mint. 
We require all the ingots which we left at Alexandria, in 
exchange for the coin given to us by the merchants. I beg 
you will therefore assemble the merchants to whom the 
said ingots were given, and ask to have them back. I will 
glYQ them in exchange corn and rice, of which we have 
enormous quantities. . . . We have driven 2,000 of the best 
mounted Mamelukes into the Nile. . . . 

'' Bonaparte." 



How Bonaparte acquired his corn and rice is not stated, 
nor has history left on record what the merchants of 
Alexandria thought of the operation of the French 
General. Unfortunately a French gunner was assassinated 
in Alexandria, and this laid the city open — as Rome, 
Venice, and other cities in Italy had been laid open — to 
numerous vexations. No less than fifty hostages were 
taken on board the fleet, nor was this all. 



SEVERE MEASURES. 21 7 

ORDER. 

'' Cairo, loth July, 1798. 
*' Bonaparte, General-in-Chief. 

"It being just that the commerce of Alexandria should 
contribute, like that of Cairo, towards the keep of the 
army, &c. 

"Art. I. A contribution of 300,000 francs shall be levied 
on the principal merchants. . . . This sum must be paidjn 
twenty-four hours after the publication of the present. 

*' Art. 2. All persons who were employed under the late 
administration must pay a share of the contribution. 

" Bonaparte." 

ORDER. 

*^ Cairo, 30/^ July, 1798. 
" Bonaparte, General-in- Chief, having proofs of the 
treason of Seid Mohamed el-Koraim, whom he had 
overwhelmed with benefits, orders — 

^' Art. I. Seid Mohamed el-Korai'm shall pay a contribu- 
tion of 300,000 francs. 

"Art. II. In default of acquitting this debt, fivQ days 
after the publication of the present order he shall have his 
head cut off, 

" Bonaparte.'' 

And poor Korai'm, either unable or unwilling to pay this 
price, had his head cut off, and carried through the streets 
on a pike, as a warning to all traitors not in a position, or 
unwilling, to purchase immunity. Bonaparte had been 
informed that Korai'm had concealed his money in a 
cistern, where it may possibly still lie, for his servants, 
though tortured, either would not, or could not, reveal the 
hiding place. 

Damietta, Rosetta, and other towns were also to 
contribute towards the expenses of the French army, each 
in due proportion. 



2l8 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

To GENERAL MENON. 

*' Cairo, 31 s^ July^ 1798. 

'' Your presence. Citizen General, is again necessary at 
Rosetta for some days, for the organisation of that 
province. 

" The Turks can only be kept in order by means of the 
greatest severity ; every day I have five or six heads cut 
off in the streets of Cairo. We have been obliged to spare 
the inhabitants up to the present, in order to obliterate the 
terrible reputation which preceded us. To-day, on the con- 
trary, we must assume the tone necessary to make ourselves 
obeyed ; and for them to obey is to fear. . . . 

" Bonaparte." 

On hearing of the disaster of the Nile Bonaparte, in 
order not to discourage his army, affected to treat the 
destruction of the French fleet lightly, saying that the 
English would force him to accomplish greater things 
than he had proposed. 

To rear-admiral GANTHAUME. 

" Cairo, i^th August, 1798. 

" The situation in which you find yourself. Citizen 
General, is horrible. If you did not perish, fate must 
destine you to revenge our navy and our friends ; receive 
my congratulations (in anticipation). This is the only 
agreeable senti^nent I have experienced since the day before 
yesterday, when I received at thirty leagues from Cairo 
your report, forwarded to me by General Kleber. 

" I salute and embrace you. 

'' Bonaparte." 

Bonaparte was much disappointed with the obstinacy of 
other towns which rejected his overtures, and on the 
slightest complaint they were to be burned down, &c. 



THE BATTLE OF THE NILE. 219 

To GENERAL BERTHIER. 

"Cairo, ist August, 1798. 
''.... General Dumuywill disarm the town of Daivan- 
hour, and will cut off the heads of the five chief inhabitants, 
one amongst the worst men of law, and four others, who 
have most influence with the population, should be 
selected. After this he will send twenty-five hostages to 
Cairo, &c.. Sic. 

" BONAPARTE." 

Frequent orders of this description were despatched by 
Bonaparte to his various lieutenants. 

In a long despatch to the Directory, giving an account 
of the situation, the General-in-Chief criticised the conduct 
of Admiral Brueys, adding — '^If in this fatal event he 
committed errors, he expiated them by a glorious death. 

" The fates wished in this, as in many other circum- 
stances, to prove that if they have accorded us the pre- 
ponderance on the Continent, they have given the empire 
of the seas to our rivals. But, no matter how great this 
reverse, it cannot be attributed to the inconstancy of 
fortune ; she has not abandoned us yet ; far from that ; 
she has favoured us in this operation more than ever. 
When I arrived before Alexandria, and learned that the 
English had passed that place a few days before with a 
superior force y in spite of the tempest which reigned, and at 
the risk of being shipwrecked, I landed. I remember that 
when all was ready for disembarking, a vessel of war was 
signalled in the distance ; it was the Justice'^ coming from 
Malta. I cried. Fortune, will you abandon me } What, 
only five days ! I marched all night, and attacked Alex- 
andria at break of day with 3,000 men worn out with 
fatigue, without guns, and almost without cartridges." 

In a letter to Marmont, dated the i8th August, Bona- 
parte showed considerable anxiety to know what the 
^ A French frigate coming from Malta. 



2 20 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

English were about. "You will forward me the most 
minute details," he wrote, "and let me know the situa- 
tion of the English, and the manner in which our squa- 
drons behaved during the combat. In speaking either 
to the generals, to the sailors, or to the soldiers, take 
care to say and to do all in your power to encourage 
them. More especially, have a conference with Rear- 
Admiral Ganthaume, and let me know what he thinks 
of the conduct of our fleet, what he thinks of the conduct 
of Villeneuve, and what he supposes that the English 
intend doing. Assure him of my esteem, &c., &c." 

Two days afterwards, writing to Kleber, he said — ** The 
Turks will think twice before undertaking any important 
operation against us ; besides, they would soon repent of 
it. ... I do not fear 100,000 Turks. If the English re- 
lieve this squadron by another, and continue to infest the 
Mediterranean, they will perhaps oblige us to do greater 
things than we proposed to perform '' — would force the 
French to take India. ^ 

On the 22nd August Bonaparte created an institute at 
Cairo, which he organised with his usual love of detail. In 
the hst of persons proposed to form " the Institute of 
Egypt," the Correspondence gives, " Mathematical Section, 
Bonaparte, Monge, &c." In the section of political 
economy, one remarks the name of Tallien. 

^ The Mediterranean certainly was infested at this time with British 
cruisers, which let very few French vessels through. About this date 
Nelson thus wrote to Earl Spencer : — 

"Mouth of the 'Mil^, gtk August, 1798. 
" I send you a pacquet of intercepted letters, some of them of great 
importance : in particular, one from Bonaparte to his brother. He 
writes such a scrawl, no one not used to it can read it : but luckily we 
have got a man who has wrote in his office to decipher it. Buonaparte 
has differed with his Generals here, and he did want — and, if I under- 
stand his meaning, does want — and will strive to be the Washington 
of France. . . . 

" Horatio Nelson." 



BONAPARTE AT THE PYRAMIDS, 22 1 

ORDER. 

" Cairo, i(^th August^ 1798. 

" Bonaparte, General-in-Chief, orders — 

"Art. I. The first Vendemieure epoch of the estabhsh- 
ment of the Republic shall be celebrated at the different 
points occupied by the army, by a civic /^/^. 

Art. 2. The garrison of Alexandria shall celebrate the 
fete round the column of Pompey. . . . The tricoloured 
flag shall be planted on top of the column. The needle 
of Cleopatra shall be illuminated. 

" Art. 6. The troops in Upper Egypt shall celebrate the 
fke amid the ruins of Thebes." 

Conversation of Bonaparte in the Grand Pyramid with 
several imauns and muftis : — 

Bonapm'te, — God is great, and His works are marvellous. 
Behold, a great work accomplished by the hand of man. 
What was the object of him who built this pyramid } 

Soliman, — It was a powerful king of Egypt, whose name 
was Cheops. He wished to prevent sacrilegious persons 
from disturbing the repose of his ashes. 

Bonaparte. — The great Cyrus had himself buried in the 
open air, so that his body might return to the elements. 
Do you not think he did better } 

Solhnan {inclining). — Glory to God, to whom all glory 
is due. 

Bonaparte. — Honour to Allah ! Who was the calif 
who opened this pyramid and disturbed the ashes of the 
dead t 

Mohajned. — They think it was the Commander of the 
Faithful, Mahmoud, who reigned several centuries ago at 
Bagdad. Others say it was the renowned Aroun al 
Raschid in quest of treasure ; but he only found 
mummies. . . . 

Bonaparte. ■^'QvQdid stolen by the wicked fills the mouth 
with gravel. 



22 2 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

Mohamed {inclining). — That is the observation of 
wisdom. 

Bonaparte. — Glory to Allah ! There is no other God 
but God; Mohammed is His prophet, and I am one of 
his friends. 

Soliman, — Salutations and peace to the man sent by 
God ; salutations also to you, invincible general, favourite 
of Mohammed ! 

Bonaparte, — Mufti, I thank you. The Koran delights 
my mind. ... I love the prophet, and intend to visit and 
honour his tomb in the sacred city.^ But my mission is 
first to exterminate the Mamelukes. 

Ibrahim. — May the angels of victory sweep the dust 
from your path and cover you with their wings. The 
Mameluke has deserved death. 

Bonaparte. — He has been smitten and delivered over to 
the angels of darkness, Moukir and Quakir. God, on 
whom all depends, has ordered his domination to be 
destroyed. 

Soliman. — He extended the hand of rapine over the 
land, the harvests, and the horses of Egypt. 

Bonaparte. — And over the most lovely slaves, very holy 
mufti. Allah has withered up his hand. If Egypt be his 
farm, let him have the lease God gave him ; but God is 
just and merciful for His people. 

Ibrahim. — O most valiant amongst the sons of Jesus, 
Allah has caused you to be followed by the exterminating 
angel, in order to deliver the land of Egypt. 

Bonaparte. — This land was in the hands of twenty-four 
oppressors (Beys), rebels towards the great Sultan our 
ally (whom God surround with glory), and 10,000 slaves 
from the Caucasus and Georgia ; Azrael, the angel of 
death, has blown upon them, and they have disappeared. 

Moha7ned. — Noble successor of Alexander, honour to 
your invincible arms, and to the unexpected thunderbolts 
which issue from the midst of your mounted warriors. 
^ Bonaparte went neither to Mecca nor to Rome. 



CONVERSATION WITH THE MUFTIS. 223 

Bonaparte. — Do you believe this thunder to be the work 
of the children of men ? Allah has caused it to be placed 
in my hand by the genius of war. 

Ibrahim. — We recognise by His works Allah, who sent 
you. Would you conquer without the permission of Allah ? 
The Delta and all the neighbouring countries resound with 
your miracles. 

Bonaparte. — A celestial car will ascend by my orders to 
the clouds ; and the lightning will descend to the earth by 
a wire as soon as I command it.^ 

Solhnan. — And the great serpent which issued from the 
column of Pompey on the day of your triumphal entry 
into Alexandria and was withered up — was this not a 
prodigy operated by your hand ? 

Bonaparte. — Lights of the century, you are destined to 
see still greater marvels ; for the days of regeneration have 
arrived. 

Ibrahim. — The divine unity regards you with an eye of 
predilection, adorer of Jesus, and renders you the supporter 
of the children of the prophet. 

Bonaparte. — Mohammed, has he not said, '* Every man 
who adores God and does good, no matter what his 
religion, shall be saved " } 

Soliman, Mohamed, and Ibrahim (all bowing together). — 
He has said it. 

Bonaparte. — And if I have tempered, by orders from on 
high, the pride of the Vicar of Jesus, by diminishing his 
terrestrial possessions, in order to heap up for him celestial 
treasures, tell me, was it not rendering glory to God whose 
mercy is infinite ? 

Mohamed {embarrassed^. — The Mufti of Rome was rich 
and powerful ; but we are poor. 

Bonaparte. — I know that ; do not be alarmed. You 
have been weighed in the balance of Balthazar, and have 

^ Franklin and Montgolfier were both to be pressed into the 
service. It is true that the latter had already succeeded against the 
Austrians at Fleurus. 



2 24 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

been found light. This pyramid, then, did not contain 
any treasure } 

Soliman, — None, O lord, we swear it by the holy city 
of Mecca. 

Bonaparte. — Evil, three times evil to those who search 
for perishable riches, and who covet gold and silver, which 
resemble dross. 

Soliman, — You have spared the Vicar of Christ, and have 
treated him with clemency and kindness. 

Bonaparte. — He is an old man whom I honour, but he 
has done wrong in condemning all Mussulmans to eternal 
fire ; and Allah forbids intolerance. 

Ibrahim. — Glory to God and to his prophet, who has 
sent you among us to stimulate the faith of the weak, and 
to open the doors of the seventh heaven to the faithful. 

Bonaparte. — You have spoken rightly, most zealous 
muftis ; be faithful to Allah, the sovereign master of the 
seven marvellous heavens ; to Mohammed, his vizier, who 
passed through all the heavens in a night. Be the friends 
of the Franks and Allah ; Mohammed and the Franks will 
recompense you. 

Ibrahim, — May the prophet himself place you on his left 
hand on the day of resurrection, after the third sound of 
the trumpet. 

Bonaparte. — Let him who has ears to hear listen ; the 
hour of resurrection has arrived for all people who groan 
under oppression. Muftis, imauns, mollahs, dervishes, 
calenders, tell this to the people of Egypt. Encourage 
them to join us in finishing to annihilate the Beys and 
the Mamelukes ; favour trade with the Franks in your 
various provinces and in their efforts to reach the ancient 
country of Bramah ; offer them depots in your ports, and 
drive out the islanders of Albion, accursed among the sons 
of Jesus; such is the will of Mohammed. The treasures of 
industry and the friendship of the Franks will be your 
reward until you ascend to the seventh heaven and sit 
beside black-eyed houris, always young and always 



THE' MOHAMMEDAN RELIGION. 225 

maidens, and repose under the shadow of Lama, whose 
branches will offer to all true Mussulmans everything 
they desire. 

Soliman {inclining), — You have spoken like the most 
learned of moUahs. We repose faith in your words ; we 
will serve your cause, and may God hear us. 

Bonaparte. — God is great, and His works are marvellous. 
Salutations and peace be to you, most holy muftis.^ 

'* i2th August^ 1798." 

To GENERAL MARMONT. 

" Cairo, 2%th August, 1798. 

'^ I have received your letter of the 7th Fructidor. I 
flatter myself that you will be able to send us the greater 
portion of our artillery. . . . You may remember our bat- 
teries of Toulon, and how little dangerous the English are 
by land. '2 Artillery, with red-hot cannon balls, served with 
sangfroid, is terrible against vessels. 

" Our affairs here are improving every day. Go and see 
the Sheik El Messiri on my behalf; tell him among other 
things of the manner in which we celebrated the fete of the 
prophet ; that three or four times by decade I hold confer- 
ences with the chiefs of the law and the principal cherifs of 
Cairo, and that no one more than myself is persuaded of 
the purity and sanctity of the Mohammedan religion. 

*' Bonaparte/' 

^ Speaking to Madame de Remusat, at Boulogne, Bonaparte thus 
excused the idea he had conceived of adopting the Mohammedan 
faith :— 

" After all, circumstances might have induced me to turn Mussul- 
man. It would have been a sign-post ; but I should have reached the 
Euphrates first. A change of religion, inexcusable for the sake of 
private interests, becomes comprehensible where immense political 
results are involved. Henri IV. was right in saying, ^ Paris is welt 
worth a mass.^ Do you think the Empire of the East, and perhaps 
the subjection of the whole of Asia, were not worth a turban and loose 
trousers ? The state of feeling in the army was such that it would have 
undoubtedly lent itself to this joke." 

2 Marmont had reason to doubt this afterwards in Spain. 

VOL. I. Q 



226 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

On the same day, writing to General Menou, Bonaparte 
said — ^^ I cannot approve too highly of the dinner you 
gave to the sheiks of the country. We celebrated the 
fete of the prophet here with an amount of pomp and 
fervour which almost merited me the title of saint." 

When at the camp of Boulogne, Bonaparte confided to 
Madame de Remusat that he had some idea at this period 
of writing a Koran of his own, of assuming the turban, and 
of riding into the desert on an elephant ; but the Moslems 
in Egypt were never deceived by the professions of a 
prophet who extended his protection to such dogs as 
Copts and Jew^s. 

To THE DIRECTORY. 

"Cairo, Wi September, 1798. 

" A Portuguese squadron composed of four vessels of war 
and two frigates arrived before Alexandria on the 29th 
August, and joined the squadron of cruisers left behind 
by the English. . . . Render us justice, Citizen Director, 
for this impertinence on the part of the Queen of Portugal. 
In order to get to Lisbon, there is no ocean to be crossed. 
.... If we could close the port of Lisbon to the English, 
they would have to come from London to Alexandria 
without casting anchor. Besides, this would not fail to 
occupy their attention. We might procure at Lisbon the 
means for reorganising our fleet. 

'' I am awaiting news from Constantinople [whither he 
thought Talleyrand had been sent]. I cotild not possibly 
retur7i to Paris in October^ as I p7'07nised, but the delay will 
only last a few months. All is going on well here ; the 
country is subdued, and is becoming accustomed to us. 
The rest must be the work of time. All the institutions 
which can accelerate the march of events are in active 
operation. . . . Since my departure I have not received a 
single letter from you or from any minister or person who 
interests me. . . . Never did colony offer greater advan- 
tages. I have no doubt that by means of Egypt you will 



TREATMENT OF EGYPT. 2 2/ 

be in a position to make any terms you wish with England. 
Mistress of Egypt, France would be in the long run mistress 
of India. The Cabinet of London is well aware of this. 
In a fortnight I will send you my brother (Louis) who will 
give you all the information you may desire. 

'' Bonaparte." 

Bonaparte never forgot nor forgave the insult of the 
Queen of Portugal. Several years afterwards, when first con- 
sul, he wrote to Talleyrand, saying — '*If the King of Spain 
objects to occupy one of the provinces of Portugal, Lucien 
(then ambassador at Madrid) may release him from this 
task on condition of the King of Portugal handing us over 
the three vessels which blockaded me at Alexandria." 

As for the country becoming accustomed to the French, 
that was a gross falsehood in the sense Bonaparte applied 
the term " accustomed." The resistance on the part of the 
inhabitants was never interrupted ; oppressors and oppressed 
fought against the common enemy. The Correspondence 
contains page after page of letters and orders for the 
burning of villages, for summary executions, for the se- 
curing of hostages, for making severe examples. Of a 
truth the French army soon more than justified the terrible 
reputation by which it had been preceded. And this was 
the manner in which a neutral country was treated, in- order 
to punish England, and to threaten our communications 
with India ! 

Ever anxious to remove blame from his own shoulders, we 
find Bonaparte returning to the subject of the battle of the 
Nile, and calumniating a gallant officer, if not intentionally, 
at all events in the most reckless manner. 

To GENERAL KLEBER. 

'^ Cairo, \otli September, 1798. 
''.... As for the conduct of Rear-Admiral du Chayla, 
it would have been glorious for him to have fallen on his 
quarter-deck Hke Petit Thouars. But what deprives him 

Q 2 



2 28 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

of all chance of recovering my esteem, is his cowardly 
conduct with the English since he became their prisoner. 
There are men who have no blood in their veins. He 
will have to listen every evening to the English getting 
drunk upon punch, and drinking to the shame of the 
French navy ! He will be disembarked at Naples as a 
trophy for the lazzaroni. It would have been better 
for him to have remained a prisoner on board an English 
ship, and to have asked no favour. O'Hara, who was a 
vulgar man, when he was taken prisoner at Toulon, and 
asked what he wished, replied, ' To be left alone, and to 
owe nothing to pity.' Kindness and good treatment only 
honour the conqueror ; they dishonour the conquered, who 
ought to show reserve and pride, 

'' Bonaparte." 

What a pity it was that the Emperor Napoleon did not 
remember these fine sentiments when he was at St. Helena 
annoying the world with his petulance ! As a matter-of- 
fact, Rear-Admiral du Chayla fought in the most gallant 
way, and insisted on continuing to fight his ship after being 
dangerously wounded, and when only three guns remained 
in a condition to reply to the fire of the enemy. He was 
complimented by the Minister of Marine. 

In one of the letters intercepted by the British cruisers 
we find Tallien, who was in Egypt, writing to his wife, the 
fair Carrabus, in a different strain to Bonaparte, and saying 
among other things : — 

"When you receive this letter it will be already known 
without doubt in France that our squadron has been 
defeated by the English. We are all here in the greatest 
consternation. I am unable to give you any details, because 
we do not as yet know them in a positive manner ; what is 
unfortunately only too certain is, that the superb vessel 
U Orient was blown up during the battle. Being placed on 
an eminence overlooking the sea, we were eye-witnesses of 
this awful spectacle. The battle lasted over twenty-four 



THE REPUBLICAN NEW YEAR. 229 

hours ; the English must have suffered very much. We 
are ignorant as to the number of vessels we have lost. 
I venture to hope that the alarming rumours which 
are afloat may not be confirmed. Admiral Brueys was 
killed, as well as Ducheyla, and a number of other 
heroes (not Duchayla). 

'' One cannot at the first moment form an opinion as to 
the causes of this disaster, afflicting to every good French- 
man ; on the contrary, it is necessary that one should use 
every endeavour to repel calumny, which neither respects 
misfortune nor the ashes of the dead. . . . We leave to- 
morrow for Cairo ; we shall be the first to announce this 
afflicting news to Buonaparte, who, I hope, will take a just 
view of his position, and support with courage this first re- 
verse of fortune. I confess I am uneasy as to the effect 
that this news will produce in France." 

THE REPUBLICAN NEW YEAR, 

PROCLAMATION TO THE ARMY. 

" Cairo, \st Ve^idemiairey Year VI L 
(22nd September, 1798.) 
" Soldiers, we celebrate the first day of the year VII. of 
the Republic. 

" Five years ago the independence of the French people 
was menaced ; but you took Toulon ; this presaged the 
ruin of our enemies. 

" A year afterwards you beat the Austrians at Dego. 
The next year you were on the summits of the Alps. . . . 
Who would have thought you would now be on the banks 
of the Nile .? 

'* From the Englishman, celebrated in arts and com- 
merce, down to the hideous and ferocious Bedouin, you 
attract the attention of the world, &c. 

*' Soldiers,, your destiny is superb, because you are 
worthy of the great things you have done, and of the 
opinion formed of you, &c. 

'' Bonaparte." 



230 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

ORDER OF THE DAY. 

" Cairo, 'i\th September^ 1798. 
'^ . . . Numerous flying columns march through the 
villages of the provinces of Damietta and of Mansourah, in 
order to inflict severe punishment on the chiefs of the 
revolt, and to visit those unfortunate persons who have 
been led astray by the writings and false promises of 
Ibrahim Bey, with exemplary vengeance. 

'' Bonaparte." 

On the 9th of the Republican month we find Bonaparte 
issuing this order of the day— 

" Jean-Baptiste Lenati, Benedite, and Frangois Sala, 
accused and convicted of having cut bunches of dates in a 
Turkish garden, have been condemned, in accordance with 
the law of the 21st Brumaire, to be marched up and down 
the camp, in the midst of a detachment, twice a day, 
carrying ostensibly the bunches of dates, having their 
tunics turned inside out, and wearing on their breast a 
placard with the word ' Maraudeur' written on it." 

This example of severity in the matter of a few dates 
does not appear to have had much effect. 

We have seen how poor Korai'm had his head cut off 
because he refused to pay the price at which Bonaparte 
valued it. 

To GENERAL BERTHIER. 

"^ Cairo, 6M October, 1798. 
'' You will order General Manscourt to send the mer 
chants of the Mamelukes who have arrived at Alexandria, 
to Cairo. An inquiry will be held to find out if these 
merchants have received any advances. 

*' You will also order the General to seize the property 
of Hassan-Allah, in order that we may repay ourselves the 



FRENCH CONSULS. 23 I 

40,000 medins he owes to Koraim. As for the brother of 
Korai'm, his property should not be confiscated, as he is 
not yet accused of anything. 

'' Bonaparte." 

Very little progress was made in gaining the affection of 
the Egyptians, in spite of all the cajolery to which Bona- 
parte had recourse. Like the people in Italy, they preferred 
their old masters to their new one. This want of sympathy 
for the soldiers who were to free them from the tyranny of 
the Beys was exhibited by the Egyptians on every oppor- 
tunity ; and no Frenchman could stray from his column 
without being massacred. 

To THE DIRECTORY. 

'' Cairo, ^th October^ 1798. 

''. . . I send you my brother (Louis) with the stan- 
dards taken from the Turks and Mamelukes. . . The 
customs of this country are not ours ; it will require a long 
time for this people to become used to them. However, 
every day they know us better. 

'' The Porte has nominated Djezzar pasha of Acre and 
General-in-chief of all Syria. He has replied to none of 
the overtures I have made him. Our consuls ^ have been 
everywhere arrested, and the Ottoman Empire resounds 
with the noise of war. . . This country swarms with 
ferocious Arabs. All the tribes united muster 12,000 
cavalry and 50,000 infantry. . . The soil is the most 
beautiful in the world, and the position as interesting as 
it is decisive, with regard to India." 

After dwelling at length on the political situation, asking 
for news about Spain, Russia, Germany, Turkey, and the 
expedition, to Ireland, and demanding reinforcements, 
Bonaparte added : 

^ Consuls at Tripoli, Tunis, Algiers, and Morocco, all thrown into 
irons. 



232 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

" We want for nothing here ; we are fortifying all the 
most essential points, and we are full of health, strength, 
and gaiety." 

However, money was scarce, for we find Napoleon 
writing two days later to Citizen Poussielgue — 

*' It is indispensable to get money as quickly as possible 
so as to pay the troops for the 3rd decade of Vendemiaire : 

'' 1st. Pay into the chest the remainder of the money 
for the cotton. 

^' 2nd. Sell the coffee derived from the merchants who 
did business with the Beys. 

" 3rd. Sell for ready money the incense, muslin, and 
elephants' teeth found in a house, of which the inventory 
was recently taken. 

'' Lastly, hasten the payment of the contributions still 
due. Bonaparte." 

On the 17th October Bonaparte rendered an account to 
the Directory of his various operations, and gave a graphic 
description of the intrepidity of the enemy's cavalry, which 
galloped close up to the French squares, and died after 
having flung ^' their hatchets, pistols, and guns at the heads 
of our men. . . Here (at Sediman), as at the battle 
of the Pyramids, the soldiers reaped a considerable booty, 
hardly a Mameluke upon which they found less than 500 
louis." And, in fact, French soldiers who had turned their 
bayonets into fishing-hooks were to be seen on the banks 
of the Nile, angling for defunct Mamelukes, who had been 
driven into that river and had perished. The rich booty 
offered by the enemy reconciled the French soldiers to 
Egypt, and quelled insubordination, which was on the 
point of assuming dangerous proportions. 

To GENERAL MARMONT. 

"Cairo, 17/A October, 1798. 
" That intriguer, Abdallah, the steward of Mourad Bey, 
passed through El Choarah three days ago, going in the 



MOURAD BEY. 233 

direction of Alexandria. I wish you could catch him. I 
would give 1,000 crowns for him — not that he is worth 
that, but in order to make an example. It is the same 
man who went on board the vessel of the English Admiral. 
The Arabs might be spoken to ; they would do a great 
deal for 1,000 sequins." 

'' Bonaparte." 

Mourad Bey was a most implacable and ubiquitous 
enemy, and even his steward's head would have been 
acceptable. 

On the 27th October Bonaparte furnished the Directory 
with an account of the revolt at Cairo, during which his 
aide-de-camp Sulkowski and Greneral Dupuy perished. To 
General Reynier he wrote on the same date, saying tran- 
quillity had been perfectly re-established at Cairo. " Every 
night we cut off thirty heads, and a great many chiefs (sic). 
. . Punish the different Arab tribes which have revolted 
against you. Trj/ and obtain some horses and hostages. The 
best way to punish the revolted villages is to capture the 
Sheik-el-Beled, and to cut off his head, for everything 
depends on him/' Bonaparte also informed General 
Lanusse, the same day, that the diligence of Damietta had 
been attacked, and had its throat cut [sic) in the province 
of Guelyoub, adding — " Try and get hold of the chiefs and 
cut their heads off." On the 27th, too, General Berthier 
was ordered to arrest the Sheik-el-Beled of El Ekhsas — 
" and, in case he has run atway, four of the principal 
inhabitants of the village which fired on our boats." 

Cairo was punished in the most merciless manner. On 
the 2 1st October Bonaparte wrote to General Bon to put 
to the sword every armed person he met ; and the next 
day to Berthier — ** Be so good as to order the commandant 
to cut the throats of all the prisoners who were taken with 
arms in their hands. They must be taken to-night to the 
banks of the Nile, between Boulak and Old Cairo, and 
their headless trunks thrown into the river." A large 



234 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

number of peasants in the neighbourhood of Cairo, who 
had taken part in the revolt, were decapitated ; and one 
morning a long string of donkeys laden with sacks and 
escorted by soldiers halted in the middle of the Ezbekieh. 
When a crowd had assembled the sacks were opened, and 
the multitude saw with horror and affright the heads of the 
massacred peasants roll to the ground. 

These orders are not to be found in the correspondence. 

In the midst of numerous despatches directing the 
severest measures of repression, it is a relief to find an order 
which, had it been observed, would have reflected some 
credit on the Commander-in-Chief It appears Hke an 
oasis in the desert. 

To GENERAL BERTHIER. 

" Cairo, d,th November, 179S. 
" The barbarous custom of inflicting the bastinado on 
men supposed to be in the possession of important secrets 
ought to be abolished. It has long been recognised that 
this manner of examining men, by putting them to torture, 
produces no good effect. The unfortunate wretches say 
everything that comes into their heads, &c. Consequently 
the General-in-chief forbids the employment of this method, 
which is contrary both to humanity and to reason. 

"Bonaparte." 

Citizen Guibert, a young officer of guides, having been 
told off for a mission to the English Admiral, received the 
following instructions : — 

''You will hand the Admiral, in a careless way, the 
different Egyptian papers and copies of the Decade. You 
will try to obtain some European papers. You will give 
him to understand that I frequently receive news from 
Constantinople by way of land, and that there is no truth 
in the rumour of a Russian squadron blockading Corfu. 
You will tell him, as if by inadvertence, which will be set 



CONTEMPLATES GOING TO SYRIA. 235 

down to your youth, that I send to France every day, that 
several of my aides-de-camp have been despatched, and, 
among others, my brother who left twenty-five days ago. If 
he asks where they start from, you will say you d6 not know, 
but that ray brother started from Alexandria. . . . You will 
tell him that if he has any difficulty in procuring water, 
you know it to be my intention to furnish it ; you will 
relate that before Mantua, knowing that Wurmser had a 
great number of sick, I sent him a large quantity of 
medical stores, a piece of generosity which much aston- 
ished the old Marshal [and of which he never heard] ; also 
that I sent him every day a dozen oxen, &c., &c. ! 

" Bonaparte." 

Bonaparte was exceedingly anxious for news. His 
communications with Europe were almost completely cut 
off, and he knew little or nothing of what was passing at 
home, for his land communications had been utterly 
destroyed since the Barbary powers had turned against 
him. His brother Louis, however, was fortunate enough 
to escape the British cruisers and to reach France. 

To AMED pasha, GOVERNOR OF LEIDEH. 

^' Cairo, 19//^ Nove7nber^ 1798. 

" I do not wish to declare war if you be not mine 
enemy ; but it is time that you explain yourself. If you 
continue to harbour Ibrahim Bey on the frontiers of 
Egypt, I shall regard that as a mark of hostility, and I 
shall go to Acre. . . . 

" Bonaparte." 

The fact is that Bonaparte had long determined to carry 
his arms into Syria, but he was always glad of a pretext 
which would look well in a proclamation, and justify an 
attempt should it turn out unsuccessful. Writing to the 
Director}^ on the 21st November, Bonaparte said : — 



236 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

" The Porte has dismissed the Pasha of Egypt, and has 
nominated the ex-Pasha of Damascus in his place. The 
Porte appears to have written to me several times, hut all 
the letters have been iritercepted by the English. . . . We 
have no news from Europe since the arrival of Lesimple, 
that is to say since the i8th Messidor — nearly five months 
ago — and we are becoming anxious. ..." 

To GENERAL BERTHIER. 

" Cairo, 2nd December, 1798. 

" Order Citizen Deriot to march with twenty-five 
troopers, at 2 A.M., to fort Sulkowski, to pick up thirty 
men of the 22nd in garrison there, and with this force to 
enter the village of El Matarzeh, where it is indispensable 
he should arrive an hour before daybreak, in order to kill 
some Arabs. . . . He will return along the Nile, and will 
study the locality so as to be able to form another ambush 
the day after to-morrow. 

" Bonaparte." 

To CITIZEN POUSSIELGUE. 

" Cairo, 7M December, 1798. 

" Considering the loss we have experienced in the sale 
of her diamonds, the wife of Mourad Bey must be made 
to pay 8,000 talari within five days. 

" Bonaparte." 

And this was the way in which Bonaparte revenged 
himself on the gallant and indomitable Mameluke leader 
fighting for faith and country. 

To GENERAL BERTHIER. 

" Cairo, %th December, 1798. 

" Will you make known to the doctor and the surgeon- 
in-chief that I am dissatisfied at the facility with which they 



CHILDREN TO BE SEIZED. 237 

give certificates to return to Europe, to individuals whom 
cowardice, inconstancy, and the absence of love of duty, 
induce to leave the army before the end of the 
campaign. . . . 

" Bonaparte." 



This desire to escape from Egypt was manifested even 
in the headquarters staff, and but for the want of means of 
transport it is quite possible that the general camp, 
pioneers and all, would have insisted upon returning to 
France. 

ORDER OF THE DAY. 

" Cairo, S^A December^ 1798. 
*' . . . When a village revolts, in order to punish it, the 
General in command of the district must seize on all the 
children between the ages of twelve and sixteen ; a list of 
these children must be sent to the General-in-chief, who 
will ^wfii orders respecting their ulterior destination. 
When a village deserves to be burned, care should be 
taken to carry off all the children. 

'' Bonaparte." 

It is curious to find the Imperial Commission of i860 
publishing an order which should stamp its author with 
infamy. But then there were so many infamies committed 
throughout this campaign that it would have been useless 
to eliminate one or two. 

Bonaparte busied himself a good deal with what was 
passing at Constantinople at this moment. He despatched 
Citizen Beauchamp thither on a mission, to demand the 
release of French prisoners in Syria, to reassure the 
Sultan with regard to the expedition to Egypt, to declare 
that the French would aid Turkey against the two 
Emperors who were bent on dismembering his empire, 
and, above all, to see how things were going on at home, 



238 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

and to learn the intentions of the Porte. Bonaparte wrote 
the most friendly letter to the Grand Vizier, and also 
addressed himself to " Citizen Talleyrand, ambassador at 
Constantinople," who was, however, at that period, 
Minister of Foreign Affairs. 

Citizen Beauchamp was thrown into the Seven Towers, 
and two Turkish armies, one in Syria and another at 
Rhodes, prepared to assert the sovereign rights of the 
Porte in Egypt. 

To CITIZEN YOUKKS^ Lieutenant of Chassettrs. 

" Cairo, 18/// Deeejnber, 1798. 

" Citizen Foures is ordered to start by the first diligence 
from Rosetta for Alexandria, where he will embark on 
board a brig. . . . He will be the bearer of the accom- 
panying despatches, which he will open only at sea, and 
in which he will find his instructions. I hand him 3,000 
francs to cover the expenses of his mission. 

" Bonaparte." 

There is a little romance attached to the above letter. Junot 
having told Bonaparte of several infidelities committed by 
Josephine, theGeneral-in-chief determined to console himself 
by establishing a harem ; but not finding the native women 
to his taste, he took for mistress an exceedingly pretty and 
lively young woman — Madame Foures. As her husband 
was in the way he was ordered to France with despatches, 
but he fell into the hands of the English, who, suspecting 
the real state of the case, set the unfortunate sub-lieutenant 
ashore at Alexandria. Citizen Foures could obtain no 
redress at headquarters beyond a divorce, which was pro- 
nounced by court martial. The favour of Madame Foures 
did not last beyond the campaign. On his return to Paris 
Bonaparte pardoned Josephine's frailties, and having taken 
Pauline Foures from one husband gave her to another, 
although the first spouse wished to have her back. 



MOUNT SINAT. 239 

ORDER. 

" Cairo, 19//^ December, 1798. 

*' Bonapiarte, General-in-chief, wishing to favour the 
convent of Mount Sinai — 

" 1st. In order to transmit to future races the traditions 
of our conquest ; 

'' 2nd. Through respect for Moses and the Jewish nation, 
whose cosmology retraces the earliest ages ; 

^' 3rd. Because the convent of Mount Sinai is inhabited 
by well-educated and polished men, living in the midst of 
the barbarity of the desert ; 

"Orders, &c., &c." 

And the good monks were afforded protection against 
the Bedouins, and granted several religious and commercial 
privileges, while Bonaparte signed his name in the register 
alongside of that of Mohammed. 

To THE INHABITANTS OF CAIRO. 

" Cairo, 21 st December, 1798. 

" Perverse men led some of you astray ; they have 
perished. God has ordered me to be clement and mer- 
ciful to the people; I have been clement and m^erciful 
towards you. 

" I was angry with you for revolting. During two 
months 1 deprived you of your divan ; but to-day I 
restore it. Your good conduct has effaced the stain of 
your revolt. 

^* Cherifs, ulemas, preachers in the mosques, make 
known to the people that those who deliberately declare 
themselves my enemies shall find no refuge in this world 
nor the next. . . . Make known to the people that since 
the w^orld w^as created it was written that after having 
destroyed the enemies of Islamism and overthrown the 
cross, I should come from the far west to fulfil the duty 
imposed upon me. Show the people that in the holy book 



240 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

of the Koran, in more than twenty passages, what is 
happening was foreseen, and what is to happen is 
explained. 

'' Bonaparte." 

Bonaparte was about to invade Syria with five divisions, 
leaving Desaix in Upper Egypt, Marmont at Alexandria, 
and Dugua at Cairo. It was hoped that with its divan 
restored the inhabitants of Cairo would remain quiet in 
the absence of the General-in-chief. Hence this sudden 
affability. 



CHAPTER V. 

TPIE YEAR 1799. 

This year was filled with stirring events. The French 
had 40,000 men in Egypt under Bonaparte. Scherer com- 
manded 50,000 in Italy ; Jourdan 40,000 on the Danube ; 
Massena 30,000 in Switzerland ; Bernadotte 30,000 on the 
Rhine; Macdonald 20,000 in Naples, and Brune 10,000 
in Holland. The coalition had over 300,000 men under 
arms. In March Jourdan was defeated by the Archduke 
Charles, and Germany was lost. In April Scherer was 
beaten by Kray, and after losing the lines of the Adige, 
the Mincio, and the Adda was superseded by Moreau, who 
in his turn was defeated at Cassano. In June Macdonald, 
who had hurried away from Naples, lost the stubborn- 
fought battle of Trebia, where 12,000 men fell on each side. 
In August Joubert, who had succeeded Moreau and 
Macdonald, was beaten on the desperate field of Novi by 
Suwarrow, and was himself slain. The loss was 7,000 
men on each side. Grouchy, after receiving fourteen 
wounds, still waved the French flag over his head while 
lying on the ground. The Chouans were abroad in Brittany 
and La Vendee. It was only in Holland and in Switzer- 
land that the French arms were successful. A British 
force 12,000 strong under Sir Ralph Abercromby landed 
in Holland, took the fort of Helder, repulsed a combined 
Dutch and French attack, and captured the whole Dutch 

VOL. I. R 



242 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

fleet in the Texel. However, disasters followed. No 
sooner had the Russian contingent under General Her- 
mann arrived than the French gained the battle of Bergen. 
The English who formed the left and centre carried all 
before them under Dundas 'and Pulteney, and made 1,000 
prisoners, but the Russian wing having been completely 
routed, the Duke of York was obliged to retreat, and to 
evacuate Holland. In Switzerland Massena inflicted on 
Korsakow a crushing defeat which prevented Suwarrow 
from crossing the Alps, and carrying out his darling scheme 
of marching on Paris. Soured by disappointment the 
veteran returned to St. Petersburg and died of a broken 
heart. These French successes had an immense influence 
on passing events. They drove the Czar, who traced the 
reverses of his troops to English and Austrian treachery, 
into the arms of France. 

In February Bonaparte marched into Syria. In March 
Corfu was taken by a combined Russian and Turkish 
force. In May the siege of St. Jean d'Acre had to be 
raised. In June Bonaparte returned to Egypt. In July 
he defeated the Turks at Aboukir, in August he sailed 
for France, and in October he landed at Frejus, and set 
out for Paris. In November he turned out the chambers, 
and in December he became first consul. 

It will be remarked from the first letter we quote for 
1799 that General Bonaparte was anxious to open negotia- 
tions, and to obtain some positive information as to what 
was passing in Europe. 

To GENERAL MARMONT. 

^' Cairo, ^th January^ i799- 
*^ . . . I authorise you to send a parlefnentaire to the 
English ; you will tell them that having learned they have 
the plague on board, you desire to render them all the 
assistance dictated by humanity. Send an extre'^nely 7tpright 
man who is not a great talker^ and who has good ears. . . . 
a man having the rank of captain, who will take with him 



MEDICi^L OFFICER PUNISHED. 243 

Egyptian gazettes, and who must try and obtain European 
ones in exchange. Direct the officer to go on board alone 
so that there may be no gossip on his return. . . . 

" Bonaparte." 

ORDER OF THE DAY. 

" Cairo, 8/^ January^ 1799- 
" Any medical man who leaves his ambulance in presence 
of the enemy, without orders, or who refuses his aid to 
persons suffering from contagious maladies, shall be 
arrested. . . . BONAPARTE." 

And it was directed that Surgeon Boyer, who had refused 
to attend to plague-stricken patients, should be dressed as 
a woman and paraded through the streets of Alexandria 
with a placard on his back with these words — '' Unworthy 
to be a French citizen ; he fears death." After which 
Citizen Boyer was to be put in prison and sent back to 
France by the first ship. 

A balloon was sent up on the anniversary of the battle 
of Rivoli, but it does not appear to have greatly impressed 
the Moslem mind. 

To GENERAL VERDIER. 

" Mansourah, \Wi Januarj/, 1799. 
" . . . . The Sheik of the village of Myt-Ma'sarah is very 
culpable ; you will threaten him with the bastinado unless 
he tells you where other Mamelukes and other guns are 
hidden. . ,. . After which you will cut off his head and 
expose it with an inscription to the effect that he suffered 
for having hidden guns. BONAPARTE." 

To GENERAL BERTHIER. 

" Cairo, 25//; January ^ i799- 
** You will set out on the lOth Pluviose for Alexandria, 
and embark on board the frigate La Courageuse, . . . 

" BONAPARTE." 
R 2 



244 'i'lIE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

Lengthy instructions followed, but Berthier at the last 
moment made up his mind to remain with the army which 
was about to undertake active operations. The fact of his 
contemplated return to France was due to his violent love 
for a Madame Visconti whom he had carried off from her 
husband in Italy. This singular and extravagant passion 
lasted till death, although under the Empire Bonaparte 
forced his chief of the staff to marry a German princess. 
The three lived together and got on very happily until 
poor Berthier either fell from, or was pushed out of, a 
window, and died, after having deserted his old master and 
taken service under Louis XVIIL 

To THE IMAUN OF MUSCAT. 

"Cairo, 25/^ Jattuary^ I799- 
'' I write you this letter to inform you of the arrival of the 
French army in Egypt. As you have always been friendly 
you must be convinced of our desire to protect all the 
merchant vessels you may send to Suez. I also beg you 
will forward the inclosed letter to Tippoo Sahib by the 
first opportunity. 

''Bonaparte." 

To TIPPOO SAHIB. 

" Cairo, 2^th January^ 1799- 
" You have already been informed of my arrival on the 
shores of the Red Sea, with a numerous and invincible 
army, animated with the desire of delivering you from 
the iron yoke of England. 

*' I hasten to inform you of my desire to receive news 
with regard to the political position in which you find 
yourself placed. I even desire you will send to Suez some 
competent person who enjoys your confidence, and with 
w^hom I can confer. 

''Bonaparte." 

Bonaparte had great hopes of obtaining the alliance 
of Tippoo, who had on more than one occasion made 
overtures to France. In 1788 Louis XVI. received an 



CITIZEN TIPPOO. 245 

embassy from Tippoo which was feted at Versailles, but 
owing to the state of the French exchequer could obtain 
neither men nor money. This failure so irritated the 
Nabob of Mysore that he had two of his ambassadors 
executed on their return. In 1791 Tippoo once more 
applied to the French king for assistance, offering to pay 
all expenses if his majesty would only send him 6,000 
men. But Louis XVI. at that moment had lost all 
authority, and was bewailing the error he had committed 
in favouring the independence of the United States merely 
to thwart England. In 1797 poor Tippoo, sadly shorn of 
his glory, saw another chance of revenge. A Jacobin club 
had been established at Seringapatam composed of French- 
men who had been driven from Pondicherry. They swore 
hatred to all royalties and tyrants with the exception of 
Citizen Tippoo, the Victorious, An embassy was once more 
sent to France, but led to a very trifling result. As to the 
overtures made by Napoleon, nothing came of them, for 
his letter fell into the hands of a British cruiser. In April 
1799 Seringapatam was stormed, and Tippoo Sahib's 
eventful career brought to a close. 

In a letter which Nelson wrote to George Baldwin, Esq., 
Consul at Alexandria, he said — ^^ I am persuaded of the 
intention of the French to attempt driving us from Egypt 
in concert with Tippoo Sahib," and he added that even 
at the risk of a war we should get possession of his 
sea coast. 

To GENERAL BERTHIER. 

" Cairo, 26th January^ 1799. 

" You will place under arrest the officers and sub-officers 
of the detachment charged to bring in the flock of sheep 
captured from the Arabs by General Murat, which detach- 
ment not only did not prevent pillage, but was the first to 
pillage. You will send the names of the officers and men 
to the paymaster, so that the value of the sheep stolen 

may be stopped. 

" Bonaparte." 



246 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

And on the same day Bonaparte wrote to Berthier that 
200 soldiers who had lost their sight were to be sent to 
Rosetta. An English brig having gone ashore, and sixteen 
of the crew having been saved, he had great hopes of 
obtaining news from Europe. 

ORDER. 

"Cairo, \st February, 1799. 
"The house occupied by General Lan nes together with 
twenty feddans of land is conceded to him for ever." 

General Murat and General Dommartin received similar 
gifts. The conquest of the country was regarded as 
permanent. 

To THE DIRECTORY. 

'^ Cairo, ^th February, 1799. 

" Several generals and officers having informed me that 
their state of health will not permit them to serve any 
longer in this country, I have given them leave to return to 
France. . . . The arrival of a vessel at Alexandria with 
letters for me from Genoa and Ancona has just been 
announced. This is the first news from Europe for eight 
months. ... I hope to learn what is passing on the 
Continent so as to be able to shape my conduct in 
consequence. 

'' Bonaparte." 

To THE directory. 

"Cairo, loth February, 1799. 
*' The ship which arrived at Alexandria merely brought 
me a letter from the consul at Ancona saying that all was 
quiet in Europe and in France." 

Bonaparte made no mention of the letters from Genoa 
which were probably written by Joseph and Lucien, whose 
efforts to keep the General acquainted with what was going 
on were incessant. 



THE SUEZ CANAL. 247 

The report continued : — 

'' I am having a corvette built at Suez, and I have a 
flotilla of four despatch boats cruising in the Red Sea. . . . 
Ibrahim Pasha and other pashas threaten to invade Egpyt. 
I start in an hour to meet them. We shall have to pass nine 
days in a desert without grass or water. I have collected 
a sufficient number of camels and hope we shall want for 
nothing. ... In the operation I am undertaking I have 
three objects in view. ist. To insure the conquest of 
Egypt by constructing a strong fort beyond the desert, &c. 
2nd. To force the Porte to give explanations. 3rd. To 
deprive the English cruisers of the supplies they draw 
from Syria. 

'' I am accompanied in this expedition by the Mollah, 
who, after the mufti of Constantinople, is the most revered 
man in the Mussulman Empire. . . . The Ramazan, which 
commenced yesterday, was celebrated by me with great 
pomp. I performed the same functions that the Pasha 
used to perform. General Desaix is 160 leagues from 
Cairo making excavations among the ruins of Thebes. . . . 
By the first courier I will send you the levels of the 
Suez Canal, the vestiges of which are perfectly 
preserved. . . . 

" Bonaparte." 

A long letter which Bonaparte wrote to Desaix on the 
same date shows that the ship which reached Alexandria 
must have brought him an ample stock of news. He in- 
formed Desaix that the Congress of Rastadt was still 
sitting ; that recruiting was brisk ; that Jourdan com- 
manded the army of the Rhine and Joubert that of Italy ; 
that when it was known in London that he had landed in 
Egypt, all England went mad ; that the English had 
declared war against the Italian Republics, and were 
blockading Malta ; that General Humbert had managed to 
double Scotland and to land in Ireland, &c. 



248 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

On the 6th February Bonaparte set out for Syria, 
having little idea of the obstacles he was destined to 
encounter, and which proved stronger than his own 
imperious will. 



To THE SOLDIERS OF KLEBER'S DIVISION. 

^^The Wells of Zaouy, 2 \th February^ 1799. 
** It is not by mutinying that you will remedy matters : 
it would be better for you to bury your heads in the sand 
and to die with honour, than to indulge in disorder and to 
violate discipline." 

Kleber had lost his way in the desert for three days, and 
a number of soldiers in despair had flung away their 
muskets and become insubordinate. 

On the 27th February Bonaparte wrote to Desaix, 
saying : — 

" We have crossed seventy leagues of desert which is ex- 
ceedingly fatiguing ; we had brackish water and often 
none at all. We ate dogs, donkeys, and camels. There 
has been a horrible wind blowing for the last three days, 
and it is pouring with rain. The sky is overcast, and the 
climate resembles that of Paris. ..." 

This letter was from Gaza. 

On the 5th March Bonaparte, evidently in bad humour, 
was at Jaffa. There he gave General Berthier orders : — 

'' Put Adjutant-General Grenier under arrest for not 
having sent camels with the head-quarters convoy, and 
afterwards having sent them without orders. 

" Put Major Faure of the artillery under arrest for 
naving sent a man for tools without an escort. 

'* Put the canteen man of the Guides ^n^i the three bands- 
men under arrest for having allowed their horses to be 
stolen by the Arabs." 



BONAPARTE IN SYRIA. 249 

Aide-de-camp Beaumont, a surgeon, and other officers 
and men were to be punished in a similar manner for 
neglect of duty, and although the bastinado had been 
condemned on principles of reason and humanity — 

" The officer in command of the convoy is authorised to 
administer the bastinado to the camel-drivers who fail to 
keep their appointed rank, and to the carters who do not 
picquet their horses at the places indicated." 

Bonaparte was most prolific in his appeals to the various 
civil and religious authorities in Syria, assuring them of 
his friendly intentions. He thus addressed : — 

The sheiks, ULEMAS, AND COMMANDANT OF 
JERUSALEM. 

"Jaffa, ()th March, 1799. 
" God is clement and merciful ! 

*^ I make known to you that I have driven the Mame- 
lukes and the troops of Djezzar Pasha from the provinces 
of Gaza, &c. ; that it is not my intention to wage war 
against the people ; that I am the friend of the Mussul- 
man ; that the inhabitants of Jerusalem can choose between 
peace and war ; if they choose the first let them send 
delegates to the camp of Jaffa to promise never to do 
anything against me. If they are mad enough to prefer 
war I shall march against them. They ought to know that 
I am terrible as the fire of heaven for my enemies, but 
clement and merciful towards the people, and those who 
desire to be my friends. 

" Bonaparte." 

On the same day he remonstrated with Djezzar Pasha 
and said : — 

" In a few day I shall march upon St. Jean d'Acre. But 
why should I shorten the life of an old man whom I do not 
know } What are the few leagues more, compared with 
the country I have conquered .'* And since God has given 



250 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

me the victory I wish to follow his example and to be 
clement and merciful, not only towards the people but towards 

the great 

" Bonaparte." 

To THE DIRECTORY. 

"Jaffa, 13/A March, 1799. 
" On the Sth Fructidor I sent an officer to Djezzar the 
Pasha of Acre : he received him badly and sent no reply. 
On the 29th Brumaire I wrote to him again, and he cut off 
the bearer's head. The Frenchmen arrested at Acre have 
been cruelly treated.'' 

Bonaparte then entered into a detailed account of his 
various operations — the capture of El Arysch, the battle 
of Gaza, "where we charged the enemy by the heights 
which look on Hebron, and where Samson carried off the 
gates ; " and the siege of Jaffa, which place was taken by 
storm. 

" At five o'clock/' he wrote, " we were masters of the 
town, which during twenty-four hours was handed over to 
pillage and all the horrors of war, which never appeared to 
me so hideous ; 4,000 of the troops of Djezzar were 
slaughtered, and among them 800 gunners and a portion 
of the inhabitants." And, *' The Republican army is 
master of Palestine. 

*' Bonaparte." 

To Marmont Bonaparte wrote concerning this hideous 
massacre : — 

'' The capture of Jaffa was very brilliant, 4,000 of Djez- 
zar's best troops and the best gunners of Constantinople 
were slaughtered " — not to talk of 2,500 prisoners massacred 
in cold blood three days after the capitulation.^ This 

^ Bonaparte afterwards attempted to justify this barbarous act on 
the grounds that he could not feed these prisoners, and that, had he 



EXCHANGE OF PRISONERS. 25 I 

tragedy enacted, Napoleon marched upon St. Jean d'Acre, 
laying siege to that place on the i8th March. 

To M. SIDNEY SMITH. 

"Acre, ^yd March ^ 1799. 
" The General-in-Chief Bonaparte commanding the 
armies of the French Republic begs me to inform you that 
in virtue of the cartel of exchange between the two nations, 
he sends you the English prisoners captured at Hayfa, &c., 
&c. He hopes you will send to his camp the French 
prisoners, especially those taken on board the last vessels, 
on condition that they shall not serve against the troops of 

allowed them to go, they would have fought against him again. 
Lanfrey dismisses both these pleas, saying that Napoleon, who seldom 
lost fifty men in his battles in Egypt, had little to fear from these 
captives, and that, as he took large quantities of provisions at El 
Arysch, Gaza, and Jaffa, there would have been no difficulty in 
feeding them. Several officers refused to have anything to do with 
the execution. 

General Bon commanded the firing party, and his orders (the 
original exists) were to shoot the prisoners — " taking precautions so 
that none of them can escape." 

At the same date (23rd March) we find Nelson writing : — 

To THE HON. WILLIAM WYNDHAM. 

"CULLODEN, Palermo, i^rd Ma7'ch^ 1799. 

" My dear Sir, — The ambassador of Buonaparte has been inter- 
cepted by my friend Troubridge on his way to Constantinople, and 
amongst other articles of his instructions is a very important one — viz., 
an offer to enter on terms for quitting Egypt with his army. This 
offer is what I have long expected the glorious battle of the Nile 
would produce ; but it was my determination from that moment never, 
if I could help it, to permit a single Frenchman to quit Egypt. 

" Sir Sidney Smith, who has the present command of the squadron 
off Alexandria, thinks differently from me, and will grant passports 
for the return of that part of the French army which God Almighty 
permits to remain. I have therefore thought it highly proper to send 
Sir Sidney Smith the order, of which I transmit a copy, for I con- 
sider it nothing short of madness to permit that band of thieves to 
return to Europe. . . . 

" Nelson." 



252 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

his Britannic Majesty. The General-in-Chief begs me to 
thank you for having sent him back one of his couriers," 
&c., &c. 

The courier was the unfortunate Foures 1 There was 
therefore a touch of irony in his expression of gratitude. 
The relations between Bonaparte and Sir Sidney Smith 
became much less cordial afterwards. 

ORDER OF THE DAY. 

" Acre, 8//? Aprils ly^^c). 
''.... Soldiers go out on the roads and carry off the 
provisions which the peasants are bringing to market ; 
several complaints have been made against the men of 
Kleber's division. For several weeks past there has been 
no bread in the market because that which the peasants 
were bringing in was taken from them by force, or at an 
arbitrary price ; several peasants were beaten and not 
paid. . . , 

'' Bonaparte." 

In a long letter to Marmont, Bonaparte, on the 14th 
April, gave an account of how matters were progressing at 
St. Jean d'Acre. 

" There are a large number of English and emigres in 
the place," he wrote, " and you may imagine how anxious 
we are to enter it. I should bet for ist Floreal (20th 
April). . . . General Caffarelli, my aides-de-camp Duroc, 
and Eugene de Beauharnais, General Valentin, Sanson, 
Say, and Souhait are among the wounded." 

The gallant Caffarelli who had already lost a leg, had 
his arm amputated, and died. 

Highly indignant with that ''grain of sand," as he con- 
temptuously called Acre for presuming to stand in the way 
of his destiny and to destroy his illusions, he wrote to 
Berthier — 



SIR SIDNEY SMITH. 253 

"The admiral of the English squadron cruising before 
Acre having been barbarous enough to embark some 
French prisoners on board a ship from Constantinople, 
tainted with the plague, on the pretext of sending them to 
Toulon but really to make away with them ; besides, this 
man, being a kind of lunatic, you wall inform the com- 
manders along the coast that it is my intention not to hold 
any communication with him. . . . 

" Bonaparte." 

What Sir Sidney Smith really did was to aid in the 
defence of Acre ; to publish proclamations in Turkish to 
the effect that Bonaparte had been sent to Egypt because 
the Directory feared him and his army ; to call the 
General a renegade, and to offer to meet him in single 
combat. 

On the loth May, Bonaparte sent an account of his 
various battles to the Directory, pointing out the rapidity 
with which the army had passed the desert. 

'* Murat/' he said, ''had gained possession of Safed, 
whose inhabitants showed him the spot where Judith had 
killed Holofernes." 'The Combat of Nazareth* ended 
in the defeat of the enemy, who had crossed the Jordan 
coming from Damascus. * The Combat of Canaan ' seems 
to have been drawn. At the 'Combat of Mount Tabor' 
the cavalry of the enemy behaved with great gallantry, 
but was finally dispersed. At St. Jean d'Acre matters 
wxre not going as well as could be wished. 

Bonaparte wrote — 

" The season is too far advanced ; the end I had in 
view has been accomplished (?) My presence is required 
in Egypt. I have placed a battery of twenty-four guns so 
as to destroy the palace of Djezzar, and the principal 

monuments in the town Having reduced Acre to 

a heap of stones, I shall recross the desert, so as to be 
ready to receive any Turkish or European army which 



2 54 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

may attempt to land Since crossing the desert I 

have lost 500 men killed and 1,000 wounded. The enemy- 
has lost 15,000. 

"Bonaparte." 

This despatch would hardly lead one to believe that 
Bonaparte retreated from before Acre only after fourteen 
unsuccessful attempts had been made to carry the place by 
storm, after his troops had suffered severely, and after 
several of his lieutenants had remonstrated with him. 
Nothing could equal his fury at being foiled by land as 
well as by sea. 

After giving orders that the troops should sharpen their 
bayonets on all three edges, and informing General Dugna 
that Generals Bon, Lannes, and Duroc had been wounded, 
and that Ventura his interpreter was dead, Bonaparte 
issued one of his usual bombastic proclamations, remind- 
ing the army of the great things it had accomplished. To 
explain his retreat he said : — 

" A few days more, and you would have captured the 
Pasha in the very middle of his palace ; but at this season 
the capture of Acre would not be worth the loss of some 
days ; besides, the gallant fellows who would have perished 
are required for more essential operations. 

** Soldiers, we have a career of dangers and fatigues 

before us 

''Bonaparte." 

Everything was now prepared for a retrograde move- 
ment. We see by the various orders how the sick and 
wounded were to be removed ; how General Dommartin 
was to throw some of his guns into the sea at dead of 
night, and how five spans of an aqueduct and the pillars 
of a mosque were to be blown up. Junot was ordered to 
burn all the mills on the river Jordan and to sell or destroy 
all the corn. Having caused Mount Carmel to be occupied, 



RETREAT FROM SYRIA. 255 

orders to commence the march back to Egypt were issued 
for the 20th May, and everything was to be done at Cairo 
to give the return an air of triumph. A great show was 
to be made with captured standards and prisoners. The 
siege of St. Jean d'Acre cost the French 4000 men. 

To GENERAL BERTHIER. 

"Jaffa, 26//^ May, ij()g. 
*' Bonaparte, General-in-Chief, seeing the consequences 
of the embezzlements of the magazines under present 
circumstances, and the necessity of making a severe 
example of a crowd of depredators, orders," &c. 

The accused were to be tried by drum-head court- 
martial, and summarily shot if found guilty. 

On the 27th May Bonaparte gave an account of his 
glorious achievements to the Directory, and related that 
when he was on the point of carrying Acre, spies, deserters, 
and prisoners informed him that the plague was raging in 
the place. Under these circumstances its capture was 
renounced. On the 3rd Prairial, the army, he mentioned, 
encamped among the ruins of C^sarea, in the midst of the 
remains of marble and granite columns, which proved the 
truth of what Josephus had written concerning that city. 

On the 15th June, Bonaparte, in a letter to Desaix 
announced his arrival at Cairo. " I salute and love you,'* 
he concluded ; adding, as P.S. : '* Wear a flannel waistcoat ; 
that is the only way to avoid getting sore eyes." 

An officer who took part in this retreat has left a striking 
picture of the horrors with which it was accompanied. 
The fearful thirst, excessive heat, and want of water de- 
moralised the army, destroying all generous sentiments. 
" I saw officers who had suffered amputation,'' he wrote, 
'' thrown out of their stretchers though they had paid the 
men to carry them. Sick and wounded were abandoned. 
All the villages, hamlets, and towns on the line of march 
were burned. Those who presided over these disasters. 



256 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

seemed, by spreading desolation round them, bent on 

revenging their reverses The beautiful sky was 

obscured by the smoke of our continual conflagrations." 
And in one of the intercepted letters published in England 
may be found such paragraphs as these : — '' If the army 
had known what awaited it, not one of us would have 
embarked ; death would have been a thousand times 
preferable to the misery we endure. We are surrounded 
by enemies on all sides. In the space of a week 600 men 
have died of thirst. Discontent is general ; never was 
despotism carried to such a pitch. Soldiers have been 
seen to kill themselves in presence of the General-in-Chief, 
exclaiming, ' This is your work.' " 

Bonaparte, violently irritated with Sir Sidney Smith, 
whom he now called a captain of fire-ships, in an order of 
the day of the i8th June, said : — 

*' During the absence of the army in Syria, the com- 
mander of the British squadron so far forgot himself, and 
what he owed to honourable soldiers, as to propose to 
General Dugna to take advantage of a moment, when a 
portion of the army was beyond the desert, to return to 

France The General-in-Chief will make known to 

the army all the officers, who by their conduct, forget they 
are the citizens of the first nation in the world, which, after 
having subdued the Continent, has, by founding its power 
on the Nile, sapped the gigantic strength of England in 
India; a nation, for which he has only one fear, that of 
arriving too quickly at the maximum of glory and 
prosperity, after which, in the natural order of events, 
everything declines." 

From this period all the despatches of Bonaparte show 
that Egypt continued in a most unsettled condition. One 
despatch gives an account of fighting at Thebes and eleven 
other places, and although villages which revolted were 
burned to the ground and their inhabitants put to the 



A GERMAN REPUBLIC. 257 

sword, this did not prevent other villages from revolting 
and false prophets from preaching resistance. On the 
28th June Bonaparte asked for reinforcements. 

" The army/' he said, " has lost 5,344 men since it 
landed, but the Syrian campaign has had a great result ; 
we are masters of the whole desert, and have disconcerted 
the plans of our enemies for this season." And then, '^ If 
you could send us 15,000 men we might go anywhere, even 
to Constantinople. We require 2,000 men for our cavalry, 
with carbines, saddles, &c. ; 6,000 foot soldiers ; 600 
hussars ; 500 gunners ; engineers, masons, carpenters, 
sappers ; 20,000 muskets ; 40,000 bayonets ; 3,000 sabres ; 
6,000 brace of pistols ; 10,000 pioneering tools. If you 

cannot send this succour you must make peace We 

are very anxious for news from France // ivill be 

the happiest day in our existence zvhen we hear of the 
establishment of the first Republic in Germany, 

''Bonaparte." 

The above despatch shows what Bonaparte, driven back 
into Egypt, thought of the prospects of the expedition two 
months before he left the country. 

The Cherif of Mecca having applied for passports for the 
Fath-el'Bahri and three other vessels, bound for India, 
Bonaparte directed Earthier to make them out in the 
following form : — 

" The French Republic makes war against the pashas 
and the ministers of the Grand Turk, who, are influenced 
by Russia, the eternal enemy of Islam, but the French 
Republic is the most sincere friend of the descendant of 
the califs, of the chief of the Mussulman religion, the 
greatest and the most perfect of princes, the Cherif of 
Mecca. 

" In consequence the General-in-Chief orders," 8z:c., &c. 

VOL. I. S 



258 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

To THE DIVAN OF CAIRO. 

'^ list July ^ 1799. 

"There is no other God but God, and Mohammed is His 
prophet ! 

*' To the Divan of Cairo, chosen among the wisest, the 
most educated, and the most enlightened persons. May 
the grace of the Prophet be on you ! 

" I write you this to inform you that .... eighty 
vessels presented themselves before Alexandria, but being 
warmly received they have anchored at Aboukir and are 
disembarking troops. My intention is, when they are all 
disembarked, to attack them, to kill all who refuse to 
surrender, and to grant others life in order to bring them 
here as prisoners, which will be a fine sight for Cairo. 

'' Those who brought this fleet here hoped to join the 
Arabs and the Mamelukes in pillaging and devastating 
Egypt. There are on board this fleet, Russians who hold 
in horror those who believe in the unity of God, because, 
according to their lies, they believe there are three gods. But 
they will soon perceive that the number of gods does not 
constitute force, and that there is only one, the Father of 
Victory, clement and merciful, always fighting for the good 
and confounding the machinations of the wicked, who, in 
His wisdom, decided that I should come to Egypt to 
change the state of affairs, and to substitute for a regime 
of devastation, a regime of order and justice. In thus 
acting. He gives a proof of His omnipotence, for what 
those who believed in the Trinity were never able to 
accomplish, we have done — we who believe that a single 
God governs nature and the world. 

'' Bonaparte." 

In the next letter, Bonaparte said that General Abdallah 
Menou, who had embraced Islamism, and taken to himself 
a Turkish wife (from whom he afterwards obtained a 
divorce), was going to Rosetta. 



THE BATTLE OF ABOUKIR. 259 

On the 25th of July, Bonaparte gained the Battle of 
Aboukir, utterly defeating the Turkish army which had been 
landed, without cavalry, in the hope of capturing him and 
his host ; seized with panic, thousands of Turks were driven 
into the sea and drowned. 

ORDER OF THE DAY. 

"Alexandria, 1st August, i-j^^, 
" The name of Aboukir was bitter to every Frenchmen : 
the 7th Thermidor (25th July) has rendered it glorious. The 
victory which the army has gained will accelerate its return 
to Europe. We conquered Mayence and the Rhine 
boundary by invading a portion of Austria. We have 
now re-conquered our establishments in India and those of 
our allies. By a single operation we have placed in the 
hands of the Government the means of obliging England, 
in spite of her maritime triumphs, to sign a peace glorious 
for the arms of the Republic. 

" Bonaparte.'' 

However the Aboukir of Bonaparte in no way wiped 
out the effect of the Aboukir of Nelson. 

To GENERAL DESAIX. 

" Cairo, wth August, 1799- 
"I have not been well satisfied, Citizen General, with 
your operations during the movements which have just 
taken place. No matter what events arise, nothing should 
hinder a soldier from obeying orders ; talent in war con- 
sists in overcoming the obstacles in the way of an opera- 
tion, and not in causing it to fail. I mention this for your 
future guidance. 

'' Bonaparte/' 

On the same day, in an exceedingly long letter, Bona- 
parte informed Desaix that he had received some English 
papers, that several battles had been fought, that Jourdan 
had been beaten at Feldkirch, and had re-passed the Rhine ; 

S 2 



26o THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

that Scherer who had assumed the command of the army 
of Italy, had been beaten at Rivoli, and driven back across 
the Mincio and the Oglio ; that the Russians had not yet 
arrived, that Prince Charles commanded against Jourdan, 
and Kray against Scherer ; that Jarvis and Nelson were in 
the Mediterranean with fifty vessels ; that Toulon and 
Carthagena were blockaded ; that Corfu had been taken 
by famine, but that Malta had been revictualled for two 
years. And in the next letter Marmont was directed to 
take measures for the defence of Boghaz as "M. Smith is 
capable of any act of madness/' 

It was M. Smith who had sent Bonaparte the English 
papers referred to in the hope that the ill news they con- 
tained would still further discourage the army under his 
command. 

ORDER. 

*' Cairo, i6tk August, ijgg. 
** The commanders of the provinces will make known in 
an Arabic circular, to be sent to all the villages, the pomp 
with which th.Q fete of the Prophet has been celebrated at 
Cairo. No celebration within the memory of man was so 
brilliant. All the troops in Cairo, lighted by a great 
number of torches, went to visit the Sheik El-Bekry. The 
General-in-Chief dined with him, as also Mustapha Pasha, 
and all the principal officers captured at Aboukir. The 
General-in-Chief was present at the reading of several 
Arab poems written in honour of the Prophet ; after 
which, in the midst of the grand sheiks, he said prayers 
and heard the genealogy of the Prophet recited. The 
Pasha and the Turkish prisoners were overcome with 
surprise at the respect shown by the French for Islamism 

and the law of the most holy of Prophets 

'' Bonaparte." 

The next day Bonaparte wrote once more to the Grand 
Vizier to try and bring the war to a close. He asked — 



RUSSIA AND TURKEY. 26 1 

" By what fatality comes it that France and Turkey are 
at war when their frontiers are so distant from each other, 
when France is the enemy of Russia and the Emperor, 
and the Porte the enemy of Russia and the Emperor ? . . . 
Is not your Excellency aware that Russia is the real enemy 
of Islam ? The Emperor Paul I. has become Grand Master 
of Malta, that is to say he has sworn to wage war against 
the Mussulmans. Is he not chief of the Greek Church? 
.... France, on the contrary, has destroyed the Knights 
of Malta, and has broken the chains of the Turks who 
were in slavery. Thus the Sublime Porte has declared 
war against its true friends, and has entered into an alliance 
with its veritable enemies. The Sublime Porte therefore 
which was the friend of France as long as that power was 
Christ'an, declares war directly France by her religion 
approaches the Mussulman belief Russia and England 

have deceived the Sublime Porte My army is 

powerful, well disciplined, and supplied with everything 
which can render it victorious over all other armies wxre 
they as numerous as the sands of the sea." And many 
arguments were employed to induce the Sultan Selim to 
open negotiations with France, and to checkmate the per- 
fidious designs of Russia and Austria. " Say but the word," 
added Bonaparte, *'we will close the Black Sea to Russia, 
and cease to be the plaything of that hostile Power we 
have so many reasons to hate. It is not against the 
Mussulmans that the French armies wish to display their 
tactics and their courage ; but, on the contrary, united some 
day zvitJi the Mnssidmans, they zvill drive cut the commo7t 

ene^ny 

" Bonaparte." 

It was certainly an anomaly, which has not escaped the 
historian, to see the Czar, or Patriarch of the Greek church, 
assume the office of Grand Master of the Knights of Malta, 
and take the Pope, whom he anathematised in his eccle- 
siastical capacity, under his protection ; to see the Grand 



262 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

Master, whose first vow was to exterminate all Mussulmans, 
allied with the Turks ; and Russian battalions decorated 
with the Catholic cross of St. John of Jerusalem, the 
schismatic cross of St. Andrew, and the Protestant cross 
of St. Anne, fighting beside the standard of the Prophet to 
re-establish the Pope in Rome, Catholicism in France, and 
Islamism in Egypt. 

To GENERAL KLEBER. 

"Alexandria, 22nd August, 1799. 

" You will find inclosed, Citizen General, an order to take 
over the command in chief of the army. The fear of the 
English cruisers returning makes me hasten my departure. 
I take with me Berthier, Lannes, Murat, Andreossy, and 
Marmont, the citizens Monge and Berthollet. 

** You will see by the inclosed English papers that we 
have lost Italy, and that Mantua, Turin, and Tortona are 
blockaded." 

In the event of not receiving reinforcements and of 
suffering a loss of 1,500 men by plague before the end of 
the year Kleber was authorised to come to terms with 
Turkey even on the condition of evacuating Egypt. Bona- 
parte added — " You know how to appreciate, as well as 
any one, the importance to France of such a possession as 
Egypt. The Turkish empire, which is menaced with ruin 
on all sides, is crumbling to pieces to-day, and the evacua- 
tion of Egypt by France would be a misfortune all the 
greater because we should live to see that fine province in 
other European hands." 

A great deal of advice was then tendered. If the Porte 
replied to the overtures for peace, Kleber was to persist in 
assuring the Sultan that France never had any intention of 
taking Egypt from the Porte. As for the internal govern- 
ment of Egypt, Kleber was told to lull fanaticism to sleep 
until it could be eradicated. Further on, Bonaparte said — 
'' I applied several times for a company of actors ; I shall 



END OF THE EGYPTIAN CAMPAIGN. 263 

take particular care to send you some. This article {sic) 
is very important for the army, and also for the purpose of 
effecting a change in the customs of the country. 

*' The important command you are about to assume will 
enable you to display those talents with which nature has 
favoured you. . . . 

" Accustomed to see the recompense of the trials and 
labours of life in the opinion of posterity, I abandon Egypt 
with the greatest regret. 

''The interest of the country, its glory, obedience, the 
extraordinary events which are passing there, have alone 
decided me to return to Europe." 

To GENERAL KL^BER. 

"Alexandria, 22nd August, 1799. 
*' The General Kleber is ordered to assume the command 
in chief of the army of the east, the Government having 
summoned me home. 

'' Bonaparte." 

Thus terminated the Egyptian expedition as far as 
Bonaparte was concerned. It had ended in failure. At 
St. Helena he said that he was aware that the expedition 
would end in a catastrophe as soon as the English had 
destroyed his fleet at Aboukir, and, by way of excusing 
his departure, he added — '* There was nothing to detain me 
in Egypt ; it was an exhausted enterprise. Any general 
was good enough to sign a capitulation which time would 
render inevitable." The noble-minded Kleber was spared 
this task, which fell to the lot of Abdallah Menou. 

We have seen how the expedition arose, because Bona- 
parte wished to leave France for a time, and because the 
Directory wished to get rid of a powerful protector and his 
army. It has been asserted by most writers that Bonaparte 
deserted his army in Egypt and returned to France without 
orders. This charge is true, to a certain extent, true as far 
as Bonaparte himself was concerned. The government 



264 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

had sent orders for his return. Admiral Bruix had been 
instructed to use every effort to bring him back, and nego- 
tiations had been opened with the Porte for the evacuation 
of Egypt, on the condition of means being furnished to 
General Bonaparte and his army to return to France. A 
Greek, of the name of Vittallis, had been charged with the 
task of conveying the orders of the Directory to Bonaparte, 
and Vittallis was on his way to Egypt when he met Napo- 
leon at Aix. The General had therefore anticipated orders. 
What finally caused Bonaparte to accelerate his de- 
parture from Egypt was a packet of newspapers which 
Sir Sidney Smith had sent to him, enumerating the French 
reverses in Italy and on the Rhine. The British Commo- 
dore thought this intelligence would increase the dis- 
couragement which reigned in the French army, and per- 
haps lead to a capitulation. He little foresaw the real 
consequences of his act. 

Before leaving Egypt and his army, Bonaparte gave 
Kleber a rendezvous, but he hurried on board ship with- 
out waiting for him, and left his successor merely the 
written instructions already referred to. Kleber imme- 
diately wrote a re])ort to the Directory, in which he drew 
a mournful picture of the state of destitution in which the 
army had been left — neither arms, powder, lead, nor 
clothing — dysentery and ophthalmia rife. ** General Bona- 
parte," he added, "a few months after our arrival, ex- 
hausted the extraordinary resources, and levied war con- 
tributions which the country could not support. . 
However, at his departure, Bonaparte did not leave a sou 
or any equivalent object in the military chest. On the 
contrary, he left arrears for 12,000,000 francs, which 
under present circumstances, means more than a year's 
revenue. For the army alone the arrears amount to over 
4,000,000 francs. . . ." It would be difficult to say what 
effect this despatch would have created had it been re- 
ceived by the Directory. Captured by a British cruiser, 
however, it did not reach Paris until Kleber had been 



THE ENGLISH IN EGYPT. 265 

assassinated, and when Bonaparte was First Consul and 
master of the situation. 

When at St. Helena, Bonaparte wrote a series of obser- 
vations on the Egyptian campaign, under "General Menou, 
and the operations of the English. He said that the Eng- 
lish Cabinet undertook the war with 6o,ooo men — 34,000 
Englishmen and 24,000 Turks. These forces were drawn 
from England, India, and other places, and the plans were 
most defective. ... As a proof of this, Bonaparte pointed 
out that the division from India reached Kosseir six 
months- after Abercromby had landed, that it never 
fired a shot ; that the reserve drawn from London 
and Gibraltar also reached Egypt six months after 
General Abercromby ; that the Capitan Pasha with his 
6,000 men arrived at Aboukir twenty days after Aber- 
cromby ; that the Grand Vizier crossed the desert only 
in May, instead of three months sooner. Consequently 
instead of having 60,000 men, Abercromby landed with 
19,500 Englishmen, destitute of everything. He had no 
horses for his artillery or for his cavalry, although he had 
passed two months at Malta and two months in Asia 
Minor (where he might have procured any number of 
animals) making preparations. ^' These faults," said the 
writer, " were committed by the cabinet which conceived 
the plan of campaign. They furnish a new proof of the 
bad state of English administration, which is the most 
defective in Europe.'^ 

Respecting the manoeuvres of General Abercromby, 
Bonaparte had a great deal to say. He was right in 
believing that once master of Alexandria, he would be 
able to persuade the French to accept the capitulation of 
El Ayrisch ; he ought not to have arrived before the 15th 
April, when he would have been able to surprise the city, 
and when he landed, instead of wasting four days and a 
half, he should have marched at once on Alexandria. 
He himself had immediately attacked the city w^th a mere 
handful of men, without waiting for his guns, " for it is 



266 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

a principle in war that the thunderbolt is preferable to 
the cannon/^ Admiral Keith, too, should have deceived 
the French by threatening Damietta. 

The operations of General Hutchinson (who succeeded 
Abercromby) were also sharply criticised by the imperial 
captive. He was blamed for '^ running after accessories 
when he was within striking distance of the heart. . . . All 
his operations should have been directed against Alex- 
andria, and he ought to have conquered Egypt without 
losing sight of the masts of his fleet." He was then blamed 
for moving so slowly, but Bonaparte admitted '^kat he 
thought the force under General Belliard twice as strong as 
it really zvas. 

The Emperor still more severely condemned the opera- 
tions of the French commanders — those of Generals Friant, 
Lanusse, and Lagrange ; and the conduct of Colonel Cava- 
lier was pronounced to have been so unjustifiable that he 
ought to have been brought before a court-martial. '' The 
Romans would have decimated his detachment," wrote 
the Emperor, adding, "It was their anxiety to return to 
France which led the soldiers to capitulate. ... It would 
be well to pass a law forbidding all communication with 
the enemy ; for our soldiers are so good-natured, and so 
ready to make friends, and our officers are so easily 
deceived, that foreigners perpetually make fools of them." 

The conduct of General Belliard was strongly censured. 
He thought he had 10,000 English troops in front of him 
at Cairo, whereas he had only 4,000, the remainder of the 
enemy's force being Turks and Bedouins. " He surren- 
dered the capital of Egypt," wrote the Emperor, " with 
its magazines, 400 guns, &c. , without firing a shot. It is 
true that the interests of the generals, the officers, and 
civil authorities were stipulated for with great care. Of 
these 14.000 men, 500 enlisted in the Mamelukes, and the 
remainder returned to France. The army brought home 
its standards, arms, fifty pieces of artillery, horses, an 
imjnense amount of baggage ^ and all the curiosities of the 



FRENCH OFFICERS IN EGYPT. 267 

country, . . . When officers consider it possible to escape 
from a critical position by means of a convention, every- 
thing is lost. Better would it be to confide the defence 
and the honour of the country to old women armed with 
distaffs.^ . . . The grief felt by the First Consul when he 
heard of this capitulation [which he knew to be inevitable] 
may be easily imagined. His first impulse was to have 
all the generals who took a part in the council of war 
arrested. . . . But on second reflections the First Consul 
changed his mind. General Belliard was a very distin- 
guished of!i:cer; he had rendered important services during 
the campaign ; at Areola he had covered Bonaparte with 
his body, and had received a bullet destined for his chief. 
.... He had been abandoned., without orders, by General 
Menou (who had succeeded Kleber) whose irresolution and 
want of military talents had destroyed all hope and all 
confidence. The generals who signed the capitulation 
were distinguished officers. Would it have been well, 
seeing the brilliant situation of the Republic when peace 
was concluded with Russia, the Porte, and with England, 
to have cast a shadow over its glory, and to have afflicted 
the nation by opening an inquiry which would have dis- 
honoured brave men who had deserved well of the country ? 
Was it not preferable to close one's eyes, and to attribute 
all that had happened to fatality, and to the absolute 
incapacity of the Commander-in-Chief? For, no matter 
what the energy of the Government, an army of lions 
commanded by a deer will never be an army of lions." 

Naturall}^ all the operations of Abdallah Menou were 
severely censured, and he was written down as an 
unmitigated blunderer ; but this did not prevent his 
employment under the empire as governor of Piedmont 
and Venice. As for General Belliard, he afterwards dis- 
tinguished himself at Ulm and Austerlitz. He fought 
against us in Spain ; he marched to Moscow and back ; 

^ In the days of Joan of Arc the English sent the French a present 
of a flag, with a distaff embroidered on it. 



268 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

he lost an arm at Leipsic; he served Louis XVIII. 
as niajor-f^eneral of the army, on the abdication of 
Bonaparte ; he rejoined his old master on his return from 
Elba ; after Waterloo he was thrown into prison for a 
time, but instead of sharing the fate of Ney, was soon 
taken into favour once more. On the fall of Charles X. 
he was sent by Louis Philippe on a mission to Berlin, and 
he died at Brussels in 1832, while engaged in the formation 
of the new Belgian Government. 

That Bonaparte did not assemble a court-martial to try 
the generals who capitulated in Egypt is not astonishing, 
for the evidence would certainly have damaged his own 
reputition, and have brought to light matters which it 
was his interest to keep concealed. 

Some years afterwards (24th November, 1803) Napoleon 
wrote as follov/s to Talleyrand : — 

''Write in cipher to Citizen Lesseps that he ought to 
go to Cairo ; that he did wrong to show the letter of the 
Mamelukes to the Pasha of Cairo. ..... Let him tell 

Osman Bey that I received his letter and understood its 
contents ; that I like the Mamelukes because they are 
brave, and especial'y the Mamelukes of Mourad Bey, 
because they took our part and joined the French army ; 
that my intention is to favour and protect them, and that 
they can count upon this. Let him tell the widow of 
Mourad Bey that I have received her letter ; that I have 
given special orders to the French agents in Egypt to 
protect her ; that she has nothing to fear, and that she 
shall want for nothing, because Mourad Bey ended by 
becoming the friend of France. 

" Bonaparte.'' 

The fact is, that after the departure of Bonaparte, who 
had treated Egypt as Sallust treated Numidia, Mourad 
Bey, this modern Jugurtha, incensed at the reception he 
met with in the camp of the Grand Vizier Mustapha, who 



BONAPARTE LANDS AT FREJUS. 269 

was marching against the French, first of all retired from 
the scene, and then came to terms with Kleber, and aided 
that general in his operations against the Turks. Mourad 
remained the faithful friend and ally of the French, until 
carried off by the plague towards the close of 1801, and 
he was so deeply regretted b}^ his Mamelukes that they 
broke his sword and spear over his grave, considering 
no one else worthy to wield them after their beloved 
chieftain. 

It was on the night of the 22nd August that Bonaparte 
left Egypt with his staff. Managing, with his usual good 
fortune, to escape the British cruisers, on the 1st October 
he landed at Ajaccio, where he remained until the 7th, 
making himself thoroughly acquainted with the position 
of affairs on the Continent before venturing to continue 
his journe}^ On the 9th he disembarked safely at Frejus, 
and on the lOth he was at Aix, from which place he 
wrote : — 

To THE DIRECTORY. 

"Aix, \oth October, 1799. 
"Citizen Directors, — Since I left France I have 
received only one of your despatches, which reached me 
when I was before Acre. It contained the news of 
our successes at Naples, which made me conjecture an 
approaching war on the Continent. From that moment 
I considered that I should no longer remain absent from 
France. . . . Egypt, protected from invasion, is entirely 
ours." Then came a different excuse, that of the suc- 
cesses in the kingdom of Naples, for his return. *' I 
procured," added Bonaparte, "after several diplomatic 
conferences (i^), the English Gazettes up to the 6th June, 
by which I learned the defeat of Jourdan in Germany and 
of Scherer in Italy. I started at once with the Muiron 
and Carrhe, although bad sailers. I did not calculate the 
danger. It was my duty to be. where my presence was 
most necessary. Animated with these sentiments, I should 



270 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

have thrown my cloak around me and have left in a boat 
had I not had frigates. I have left Egypt well organised, 

under the orders of General Kleber 

''Bonaparte." 

Such was the letter in which Bonaparte explained his 
sudden return to France — a return which took the Directory 
by surprise, but which was hailed with delight by the 
nation. With regard to the successes of Championnet and 
the establishment of the Parthenopean Republic, Lanfrey 
has very clearly pointed out the reason of Bonaparte's 
apprehensions. Their immediate consequence was that 
the French armies found themselves called upon to defend 
a line which extended from Naples to Amsterdam, and 
which was vigorously assailed along almost its whole 
length. As for the reverses experienced by Scherer and 
other French generals, they had in a great measure been 
repaired before Bonaparte landed in France, and the 
Republic was safe from its foreign enemies. In Paris, 
however, there were nothing but plots and conspiracies ; 
but what most of the conspirators wanted was an un- 
scrupulous general. Applications had been made to 
Bernadotte and to Moreau, who afterwards boasted that 
he had refused the Dictatorship. Sieyes had founded 
great hopes on Joubert, and had given him the command 
of the army of Italy, so that he might acquire the neces- 
sary amount of glory. As Barras had given Josephine 
de Beauharnais to Bonaparte, so Sieyes gave Mile, de 
Semonville to Joubert, to attach him to his person and to 
the Republic. Unfortunately for Sieyes and fortunately for 
Bonaparte, Joubert was killed at Novi. The consequence 
was that Bonaparte, not long after reaching Paris, formed an 
alliance with Sieyes. A few days before coming to terms 
Sieyes had talked of having Bonaparte shot for his breach 
of discipline in leaving Egypt, while Bonaparte had pro- 
posed that Sieyes should be driven from the Directory in 
consequence of having sold himself to Prussia ! 



THE RUE DE LA VICTOIRE. 27 1 

The Directors soon became aware that the popularity of 
Bonaparte was too strong for them. He had been received 
with enthusiasm at landing at Frejus. He had made a 
triumphal march through France, and had been greeted 
with delight in Paris. His absence in Egypt, the uncer- 
tainty which had long reigned with regard to his fate and 
the fate of his army, and the conviction that he had been 
exiled by the Government, all served to heighten his 
popularity. His little house in the Rue de la Victoire 
was soon crowded with men of all parties seeking to win 
over the young General to their cause. Jacobins, Republi- 
cans, and Royalists received encouragement alike, and as 
Bonaparte afterwards confided to Madame de Remusat at 
the camp of Boulogne there v/as not a party in France 
which did not place faith in him. He soon ascertained 
that *' the pear was ripe " as he expressed it, and that he 
was the real master of France. All his rivals were out of 
the way. Hoche and Joubert were dead, Pichegru was a 
rebel, Moreau had been estranged and was willing to 
remain neutral, and Bernadotte, who had been removed 
from the War Office, was sulking, and had married Desiree 
Clary. Writing to Lucien Bonaparte, the future King of 
Sweden, then a staunch Republican, said in reference to 
the 1 8th Brumaire — "But is it for me to reproach you for 
not having imitated the great models of patriotism to 
be found in history, when I myself could yield to the 
entreaties of Joseph ? Why ? Because Joseph is the 
husband of Julie, the sister of my wife Desiree. See 
upon what slight things the destinies of a great Empire 
depend." 

Distrust and uncertainty everywhere reigned, and under 
these circumstances it was decided that the chambers 
should remove to St. Cloud in order that they might enjoy 
greater freedom. This did not prevent the chambers 
from being dispersed by Bonaparte at the head of his 
grenadiers, and thus perished the Constitution of the Year 
HI. which had formerly excited so much enthusiasm on the 



272 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

part of the General and the troops under his command. 
In achieving this result Bonaparte was powerfully aided by- 
several members of his family, by Joseph, by Lucien, and 
by Josephine, whose frailties had been pardoned. In fact 
Lucien by his courage saved the situation at a moment 
when the General, bewildered by the uproar and reproaches 
of the representatives of the nation, lost his head, and was 
dragged out of the chamber by his grenadiers, livid and 
fainting. Had Lucien not come to the rescue of his 
brother and harangued the troops, little more would 
probably have been heard of Bonaparte. 

The chief power now passed out of the hands of the 
Directory into those of three Consuls, Bonaparte, Sieyes, 
and Roger-Ducros. Before the end of the year the Con- 
stitution of the Year VIII. had created three consuls who 
were elected for ten years. The three Consuls elected 
were Bonaparte, Cambaceres, and Lebrun, but all the 
prerogatives were centered in the first Consul. This 
Constitution obtained the sanction of over 3,000,000 voters. 
Such is the brief sketch of the situation after the return 
of Bonaparte from Egypt. 



To CITIZEN LAPLACE. 

'^ Paris, \(^th October^ 1799. 
" I have received with gratitude, citizen, the copy of 
your fine w^ork {La Mecanique celeste) which you have just 
sent me. The first six months I can dispose of shall be 
spent in reading it. If you have nothing better to do, 
come and dine with me to-morrow. My respects to 
Madame Laplace. 

''BONAPARTE." 

No letter from the 19th October to the 9th November. 

On the 1 8th Brumaire (8th November), after the decree 
^which transferred the Corps Legislatif to St. Cloud, Bona- 
parte issued addresses to the Council of Elders, the 



ADMIRATION OF THE REPUBLIC. 273 

National Guard of Paris, and the army. In these 
addresses we find such phrases as the following : — 

" We desire a Republic founded upon true liberty, upon 
civil liberty, and the national representation, and we shall 
obtain it. I swear this in my own name and that of my 
comrades. . . . During two years the Republic has been 
misgoverned. You hoped that my return would put an 
end to so many evils ; you celebrated it with a unanimity 
which imposes upon me the obligations I am fulfilling. . . . 
Liberty, victory, and peace will replace the French 
Republic in the rank it formerly occupied in Europe, and 
which it lost, thanks to incapacity or treason." 

On the following day in a speech to the Council of 
Elders Bonaparte complained that he was already over- 
whelmed v/ith calumnies, that people spoke of Caesar, of 
Cromwell, and of a military government. If he had 
desired a military government, he asked, would he have 
lent his support to the national representation ? Since his 
return from Egypt, he said, he had been surrounded by 
intrigues. All the factions had tried to gain him over. " I 
am no intriguer,'' he added; "you know me; I believe 
I have given pledges enough of my devotion to the 
country." 

Speeches and proclamations were filled with the most 
liberal and Republican sentiments calculated to allay 
suspicion. Then came the following order of the day 
dated Paris, 20th Brumaire, Year VIII. 

" General Bonaparte is highl}/ satisfied with the conduct 
of the troops of the line, pensioners, and national guards, 
who yesterday, so fortunate for the Republic, showed 
themselves the real friends of the people ; he expresses 
his particular satisfaction to those brave grenadiers who 
covered themselves with glory in saving the life of their 
general when on the point of falling beneath the blows 
of representatives armed with poniards. 

"Bonaparte." 

VOL. I. T 



2 74 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

At the sitting of St. Cloud, Bonaparte, accused of violat- 
ing the law, had lost courage, had fainted, and had 
been carried out of the Chamber by his grenadiers, but 
the fact of any one having attempted to stab the general 
is very doubtful. Lucien Bonaparte, who saved the situa- 
tion by jumping on his horse and haranguing the troops, 
spoke of representatives armed with daggers and paid by 
England, but this was so much metaphor. Nor did any 
one see the twenty assassins who attacked the general, and 
pierced private Thome's uniform, and yet one reads in the 
Moniteicr of the 23rd Brumaire — " Thomas Thom6, 
genadier of the Legislative Body, who had the sleeve of his 
coat torn m protecting Bonaparte from the blow of a dagger 
aimed at him, dined on the 20th and breakfasted on the 
2ist with him. The citizeness Bonaparte embraced 
Thomas Thome, and placed a diamond ring, worth 2,000 
crowns, on his finger." 

In a note to the Minister of War, dated the 15th 
November, 1799, we find General Kleber officially nomi- 
nated to the command in chief of the army of the East. 
Some reinforcements were to be despatched to Egypt, and 
— '' You can also despatch a troupe of comedians. The 
Minister of the Interior will be able to furnish them. 

'' You will add 1,000 sabres, and 1,000 pair of pistols." 

The same day Bonaparte wrote to Citizen Laplace, 
Minister of the Interior, and Astronomer — 

'' The Consuls of the Republic charge me, Citizen 
Minister, to ask you, without loss of time, to compose a 
troupe of comedians for Egypt. It will be well to add 
some ballet girls. The Minister of Marine will provide 
the means of transport." 

In the midst of the gravest cares of state Bonaparte 
never neglected what appeared to many persons trivial 
details, but with the importance o{ which he was well 
acquainted. 



THE ARMY OF ENGLAND. 275 

To GENERAL JOURDAN. 

" Paris, 2\th November, 1799. 
" Citizen General, I have received your letter of the 29th 
Brumaire. Your feelings were hurt on the i8th. 

" Now that the first moments have passed I have the 
greatest desire to see the conqueror of Fleurus constantly 
on the road which leads to the organisation of true liberty 
and happiness. 

" No matter what your position, I beg you will never 
doubt the friendship I bear you. 

"Bonaparte." 

Bonaparte never got on well with Jourdan, who was the 
only marshal who did not receive the title of prince or 
duke. He was never forgiven his opposition on the 
1 8th Brumaire. 

On the 24th November, General Hedouville, commander- 
in-chief of the army of England (!), prematurely announced 
the suspension of hostilities in La Vendee, and on the 30th 
Bonaparte wrote thus to Berthier : — 

" The V/ar Minister, by special courier, will at once send 
the contents of the inclosed to the general-in-chief of the 
army of England, ordering him to adopt active measures 
against the rebels and Chouans. 

" Bonaparte." 

The " inclosed '' contained a report of a contemplated 
attack on Brest by the English. 

By a decree of the 28th November, 1799, we find that 
the Hotel des Invalides was not large enough to hold all 
the pensioners, and consequently "the ancient dwelling of 
the kings " was to receive a '' Republican destination'' In 
other words, the chateau of Versailles was to be placed at 
the disposal of the war minister for the benefit of wounded 
soldiers. Care was to be taken, however, that no works of 

T 2 



276 THE CORRESrONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

art were damaged. A couple of days afterwards Bona- 
parte signed a decree directing that the statue of Mars, 
''which came from Rome,'' should be placed under the 
dome of the Invalides — where his own remains now 
slumber — together with all the flags captured from the 
enemy. A list of the victories of the Republic was to 
be engraved upon marble tables. 



PROCLAMATION TO THE ARMY OF THE EAST. 

" Soldiers ! the consuls of the Republic often turn their 
attention to the affairs of the army of the East. 

" France is aware that your conquests will accelerate 
the restoration of her commerce and the civilisation of 
the world. 

'* All Europe watches you. 

" I am often with you in spirit. 

"No matter in what situation you are placed by the 
chances of war, you will always be the soldiers of Rivoli 
and Aboukir ; you will be invincible. 

'' Accord to Kleber the same unlimited confidence you 
had in me : he deserves it. 

*' Soldiers ! think of the day when, victorious, you will 
return to the sacred territory. It will be a day of glory 
and joy for the whole nation. 

" Bonaparte." 

DECREE. 

" The Consuls of the Republic, &c., decree — 

" I. That the emigres detained at Ham were wrecked on 
the coast of Calais. 

" 2. That they do not come under any law passed 
against the emigres. 

" 3. That it is contrary to the usages of nations to take 
advantage of a shipwreck in order to deliver to the just 
vengeance of the law unfortunate persons who have 
escaped the fury of the waves." 



LETTER TO KLEBER. 277 

And the imigrh in question were to be conducted to 
the frontier. 

It is much to the credit of Bonaparte that he at once 
abolished the infamous law of hostages, which had been 
passed while he was in Egypt. He himself threw open 
the doors of the Temple, and announced to the prisoners 
their liberty. At the same time the agents of the Govern- 
ment received orders to tolerate the presence of all emigre 
who remained quiet. Josephine, no doubt, had a good 
deal to say to these measures of clemency, which it was 
hoped would induce the Royalists to lay down their arms, 
and accept the new order of things. 

To GENERA.L KLEBER. 

" Paris, \Zth December^ 1799. 
"I have despatched several vessels to Egypt, Citizen 
General, and hope they have reached you. ... I send you 
a staff officer who will inform you of all that has passed. 
You will see it was high time for me to return to France. 
The events which have occurred here should be a new 
source of encouragement for 3^our troops. ... I dare not 
write even in cipher, for there are men in Paris and in 
London who decipher everything. Be assured that I do 
not lose sight of you. . . . Why is it that men like you 
cannot be in two places at once } 

*' Bonaparte." 

War with Austria appearing once more imminent, 
Bonaparte sent instructions to Moreau, who commanded 
the Army of the Rhine. 

**The Government," concluded this letter, "has entire 
confidence in the zeal of General Moreau and in his 
military talents, which ought, in the forthcoming opera- 
tions, to efface the shame cast on the French arms during 
the last campaign in Italy. 

" Bonaparte." 



278 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

On the 23rd December, Bonaparte informed the War 
Minister that he had arranged with the Minister of Finance 
to send a million francs to the army of Italy, and on the 
following day it was decreed that the 14th July (anniver- 
sary of the capture of the Bastille), and the ist Vende- 
miaire (foundation of the Republic), should be observed 
as national holidays. 

On the 29th December, Bonaparte addressed the fol- 
lowing letter to the King of England : — 

" Called by the voice of the French nation to occupy the 
post of first magistrate of the Republic, I deem it right, on 
assuming power, to inform your Majesty directly of this fact. 

*^ Ought the war, which for the last eight years has 
ravaged the four quarters of the globe, to be eternal ? Are 
there no means of extinguishing it ? 

" How can the two most enlightened nations in Europe, 
which are stronger and more powerful than their safety 
and independence require, sacrifice commerce, internal 
prosperity, and domestic happiness to ideas of vain 
grandeur ? How can they avoid feeling that peace is 
the greatest necessity as well as the greatest glory ? 

'' These feelings cannot be foreign to the heart of your 
Majesty, who governs a free nation for the sole purpose of 
rendering it happy. 

"Your Majesty will perceive in this overture nothing 
beyond my sincere desire to contribute eflficaciously, for 
the second time, towards a general pacification, by a 
prompt step, entirely confidential and divested of those 
forms which, necessary perhaps to disguise the dependence 
of feeble states, only reveal in powerful states a mutual 
desire to deceive each other. 

''France and England, by an abuse of force, can, un- 
fortunately, for a long time to come continue the struggle ; 
but I presume to say the fate of all civilised nations is 
connected with the end of a war which sets the whole 
world in a blaze. *' BONAPARTE." 



LETTER TO THE KING OF ENGLAND. 279 

The English Government refused to depart from the 
ancient forms established for the transaction of diplomatic 
affairs. The King of England did not enter into direct 
correspondence with the First Consul, and the British 
Cabinet refused to treat with a Government which de- 
pended on the life of a single man, unless it would abandon 
that system of unprovoked aggression from which Holland, 
Italy, Switzerland, and Egypt suffered. The above letter 
was written for France rather than for England, and to 
justify war rather than to secure peace. Such was the impres- 
sion of the British Parliament, which had no confidence in 
Bonaparte. In the Upper House Lord Grey asked: 
" Who concluded a treaty of peace with Sardinia and then 
violated it ? Bonaparte. Who concluded and then broke 
a treaty with the Grand Duke of Tuscany ? Bonaparte. 
Who concluded and then annulled the armistices with the 
petty states of Italy ? Bonaparte. Who plundered the 
Duke of Parma in spite of his neutrality } Bonaparte. 
By whom was Venice dragged into the war if not by 
Bonaparte ? Who, after having made peace with Venice 
and given her a constitution, delivered her over, bound 
hand and foot, to Austria ? Bonaparte. If Genoa has 
been subdued and humiliated, it is to Bonaparte that 
Republic owes the sacrifice of her wealth and her inde- 
pendence. If Switzerland, by lying offers of peace and 
alliances, has been induced to abandon her rights and 
her liberties, it is by Bonaparte she has been despoiled !" 
Pitt spoke in the same strain in the Lower House, 
borrowing for the occasion the Pacem nolo quia infida 
of Cicero. 

To HIS MAJESTY THE EMPEROR. 

"Paris, 2Sth Decetnber^ 1799. 
'' On my return to Europe after an absence of eighteen 
months, I find war being waged between the French 
Republic and your Majesty. 



28o THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

" The French nation has selected me to occupy the post 
of first magistrate. 

*' Foreign to all sentiments of vain glory my first desire 
is to put a stop to the shedding of blood. Everything 
leads one to foresee that in the next campaign numerous 
armies skilfully commanded will triple the number of 
victims who have already fallen since hostilities were 
recommenced. 

'' The well-known character of your Majesty can leave 
no doubt as to the desire of your heart. If it be alone 
listened to, I foresee the possibility of reconciling the 
interests of the two nations. 

" In the relations which I previously had with your 
Majesty, you showed me personally some esteem, &c. 

'* Bonaparte.'* 

On the same day Bonaparte penned the following " Pro- 
clamation to the army of Italy,'' which revealed a curious 
state of affairs : — 

'' Soldiers ! circumstances which detain me at the head 
of the government prevent me from being among you. 

" Your wants are great ; they shall be provided for. 

'' The greatest qualities of the soldier are constancy and 
discipline ; valour is only the second. 

** Soldiers ! several corps have quitted their positions. 
They have remained deaf to the voice of their officers. 

''Are all the gallant fellows of Castiglione and Rivoli 
dead } They would sooner have perished than have de- 
serted their standards, and they would have brought back 
their young comrades to honour and duty. 

" Soldiers ! you say that your rations are not regularly 
served out. What would you have done if, like the 4th, 
1 8th, 22nd, and 32nd, you had found yourself in the 
middle of the desert, without bread and without water, 
eating horses and mules .^ ' Victory will give us bread* 
they said ; and you — you desert your standards ! 



THE RAPACITY OF MASSENA. 28 1 

** Soldiers of Italy, a new general commands you. He 
was always to be found in the van in the days of your 
glory. Accord him your confidence, &c. 

'' Bonaparte." 

In the desert there was no help for it, but in Italy the 
soldiers revolted because Massena and other officers plun- 
dered the military chest, and left them to starve. Count 
Miot de Melito says in his memoirs : '' Massena, who 
succeeded Berthier at Rome, behaved in such a way that 
the French troops, left without pay, in the midst of 
the immense riches which he appropriated, revolted, and 
refused to recognise his authority. His peculations and 
pilferings, his shameful avidity, tarnished the laurels with 
which he had covered himself." 

This was not the first time that Massena — whose real 
name appears to have been Manasseh — was found guilty 
of similar malpractices, nor was it the last. In 1798, when 
deprived of his command for his dilapidations , he wrote a 
piteous letter to Bonaparte, saying, " What is to become of 
me } I appeal to your kindness. I expect everything 
from you ; an embassy would save me from the disgrace 
of returning to France at once. I can no longer serve, 
yet I have nothing wherewith to reproach myself." 
Bonaparte now threatened him with a court martial 
unless he disgorged. 

On the 25th December, too, the citizens of St. Domingo 
were informied of the change which had been operated in 
the French Government, and told that the colony would 
be governed by special laws. A decree was issued, and 
Art. VI. set forth that— 

" The following words, ' Gallant blacks, remember that 
the French people alone recognise your liberty, your 
equality, your rights,' shall be inscribed in letters of gold 
on all the flags of the battalions of the National Guard of 
the colony of St. Domingo. " Bonaparte." 



282 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

Three years after this Bonaparte re-established slavery 
and the slave trade. 



To THE SENATE OF THE FREE AND IMPERIAL 
TOWN OF HAMBURG. 

'^ Paris, '^oth December^ i799- 
"We have received your letter, which does not justify 
your conduct. Courage and virtue preserve states ; 
cowardice and vice ruin them. You have violated hos^r 
pitality. This did not happen among the most barbarous 
hordes of the desert. Our fellow-citizens will ever reproach 
you. The two unfortunate men you have delivered up 
will die illustrious ; but their blood will do more harm 
to their persecutors than would have been done by a 
whole army. 

'' BONAPARTE." 

The two unfortunates were Napper Tandy and Blackell, 
Irish rebels. Hamburg preferred giving them up to being 
bombarded. Napper Tandy did not die illustrious, but 
rather obscurely at Bordeaux, to which city he retired 
after two years* confinement in Dublin. The above in- 
cident may account for the atrocious way in which 
Hamburg was afterwards treated. It had not to wait 
long for a first instalment of vengeance. 

DECREE. 

" Paris, 30M December, 1799. 

'* The consuls of the Republic considering that for the 
last six months the body of Pius VI. has been in depot at 
Valence without having been accorded the honours of 
sepulture ; 

" That if this old man, respectable by his misfortunes, 
was for a moment the enemy of France, this was owing to 
his having been seduced by the advice of men who 
surrounded his old age ; 



THE BODY OF PIUS VI. 283 

" That it is in accordance with the dignity of the French 
nation, and in conformity with the sensitiveness of the 
national character, to accord marks of consideration to a 
man who has occupied one of the first places on earth. 

" Art. I. The Minister of the Interior will give orders 
for the body of Pius VI. to be buried with the honours 
usual to persons of his rank. 

''Art. 11. There shall be raised over the place of sepul- 
ture a simple monument recording the dignity with which 
he was clothed. 

'' Bonaparte." 

The body of this ill-used pontiff was sent to Rome at 
the time of the Concordat as a kind off-set to the demands 
of the Papal Court, which claimed the restoration not 
only of the Italian Legations, but of Avignon and 
Carpentras. 



CHAPTER VI. 

THE YEAR 1800, 

The year 1800 saw Bonaparte master of the destinies 
of France. The Directory had disappeared. The sensual 
Barras, who had contributed to his rise, had signed his 
resignation on the condition of being allowed to keep 
possession of his ill-gotten gains. Sieyes, the most ava- 
ricious of abbes and lawgivers, allowed himself to be 
bribed. When the Directory was overthrown, it had 
600,000 francs in its coffers. Sieyes was presented with 
350,000 and the property of Crone. 

" Sieyes k Bonaparte avait promis un trone, 
Sous ses debris brillants voulant Tensevelir : 
Bonaparte k Sieyes a fait present de Crone 
Pour le payer et I'avilir," 

wrote the poet Lebrun. 

France, at the commencement of 1800, was at war with 
England, Austria, Russia, the Porte, and America. 
British fleets blockaded the French and Spanish ports, 
intercepting all communication with Malta and Egypt. 
The Turks and the English were preparing to attack 
Kleber. Kray commanded an Austrian army in Germany, 
and Melas had over 100,000 men under his orders in 
Italy. The army of the Rhine, under Moreau, was com- 
posed of I io,coo men ; but in Italy, Massena had but an 



Bonaparte's sincerity doubted. 285 

army 25,000 strong, and consequently Melas had little 
difficulty in forcing that brilliant General to seek refuge 
in Genoa. There was a third French army being secretly 
formed at Dijon. 

In addition to suspecting the sincerity of Bonaparte 
when holding out an olive branch, the English Govern- 
ment had other motives for rejecting the overtures made 
at this moment by the First Consul. Pitt doubted the 
stability of the new Government in France ; he con- 
sidered a Royalist restoration imminent, and he was 
intent on capturing the French expeditionary force in 
Egypt, and on forcing Malta to capitulate. Austria, too, 
was unwilling to negotiate on the basis of the treaty of 
Campo Formio, and to renounce the territories she had 
reconquered during the absence of Bonaparte. 

Under the impulsion of Bonaparte an immense change 
was operated in every branch of the administration. Pre- 
fects and sub-prefects were established in all the depart- 
ments, and supreme authority was thus vested in the 
central government. By a mixture of force, cunning, and 
cruelty, the Vendean insurrection was suppressed. Several 
of the Chouan leaders laid down their arms and accepted 
the new order of affairs, and the Abbe Bernier, who had 
been a Royalist firebrand, preaching insurrection, subsided 
into Bishop of Orleans, and joined the " sacred gendarmery " 
of the First Consul. 

When tranquillity had been restored at home, Bonaparte 
set out to take the command of his troops in the field. 
The Czar, irritated against England and Austria, and 
seized with a sudden admiration for Bonaparte, had with- 
drawn from the coalition, and joined the maritime confede- 
ration destined to resist English tyranny on the ocean. 
On the 6th May Bonaparte left Paris, and placed himself 
at the head of the Army of Reserve. Moreau had com- 
menced operations on the 25th April, and in a fortnight 
had five times defeated Melas, and had driven him back 
upon Ulm, with the loss of 30,000 men. Another effort. 



286 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

and he would have reached Vienna. This was not what the 
First Consul intended. Before Bonaparte left Paris, orders 
signed by the three consuls were despatched to Moreau, 
directing him to detach 25,000 men, who were to join the 
Army of Reserve, and to confine his operations to the right 
bank of the Danube. These orders were handed to him by 
Carnot in person. Moreau, who might at once have forced 
Austria to sue for peace, obeyed. Bonaparte reserved for 
himself the honour of striking the blow which was to 
decide the campaign. On the i8th he crossed the Alps. 
He might have saved Massena by marching to the relief 
of Genoa. He might have beaten the various corps of 
Melas in detail, and have reached the beleaguered city in a 
week, but he had a more theatrical operation in view, and 
Genoa and its starving garrison were sacrificed. Bonaparte 
marched on Milan, and he had hardly entered that city 
when he learned that Massena had been obliged to 
capitulate. 

The battle of Marengo was lost by the Austrians on the 
nth June. In the midst of the fight Melas, worn out with 
fatigue, and sure of success, retired to Alexandria, and 
despatched couriers in all directions announcing the defeat 
of the French ; but a surprise similar to that which for a 
moment shook the iron nerves of Frederick the Great at 
Kunersdorf, awaited Melas. On the 12th August, 1759, 
Frederick sent four successive couriers to Berlin — 
" Russians beaten ; rejoice with me ! " and then a fifth 
courier, to have the archives sent to Potsdam. At Ma- 
rengo a cavalry charge changed the fate of the day, after 
Melas thought he had obtained a victory. An armistice 
followed, in virtue of which the Austrians evacuated the 
whole of north Italy, but still occupied Tuscany and 
Ancona. Preliminaries of peace were signed, and Bona- 
parte returned to Paris. On the 14th July, Kleber, after 
having won the battle of Heliopolis, was assassinated. On 
the 26th September peace was signed between France 
and America. In November, hostilities with Austria were 



THE BATTLE OF HOHENLINDEN. 287 

recommenced, and on the 2nd December Moreau won 
the battle of Hohenlinden. On the 24th of the same month 
an attempt was made to blow up the First Consul. 

We have seen how strained were the relations between 
the Directory and Bonaparte prior to the i8th Fructidor, 
when Angereau accomplished the coup d'etat against the 
Royalists. In spite of all his professions of Republicanism 
and devotion to the Constitution of the Year III. the sin- 
cerity of the young General was sorely suspected, and not 
without cause. As soon as he became First Consul he 
amnestied all the persons proscribed on account of that 
affair, with the exception of Aubry, and he recalled Carnot 
and made him War Minister. 

On the 4th January, 1800, Bonaparte wrote to. Admiral 
Bruix, who had received the command of a squadron 
destined to succour the army of Egypt. In this letter 
the French Admiral was instructed to try and capture 
Sydney Smith and his ships, for St. Jean d'Acre was 
a sore subject. 

La Vendee was giving great trouble, and on the 5th 
January Bonaparte wrote to General Hedouville, Com- 
mander-in-chief of the army of England, that he was 
sending him reinforcements to the extent of 17,400 men. 
La Vendee being sincerely Catholic, the General was to 
placard everywhere, and to publish in the journals an 
account of the funeral honours rendered to Pius VI. 

" You are invested, my dear General," continued this 
letter, '* with full power ; act as freely as if you were in the 
middle of Germany. Let minor interests and personal 
considerations disappear in presence of the necessity of 
suppressing the rebellion, and of causing the government 
to be respected. 

" It is useless to have courts martial. The consuls opine 
that the generals should have all rebels taken in arms 
summarily executed. . . . No matter what accusations are 
brought against you the Government will support you ; 
but your military actions will be examined by a man who 



288 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEOI;?. 

is accustomed to severe and energetic measures. . . . The 
First Consul thinks that in order to give a salutary lesson 
it will be well to burn down two or three large parishes. 
Experience has taught him that this is the most humane 
way of proceeding. Weakness is inhumanity," &c. 

Bonaparte had freely practised this system in Italy and 
Egypt, but experience should have taught him that the 
" infernal columns" of Thurreau had done less to appease 
La Vendee than the milder measures adopted by Hoche. 

On the 13th January, 1800, Bonaparte wrote four letters 
to Talleyrand — the first to the effect that he had ordered 
the reduction of the French army in Batavia by 18,000 
men, but that the pay, clothing, and rations of this force 
were still to be made good by the Dutch Republic. The 
sum of a million francs was to be paid at once to the 
French War Minister. The Dutch were to be told 
that although these 18,000 men had been withdrawn from 
their territory, they were really employed for Batavia on 
the Rhine ! 

In the second letter Talleyrand was asked to state what 
amount of money it would be possible to obtain from 
Holland in exchange for Flushing, and whether the French 
Government could draw on Holland for 40,000,000 francs. 

In the third letter Talleyrand was told that it was most 
essential to procure 4,000,000 francs, which Bonaparte 
thought might be obtained from Hamburg. " The senate 
of that town," added Bonaparte, '' thinks there is an agree- 
ment between us and Prussia to violate its independence. 
Make the most of this, and say that no matter how cove- 
teous Prussia may be, and no matter what her offers, a 
reconciliation with the French Government is quite possible. 
.... Six, or even four, millions, would help us to win a 
campaign." 

In the fourth letter Talleyrand was called upon to furnish 
information with regard to negotiations with Portugal, and 
to state the pecuniary aid which might be derived from 
that country. Bonaparte thought it would be possible to 



VENDEAN CHIEFS. 289 

obtain 8,000,000 or 9,000,000 francs for the army of Italy, 
which would increase his chances of reconquering that 
country by thirty per cent. The crime of Portugal was 
not closing' her ports to England. 

As regards the first letter, the troops which Bonaparte 
had maintained in Holland were not for the protection of 
the Dutch but to attack England, and they were withdrawn 
to reinforce the army in La Vendee ! As regards Flushing, 
that place had certainly been captured by the French 
several years before, but when peace was restored there 
had been no question of ceding it to France. Now, on his 
sole military authority, Bonaparte forced the Batavian 
Republic to pay ransom. 

General Hedouville not having shown himself sufficiently 
unscrupulous in La Vendee, was superseded by General 
Brune, who assumed the title of General-in-Chief of the 
army of the West. In the first instructions addressed to 
General Brune, he was informed that he had 60,000 men 
under his orders ; that he was to show himself very tolerant 
towards the priests, but that he was to burn some large 
villages and farms in the Morbihan. The troops were to 
want for nothing, and were to be supported by the guilty 
departments. " It is only by rendering war terrible," added 
Bonaparte, " that the inhabitants will be induced to shake 
off their apathy and unite against the brigands. . . . You 
will inform the chiefs, Chatillon, d'Autichamp, Bourmont, 
d'Andigne, and Frotte, that if they accept the propositions 
of the Government their persons and their properties will 
be respected.'* These chiefs were also led to believe that 
Bonaparte intended to play the part of a Monk, and to 
restore the monarchy. 

A soldier of the thirty-second demi-brigade having 
written to Bonaparte reminding him of his services, his 
wounds, &c., received the following reply : — 

" To THE GALLANT LfiON,— I have received your letter, 
my gallant comrade. You are the bravest grenadier in the 
VOL. I. u 



290 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

army now that the gallant Benezette is dead. You received 
one of the hundred sabres which I distributed to the army. 
All the soldiers admitted that you were the model of the 
regiment. I greatly wish to see you. The War Minister 
will send you an order. 

*' I love you as my son. " BONAPARTE." 

And the '' gallant Leon " was made a sub-Heutenant in 
the Consular Guard. 

To GENERAL MASSENA. 

" Paris, ^th February, 1800. 

'* I have seen with great pleasure the firm way in which 

you have established order in your army. We expect at 

each moment 1,500,000 francs drawn from Holland, which 

will be forwarded to you. La Vendee is three parts 

pacified. Brune has beaten Georges 

" Bonaparte." 

Massena probably disgorged. It is a significant fact 
that none of the officers or men who revolted against his 
authority were brought to trial. 

To LUCIEN ^O^KV^KI'E, Minister of the Interior. 

" Paris, ^th February^ 1800. 
" I beg you to give the necessary orders for placing in the 
grand gallery of the Tuileries the statues of Demosthenes, 
Alexander the Great, Hannibal, Scipio, Brutus, Cicero, 
Cato, Caesar, Gustavus-Adolphus, Turenne, the great Conde, 
Duguay-Trouin, Marlborough, Prince Eugene, Marshal 
Saxe, Washington, Frederick the Great, Mirabeau, Dugom- 
mier, Dampierre, Marceau, and Joubert. 

*' By order of the First Consul." 

Few persons now remember Dugommier, who was hardly 
of a calibre to figure among the sages and heroes above- 



WASHINGTON S DEATH. 29 I 

named. He was a gallant old soldier, who had been 
Bonaparte's commanding officer at the siege of Toulon. 

ORDER OF THE DAY. 

" Paris, ^th February^ 1800. 

"Washington is dead. This great man fought against 
tyranny. He consolidated the liberty of his country. His 
memory will always be dear to the French people, and 
especially to French soldiers, who, like American soldiers, 
fight for liberty and equality. 

" Consequently the First Consul directs that for the next 
ten days all the standards and pennons of the Republic 
shall be veiled in crape." 

Funeral honours were also paid to Washington when 
the new standards were distributed to the army, and a 
pompous eulogy of the American patriot and soldier was 
pronounced by M. de Fontannes, who drew a parallel 
between him and General Bonaparte. The day that the 
Moniteur published this discourse in honour of the founder 
of American democracy, Bonapairte took up his residence 
at the Tuileries. 

We have seen how Nelson gave Bonaparte credit for 
wishing to be the Washington of France. Lanfrey, in his 
History of Napokan (vol. ii. p. 8), says that he more than 
once pretended to assume a part which he had no intention 
of playing, and that he had neither a sufficient amount of 
disinterestedness nor generosity to tread boldly in the foot- 
steps of one who is called by Byron " the first, the last, the 
best; — the Cincinnatus of the West." 

Matters now began to look brighter in the west ; the 
back-bone of the rebellion was evidently broken. Abbe 
Bernier, one of the most active and influential members of 
the clerical party, had made his submission, and had gone 
to Paris to offer his services to the Government. Some 
chiefs were negotiating : the rebels who still held out were 

U 2 



292 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

to be utterly destroyed. A reward of 1,000 louis was 
offered to any one who would kill or capture Frotte. 
On the 1 3th February Bonaparte wrote : — 
'' Frotte has asked leave to submit ; my reply is that he 
must surrender at discretion. Brune is vigorously pursuing 
Georges. Operations will be carried on actively against 
Bourmont and Frotte. . . . Every day we shoot five or six 
chouans here (in Paris).'' And on the 14th : " Let Frotte 
surrender at discretion, and he will be able to count on the 
generosity of the Government^ which wishes to forget the 
past and to rally all Frenchmen." On the i8th Bonaparte 
wrote : " That wretch Frotte has preferred allowing himself 
to be captured to laying down his arms." And : " Frotte 
has been captured with all his staff, and shot. Bourmont 
has laid down his arms, and is coming to Paris. Georges 
also is going to surrender. The Russians are returning 
home. The Porte is beginning to understand its true 
interests. The financial condition of the Republic is im- 
proving.'' And on the 23rd February: ** Bourmont is at 
Paris, and is going to be married. He desires to reside 
here, or elsewhere, in tranquillity, now he has entered into 
the good graces of the Government." 

During the whole of this affair Bonaparte acted with his 
accustomed duplicity. He first of all led the Royalists to 
believe that he intended to restore the monarchy. As for 
Count Louis de Frotte, the most brilliant of the chouan 
leaders, he was not captured, but surrendered to General 
Guidal, after having received a safe conduct from that 
officer, and being encouraged by the assurances that he 
could reckon on the generosity of the Government. His 
assassination was due to personal vengeance. Frotte had 
held Bonaparte up to ridicule for growing pale and fainting 
in the arms of his grenadiers on the i8th Brumaire, and 
Frotte's brother had taken part in the defence of St. 
Jean d'Acre. These two facts alone were quite sufficient 
to seal his doom. 

On the 28th February, Bonaparte informed Admiral 



A NEW HYMN. 293 

Mazzeredo', the Spanish ambassador, that he had given 
orders for the Brest squadron to drive off the English 
squadron, it being shameful to permit from twenty-one to 
twenty-five vessels to blockade from thirty-five to forty. 

The expedition to Ireland was to be renounced, and the 
combined fleets were to operate in the Mediterranean, and 
to relieve Malta. 

In a letter to General H6douville, dated 2nd March, 
Bonaparte says — *' Try and have Charles and Chandelier 
arrested. They are two wretches guilty of all sorts of 
crimes.*' We shall see that an attempt was afterwards 
made to prove that Charles and the unfortunate Due 
d'Enghien were one and the same person. 

To CITIZEN LUCIEN BONAPARTE. 

'^ Paris, March ^rd, 1800. 
*' Citizen Minister, I beg you will ask the citizens Lebrun 
and Rouget de Tlsle to write a ' Hymne aux Combats ' to a 
well known air like the Marseillaise or the Chant du 
Depart. This hymn must coatain things applicable to 
all the circumstances of war, and propound the idea that 
peace follows in the train of victory. u BONAPARTE.'' 

It is impossible to read the following letter without 
feelings of astonishment : — 

To GENERAL BRUNE. 

" Paris, ^th March, 1800. 
" I have received your despatch of the i ith Ventose. . . . 
I saw Georges this morning ; he appeared to me a sturdy 
Breton who might be turned to some account in the in- 
terest of the country I have also seen Chatillon, 

who dined with me to-day. I was very well satisfied with 

him Shall we have peace } Shall we have war ? 

However this may be, the Emperor treats us with the 
greatest politeness. Forms are observejd by him as much 
as they were neglected by our friend Georges. 

'' BONAPARTE." 



294 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

The gallant Frotte had not been in his grave a month ; 
a month before Georges and his comrades were wretches of 
the deepest dye, and half a dozen chouans^ per dieniy were 
being shot in Paris. The smoke was still going up from 
the smouldering villages in La Vendue and Brittany. It 
may be remarked that Bonaparte was much struck with 
the military ability exhibited by the Vendean chiefs, and 
was anxious to turn their talents to account. The resist- 
ance they offered to his arms had at once irritated him as 
a despot, and excited his admiration as a soldier. 

To CITIZEN TALLEYRAND. 

" Paris, 7M March, 1800. 
*' I beg you will hand this note to the Spanish ambas- 
sador " (a note of all the more interest seeing what after- 
wards happened to Villeneuve and Gravina at Trafalgar). 
" Admiral Briux has just informed the Government that he 
is blockaded in the port of Brest by twenty-one English 
vessels ; that he has seventeen well-manned and well- 
armed French vessels, and that Admiral Gravina has 
fifteen Spanish vessels ready to weigh anchor ; that the 
First Consul finds it humiliating and shameful for the two 
nations to be blockaded by an inferior force ; that he has 
ordered Briux by telegraph to put to sea, and to give chase 
to the English fleet; that the intention of his Catholic 
Majesty in leaving fifteen vessels at Brest was not to render 
them useless to the advantage and glory of the two nations ; 
that consequently the First Consul desires orders may be 
given to Admiral Gravina by telegraph to second the sortie 
of the French fleet. 

'' Bonaparte." 

The despatch was forwarded, but the allied squadrons 
remained inert or never got beyond Toulon. It was found 
impossible to relieve Malta, or to succour the army in 
Egypt. 

On the 8th March there appeared a violent proclamation 



EXCHANGE OF PRISONERS. 295 

directed against England, who had '' betrayed the secret 
of her horrible policy;" who wished ''to rend France^ 
destroy her marine and her ports, efface her from Europe, 
or reduce her to the rank of a second-rate power." Eng- 
land was accused of sowing discord among all the nations 
of the Continent in order to prey on their commerce. But 
neither gold nor promises, nor intrigues, would rivet the 
people of Europe to her views. Young citizens were called 
upon to offer their services to the state in the sacred 
interests of humanity, and were assured that the First 
Consul would go and conquer peace at the head of those 
warriors he had so often led to victory. 

It was generally sufficient to excite the country against 
England in order to obtain recruits. English perfidy and 
English tyranny excused all kinds of arbitrary measures 
at home and abroad. At the present moment, however, the 
irritation of Bonaparte arose from a feeling of personal 
insecurity, and the assurance that plots were being hatched 
against his life by French refugees in London. 

To CITIZEN TALLEYRAND. 

"Paris, 10^^ March, 1800. 

" You will inform citizen Otto, the French Commissioner 
in London, that the Government will consent to the ex- 
change of General Don for Napper Tandy and his com- 
panions ; and that if this does not suit the English Govern- 
ment, the French Government will exchange Generals 
Hermann, Don, and Mack against Generals Colli, Perignon, 
and Grouchy. Citizen Otto, in a separate note, will point 
out how unworthy it is of the English nation to threaten 
to render the captivity of French prisoners in England 
harder. Can the nation of Newton and of Locke forget 
itself to such a point ? Prisoners are not answerable for 
the conduct of their Government. The French will never 
retaliate. .... 

•* Bonaparte." 



296 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

To CITIZEN FORFAIT. 

" Paris, \2th March, 1800. 
*' How comes it, Citizen Minister, that the English 
prisoners receive a pound of beef, while the ration of the 
French soldier is only half a pound ? 

'' Bonaparte." 

Bonaparte was certainly not very merciful towards his 
prisoners if we take for example his treatment of the Pope 
at Savona, of the ** black cardinals," and of the Queen 
of Etruria, and other captives who had incurred his dis- 
pleasure. If he did not retaliate it is nevertheless a fact 
that the British Government, after the date of the above 
letter, complained of the treatment of English prisoners. 
Of the generals offered in exchange. Mack was an Austrian 
who had been captured by Championnet in Naples, and 
who was destined to be captured by Bonaparte at Ulm. 
Hermann, it is true, was a Russian who had fallen into the 
hands of the French at Bergen when acting with the Duke 
of York in the Low Countries. The French Generals 
Perignon and Grouchy, who afterwards became marshals, 
were made prisoners by Suwarrow at Novi, and the appli- 
cation for their exchange should have been addressed to 
St. Petersburg. Colli was Bonaparte's old antagonist in 
Piedmont, who had taken service in France. 

To GENERAL M.0^^h\5 , Commander-in-Chief of the Army of 
the Rhine, 

"Paris, idth March, 1800. 

" General DessoUes will acquaint you with my views 
concerning the campaign which is about to open. He will 
inform you that no one more than myself takes an interest 
in your personal glory and welfare. The English have 
disembarked ! What do they want ? I am to-day a sort 
of lay figure, having lost liberty and happiness. Grandeur 
is all very well, as far as recollection and the imagination 
are concerned. I envy you your happy lot ; you are going 



THEATRICAL PERFORMANCES. 297 

to accomplish great things with your gallant men. I 

would willingly exchange m)^ consular purple for the 

epaulette of a brigadier under your orders. 

** I hope circumstances will permit me to come and give 

you a helping hand. At all events my confidence in you, 

in every respect, is unlimited. 

*' Bonaparte." 

What afterwards happened leads one to doubt the 
sincerity of this letter ; but it is possible that Moreau by 
his vanity and his indiscretion may have brought his trials 
on his own head, and that Bonaparte was really anxious to 
secure his services in the field. It is certain, however, 
that Bonaparte was on the point of himself assuming the 
command of the army of the Rhine at this juncture, and 
that he was irritated with Moreau for not accepting his 
plans. 

To CITIZEN LUCIEN BONAPARTE. 

" Paris, 5//^ April, 1800. 

" The Consuls of the Republic desire you will inform the 
managers of the different theatres that no dramatic work 
ought to be accepted without your permission. The head 
of the depctrtment of Public Instruction should be held 
responsible for the performance of all pieces contrary to 
good morals and social order. . . . The First Consul would 
see with pleasure the suppression of the couplet alluding 
to him in the Tableau des Sabines!' 

On the 7th April, 1880, a note addressed by the order of 
the First Consul to the French ambassador at Vienna con- 
tained the following phrase : — ^*The overtures made by the 
French Government to the Cabinet of St. James's and the 
different answers of that Cabinet have been published 
and discussed in the British Parliament. They prove 
that France desires a general peace and that England 
does not." 

In one of the discussions thus alluded to Mr. Dundas, 
who doubted the sincerity of these overtures, said, " The 



298 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

French Republic has waged war with Spain, Naples, Sar- 
dinia, Tuscany, Genoa, Geneva, Venice, Modena, Austria, 
Russia, Egypt, England; and even with that creature of its 
own creation — the Cisalpine Republic/' And other speakers 
in Lords and Commons spoke in a similar strain ! 

To GENERAL KLEBER. 

" Paris, 19/^ Aprils 1800. 
*' When you receive this letter the gallant army of the 
East will have re-entered the ports of the Republic after 
having left in Egypt immortal traces of its glorious works. 
. . . As for you, Citizen General, who have so well justified 
the choice of the First Consul, when, on his departure from 
Egypt, he confided to you the command of the army, you 
will not doubt the satisfaction he experiences at the 
prospect of your return, &c. 

" Bonaparte." 

It is difficult to reconcile this letter with what Bonaparte 
wrote on the 15th May, and with what he said at St. 
Helena — " If Kleber had evacuated Egypt I should have 
had him tried by court martial. All the documents had 
already been laid before the Council of State." In a long 
note on the Egyptian campaign, which is to be found in 
the tenth volume of Napoleon s Military Correspondence ^ we 
find the treaty of El Arish thus spoken of : " When armies 
believe it possible to get out of difficulties by means of a 
convention, all is lost. Just as well confide the honour and 
defence of the country to old women armed with distaffs." 

We shall refer to this ''note" again when we come to 
the final capitulation of Abdallah Menou. 

. To CITIZEN TALLEYRAND. 

" Paris, 22,rd April, 1800. 
" There will be no harm in sending some fowhng-pieces 
of various models to the King of Spain. 

" You can inform M. Musquiry, who spoke to me of the 
desire of his Catholic Majesty to obtain an increase of 



THE SPANISH TREATY. 299 

territory in Italy for the Duke of Parma, that when 
negotiations are opened the French Government will be 
delighted to convince Europe of its esteem for the house of 
Spain ; that in this matter the private feelings I entertained 
for the Duke of Parma in Italy accord with the policy of 
the Republic. . . . Tell Alquier that I wish him to buy me 
eight saddle horses of Spanish breed. Ask him why, since 
Portugal refuses to make peace, Spain does not seize on 
several provinces of that kingdom^ which might be exchanged 
at the general peace for Minorca. 

''Mention to M. Urquijo how unfortunate it will be 
should Malta fall into the hands of our enemies, and ask 
him to send five or six vessels there laden with corn, 
brandy, meat, and flour. « BONAPARTE " 

The Court of Spain hastened to offer the horses as a 
gift, and endeavoured, but in vain, to elude the demand 
concerning Portugal. Nowhere had the execution of Louis 
XVI. created greater indignation than in Spain. War 
between the two countries had ensued, and the general of 
the Franciscans offered to march upon France at the head 
of 10,000 monks. In 1795, however, the French having 
obtained possession of the Ebro provinces, Spain treated 
for peace at Bale, and agreed among other things to cede 
to France the Spanish portion of the island of St. Domingo. 
In the event of war either power was to aid the other with 
ships and troops, and the King of Spain was to press his 
son-in-law, the King of Portugal, to close his ports to 
British vessels. And it was for concluding this treaty, 
which was a millstone round the neck of the weaker power, 
that Manuel Godoi, the lover of the queen, was created 
Prince of the Peace. 

To GENERAL BERTHIER, at Dijon. 

" Paris, i^th April, 1800. 
" . . . . My plan is not to cross the St. Gothard. I do 
not consider this operation as possible, supposing the 



300 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

ordinary rules of prudence to be observed, until Moreau 
has obtained a great advantage over the enemy. Besides 
it is possible we may be obliged to hurry to Tortone in 
order to disengage Massena, who, if he has been beaten, 
must be shut up in Genoa where he has only a month's 
rations. . . . The operation of crossing the St. Bernard 
appears much more in proportion to our present means. 

" Bonaparte." 

Bonaparte was about to place himself at the head of the 
Army of Reserve, 60,000 strong, in order to attack Melas, 
who had conceived the plan of retaking Nice, and of then, 
in conjunction with a British force assembled at Minorca, 
capturing Toulon. 

To GENERAL MOREAU. 

"Paris, 5M May^ 1800. 
** I was just starting for Geneva when the telegraph 
brought the news of your victory over the Austrians ; 
glory, three times glory ! The position of the army of 
Italy is critical. Massena is shut up in Genoa. The 
army of Melas, although weakened, is considerable. I 
salute you affectionately. 

" Bonaparte " 

The victory here alluded to was that of Hochstedt over 
Kray, which was to be followed up by more brilliant 
triumphs. 

To general DESAIX. 

" Lausanne, 14M May, iSoo. 

'' My dear Desaix, — I have just received your letter of 
the 15th Floreal. ... I was very uneasy on seeing a month 
elapse without receiving any news from you ; I feared 
everything from the punic faith. But at last you have 
arrived — good news for the Republic, but especially for 
me. . . . Two months ago I received the capitulation, but 



THE RETURN OF DESAIX. 3OI 

made no remark about it because it bore your signature ; 
but how came it that 16,00.0 or 18,000 Frenchmen were 
afraid of 30,000 Turks ? Six thousand men would have 
been sufficient to have beaten them, captured their guns 
and camels, &c. 

" On arriving in France I found the Republic lost ; La 
Vendee at the gates of Paris; the fleet blocked up in 
Brest, &c. It was necessary to find money and to refit 
the squadron ; thirty-six ships with stores and 6,000 troops 
were just going to sail for Egypt when the news came 
of the capitulation. 

" But don't let us talk of this any more. Come and 
join me as quickly as possible. . . . 

" Bonaparte." 

Desaix had been allowed to leave Egypt on the signing 
of the treaty of El Arish, which the British Government 
refused to ratify. 

There are several facts to be borne in mind while reading 
the following letter. Bonaparte would never have sailed 
for Egypt had Talleyrand not promised to go to Constan- 
tinople in order to secure the neutrality of the Porte. As 
soon as Bonaparte left France Tally rand determined to 
remain in Paris. Before leaving Egypt Bonaparte earnestly 
appealed for reinforcements, and attempted to open nego- 
tiations with the Porte. Before sailing for France he 
promised to despatch reinforcements, and his frequent 
efforts to keep his word show that he considered them 
absolutely necessary. 

To THE CONSULS OF THE REPUBLIC. 

" Lausanne, \^th May, 1800. 

" I have just received your letter of the 22nd Floreal. 

I beg you will have the inclosed printed at length in the 

official journal, for it is well for the public to know the 

situation of the army of Egypt when I left it, and how 



302 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

exaggerated are the reports made by the agents of Eng- 
land. You can add that during two years campaigning in 
Egypt and Syria, in spite of the great battles fought, the 
army was not diminished one-fifth. 

" There was no plague in Egypt this year ; it is therefore 
infamous that the country should have been abandoned. 
The only thing which could have justified an evacuation 
was the fact of the army having been greatly weakened by 
the plague. By letters I have received it appears that 
Desaix, Menou, Davoust, and several other generals of 
courage were opposed to the evacuation of Egypt. All 
that I say here is intended for you. I think it will be 
necessary for you to say that the Brest squadron, with 
stores of all kinds and 6,000 men, was about to sail when 
the news of the capitulation arrived. It will be well to 
remark that when the i8th Brumaire happened the war in 
the West had intercepted our communications with Brest 
to such an extent that Admiral Briux took more than a 
month to go from Paris to that port. I wish Citizen 
Lebrun to draw up this article himself, which should 
show Europe that had I remained in Egypt that country 
would have belonged to France. 

" Bonaparte." 



Bonaparte made several misrepresentations. The army 
of the Grand Vizier was not 30,000 but 80,000 strong, and 
English and Russian armies were approaching. The 
capitulation not having been ratified Bonaparte was 
afforded an opportunity of despatching his men and 
supplies from Brest, an opportunity of which he did not 
avail himself 

Numerous despatches were written at this moment on 
the subject of the passage of the Alps ; sledges were 
ordered for the artillery, and all the details of the march 
were carefully sketched out and clearly explained by 
Bonaparte to his lieutenants. 



CROSSING THE ALPS. 3O3 

To THE CONSULS OF THE REPUBLIC. 

"Martigny, \%th May, 1800. 
" I have received your letter of the 24th Floreal, and 
thank you for your expressions concerning the death of 
my brother's wife '' (the first wife of Lucien). "She had 
been suffering for a long time. 

** We are struggling against ice, snow, storms, and 
avalanches. The St. Bernard, astonished to see so many 
persons crossing it, throws obstacles in our way. However, 
the third of our field artillery has already passed. ... I 
am in the midst of the Valais, at the foot of the great 
Alps. In three days all the army will have crossed. . . . 

'' Bonaparte." 

And the next day from the same place — 

" The weather has become fine, which was necessary 
for the rapid passage of our artillery by the St. Bernard. 
. . . The Minister of the Interior*' (Lucien) '' has informed 
me of his desire to come and join me, wishing for distrac- 
tion since the death of his wife ; but in addition to the 
fact that in two or three days operations here will be 
carried on with great activity, I think it necessary under 
all circumstances that he should remain in Paris. 

" I read in the papers that I wrote a letter to my 
mother in which I said I should be at Milan in a month. 
That is at variance with my character. Very often I do 
not say what I know, but I never say what will happen. 
I beg you will insert a jocular kind of note to this effect 
in the Moniteur. BONAPARTE." 

And on the 24th May from Aosta — 

"You will find inclosed the bulletin of the army, which 
you can publish in the official journal. 

'' Events are about to succeed each other with rapidity, 
and I hope to be back in Paris in a fortnight. . . . 

'' BONAPARTE.'' 



304 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

Bonaparte was at Milan before a month (on the 3rd June), 
and not back in Paris until the 3rd- July! 

To CITIZEN JOSEPH BONAPARTE, 

" AOSTA, 2\th May, 1800. 
'' I beg you will give my wife 30,000 francs. The 
greatest obstacles have been overcome. We are masters of 
Ivree and of the citadel, where we found ten guns. We fell 
down here like lightning ; the enemy, who in no way 
expected us, can hardly believe his eyes. Great events 
are about to occur. I hope the results will redound to 
the honour and glory of the Republic. 

''BONAPARTE." 

Bernadotte replaced General Brune in command of the 
army of the West, for the chouafts still required to be 
watched. Writing to Bernadotte on the 24th May, and 
giving him an account of his operations, Bonaparte 
added — 

** A thousand amiable things to Madame Bernadotte if 
she is at Brest." 

On the 27th May Bonaparte announced to his two 
colleagues that everything was going on well, and, " before 
the end of Prairial I shall be back in Paris " — did not get 
back till the 14th Messidor. 

On the 28th May Bonaparte addressed a long report to 
the Government showing that he was displaying his 
wonted activity and genius at the opening of this cam- 
paign. He began by saying that the perspective of 
marching along a road several leagues in length and 
eighteen inches broad, hewn in perpendicular rocks, with 
mountains of snow threatening to fall on their heads, &c.^ 
did not frighten his soldiers. Next came a brief allusion 
to the combat of Aosta, then accounts of the affairs of 
Chatillon, the capture of Ivree, the combat of Chinsella, 
the taking of Susa and la Brunetta on the 2nd Prairial, and 
that of Verceil on the 7th. The following passage is from 



THE CAPTURE OF BARD. 305 

the report on the affair of Chatlllon. The success of the 
campaign depended on the capture of Bard in the mountain 
passes. 

*' The same day the advanced guard arrived at half a 
league from the chateau of Bard. The enemy occupied 
the heights which commanded the village. ... I ordered 
the village to be stormed. The sappers and grenadiers 
lowered the draw-bridge, broke in the gates, and the town 
was carried. Three companies of grenadiers established 
themselves there and the citadel was blockaded. On the 
5th I ordered General Loison to close round the place and 
to break all the barriers in order to facilitate the passage 
of our artillery. The grenadiers of the 28th behaved with 
the greatest intrepidity. The enemy considered Bard, 
constructed to close the entry to Piedmont, where two 
mountains form the valley of Aosta, as an insurmountable 
obstacle. A road was hewn in the mountain of Albard. 
Where the slope was too steep steps were cut, and w^here the 
path became still more narrow, with a precipice on either 
side, walls were erected ; where the rocks were separated 
by deep fissures bridges were thrown, and the French cavalry 
marched over a mountain which had been for centuries 
considered inaccessible for infantry. By an extraordinary 
effort, which again astonished the enemy, while 1,500 men 
were working incessantly at the Albard road, the soldiers 
carried on their backs two pieces of four to the defile. of 
the Con, and after having clambered with them over fearful 
rocks for thirty hours, got them into position on the heights 
which commanded the citadel. . . ." 

And it was only after the accomplishment of this 
difficult feat that Bard was taken and the read to Italy 
cleared. 

To CITIZEN TALLEYRAND. 

" NovARA, 1st Jime^ i8co. 
"You will find inclosed your letter to M. de Thugut^ 
with a few alterations. As it closes the negotiations which 
VOL. I. X 



306 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

my letter opened with the Emperor of Austria, I have 
thought it ri;^^ht to give it the form of a peroration. 

'' Should the news from Egypt be confirmed it will be 
important to have some one in Russia. The Ottoman 
Empire has not long to exist, and if Paul I. turns his eyes 
in that direction our interests will become common. Beur- 
nonville is right in saying that we shall never do anything 
with Prussia. ^^ BONAPARTE." 

In a bulletin to the army dated Milan, 3rd June, the 
First Consul relates that twenty-four hours before he 
entered that city the inhabitants did not know the French 
were in Italy ; also that a letter from the Prince de Hohen- 
zollern, who commanded the army blockading Genoa, had 
been intercepted. By this letter it appeared that the 
Prince and Melas were entirely ignorant of the movements 
of the French, and thought the army of reserve had been 
sent back to Paris. It is true that Bonaparte had taken 
every possible means to conceal his movements. 

To CITIZEN FOUCHfi. 

" Milan, ^th Jzme, 1800. 
'' I am assured that Georges has returned from England. 
It is indispensable to have him arrested, as well as the 
father of Frotte who is in the Orne. Spare no means to 
take these men dead or alive. a BONAPARTE." 

We have seen how Talleyrand received permission to 
send some fowling-pieces to the King of Spain. In a 
letter, dated the 4th June, Bonaparte wrote : — 

" I do not see any inconvenience in your sending some 
dresses to the Queen of Spain : you may lay out a thousand 
louis in this affair. However, the necessary decorum must 
be observed, so that there may be nothing ridiculous in 
the matter. u BoNAPARTE." 



THE CATHOLIC RELIGION. 307 

It is not said whether Talleyrand himself selected the 
dresses, and with due decorum. 

In the bulletin of the Army of Italy of the 4th June, 
Bonaparte announced that '^ a Te Deuni has been chanted 
in the cathedral of Milan in honour of the happy delivery 
of Italy from heretics and infidels. . . The Austrians 
have the talent to make enemies of all parties ; tJieir rapa- 
city is unexampled ; they have carried off the very trees. 
Even the priests are discontented at seeing English here- 
tics and infidel Mussulmans profane the territory of holy 
Italy.^ Add to this none of them have been paid for ; the 
Austrians have taken everything. The university of Pavia 
has been destroyed, and the instruction of the young men 
in the various colleges confided to the Jesuits." And, in 
fact, a fearful picture was drawn of the atrocities per- 
petrated by the enemy. 

On the 5 th June, Bonaparte pronounced a long allocution 
to the clergy of Milan. '' I have assembled you," he said, 
"• in order to have the pleasure of acquainting you with the 
sentiments which animate me towards the Catholic, 
Apostolic, and Roman religion." He was persuaded that 
that religion could alone secure happiness and good 
government He would punish, even with death, any one 
who should insult that religion or their sacred persons. He 
had disapproved of all that had been done against religion 
when he was a simple agent of the government. " Modern 
philosophers," he added, ^'have tried to persuade France 
that the Catholic religion is the implacable enemiy of every 
democratic system and of every republican government. 
Hence the cruel persecution of religion and its ministers by 
the French Republic. . Experience has undeceived the 
French, and has convinced them that the Catholic religion 
is better adapted than any other to divers forms of 
government, and is particularly favourable to republican 
institutions. I myself am a philosopher, and I know that, 

1 A few days later Napoleon made Abdallah Menou a governor in 
holy Italy. 

X 2 



308 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

in no matter what society, no man is considered just and 
virtuous who does not know whence he came and whither 
he is going. Simple reason cannot guide you in this 
matter ; without religion one walks continually in dark- 
ness ; and the Catholic religion alone gives to man certain 
and infallible information concerning his origin and his 
latter end. It is the same with morality," &c. 

Then followed a description of the restoration of the 
Catholic religion in France, and — 

" The manner in which the defunct Pope has been 
treated should inspire you with confidence : Pius VI. owed 
his misfortunes partly to those persons in whom he reposed 
confidence, and partly to the cruel policy of the Directory. 
When I am able to negotiate with the present Pope I hope 
I shall be able to remove all the obstacles in the way of a 
complete reconciliation between France and the head of 
the Church." And Bonaparte concluded by saying he had 
ordered that at least a portion of their property should be 
restored to the clergy. 

This manifestation, which was the prelude of the 
Concordat, occurred just a year after Bonaparte had 
boasted in Egypt that he had destroyed the Pope, over- 
thrown the cross, and wrested Malta from the enemies of 
the crescent. 

On the 8th June, Bonaparte, in a letter to Berthier, says 
he is busy examining the contents of an intercepted letter- 
bag, and that ''one despatch from Melas to the Aulic 
Council, dated Turin, 5th June, announces that Massena 
has capitulated." 

Bonaparte in his memoirs blamed Massena. " Genoa,'' 
he said, " opened its gates when it was saved. . When 
Caesar besieged Alise he blockaded the place so closely 
that it could receive no news from without. When the date 
upon which the relieving army had promised to arrive was 
passed, the Gauls assembled under Vercingetorix : Cri- 
tognat rose and said : ' You have no news of the army of 
succour ; but does not Caesar give you news every day } Do 



MARENGO. 309 

you think he would work so hard at his entrenchments if he 
did not fear the approach of the army assembled by the 
Gauls ? Persevere and you will be saved ; ' and, in fact, 
the Gauls arrived 200,000 strong and attacked Caesar. 

" The proposition made by General Ott and Lord Keith 
to allow the garrison to leave the city with its arms, was it 
not as good as an explanatory letter from Bonaparte 
announcing his approach ? " 

There is abundant proof to show that Genoa was reduced 
to the very last extremity when Massena capitulated. 
General Ott was not so anxious for a capitulation because 
he expected the place to be relieved, but because he wished 
to rejoin Melas ; and Bonaparte had no intention of 
marching on Genoa until he had disposed of the Austrian 
army on the Po. 

To THE CONSULS OF THE REPUBLIC. 

" Torre dei Garoffoli, \^th June, 1800. 
'^ The news from the army is good. I shall be soon in Paris. 
I cannot say any more. I am plunged in the deepest grief 
by the death of the man I loved and esteemed the most. 

" Bonaparte." 

Marengo had been fought and won. In his bulletin 
Bonaparte said that " the enemy passed the Bormida by 
three bridges and surprised our advanced guard. . Four 
times during the battle we had to retreat, and four times 
we advanced. . . More than sixty guns on each side, at 
different hours, were taken and re-taken. There were 
twelve charges of cavalry with varied success. At 
3 P.M. 10,000 cavalry out-flanked our right in the superb 
plain of San Giuliano. . . The Grenadiers of the 
Guard stood like a granite redoubt, and could not be 
broken. After an obstinate resistance the enemy's left 
was checked, and our right carried the village of Castel 
Ceriolo at the bayonet. The enemy's cavalry then rapidly 
attacked our left, which was repulsed. The enemy 



3IO THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

advanced along the whole line ; the roads were covered 
with fugitives and wounded. The battle appeared lost." 

At this critical moment Desaix arrived and changed the 
fortunes of the day. Desaix himself fell mortally wounded, 
and, according to the bulletin, had only time to exclaim, 
before breathing his last : ^* Go and tell the First Consul 
that I die with the regret of not having done sufficient for 
posterity." 

It is curious that Bonaparte should have acquired more 
fame by Marengo than by any other battle he ever fought, 
and yet there is abundant proof to show that Marengo 
represented a series of military blunders. The extract we 
have given from Bonaparte's bulletin shows that the battle 
was won by dint of hard fighting, and not by generalship. 
The first fault committed by Bonaparte was venturing into 
^' the superb plain of St. Giuliano " in presence of the 
Austrian cavalry, which was far superior to his own in 
numbers. The fact is that he was ignorant of the posi- 
tion of the enemy ; he thought Melas had fallen back 
in the direction of Genoa, and he was not aware that 
the Austrians had thrown any bridges over the Bormida. 
Had it been otherwise, he would have displayed greater 
caution, and would never have detached the division of 
Desaix which had been ordered to Novi. 

That Bonaparte was himself ill-satisfied with Marengo is 
shown b}^ the care with which he doctored his own 
accounts of the battle, and the orders he gave for the 
destruction of all the original reports. Up to a certain 
point the campaign had been splendidly conceived and ably 
executed ; but at Marengo itself Bonaparte had failed to 
place all the chances on his side, according to his own maxim, 
before going into action. The fact is that Marengo was a 
surprise, and that but for the rapid return of Desaix, the 
French army would have met with an overwhelming disaster. 
As for Desaix he fell shot through the heart, and his body 
was recovered only at a late hour in the evening. The 
words put into his mouth by Bonaparte were never uttered. 



LETTER TO THE EMPEROR OF AUSTRIA. 31 I 

Jomini says : "Of all the battles gained by Napoleon 
there is not one of which he should have been less proud 
than that of Marengo. Unexpectedly attacked, as at 
Eylau, he was saved at both battles by a corps detached 
several leagues from the field of battle. . . A few 
battalions and 600 horse decided the fate of the Continent 
and changed the face of Europe." 

The glory of Marengo certainly belonged to Desaix and 
to Kellermann whose cavalry decided the fate of the day. 

The long letter addressed to the Emperor of Germany 
contained such paragraphs as these : — 

*^ English cunning has marred the effect which my over- 
tures should have produced in the mind of your Majesty. . 
The war has taken place, and thousands of Frenchmen and 
Austrians have lost their lives. . I implore your Majesty 
to put an end to the misfortunes of the Continent. It is 
from the battle-field of Marengo, in the midst of suffering 
and surrounded by 1,500 corpses, that I supplicate your 
Majesty to listen to the cry of humanity. What reasons 
can be urged in favour of continuing hostilities ? The 
interests of religion and of the Church ? Why not 
declare war against the English, the Muscovites, the 
Prussians ? They are further from the Church than we are." 

England was accused of having instigated the war and 
of having seized on the commerce of the world and the 
empire of the seas ; and the Emperor was informed that he 
had a large commerce and was interested in the liberty of the 
ocean. Austria, however, was not demoralised by Marengo. 
She had lost Italy before, and it was not in Italy that her 
fate could be decided, but in Germany. Austria accepted 
further subsidies from England, who was intent on securing 
the evacuation of Egypt, and pledged herself not to conclude 
a separate peace before February, 1801. An ambassador was 
sent to Paris to gain time, Comte de St. Julien by name. 

In his bulletin of the 17th June, Bonaparte condescended 
to treat his army to such childish inventions as these : — 

" The generals, officers, and soldiers of the Austrian 



312 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

army are indignant with Thugut. They render justice to 
the good intentions of their Emperor, and appear con- 
vinced that we are fighting against each other to raise the 
price of EngHsh sugar and coffee. An Austrian general of 
great merit said at head-quarters : * We shall have no 
repose or happiness until, by unanimous consent, we banish 
from the continent that venal and commercial nation which 
speculates on our blood for the extension of its commerce.' 
. . At Paris as at Vienna ; in France as in Germany ; in 
the French as in the Austrian army, every one desires 
peace. The intrigues and guineas of the English, the 
influence of the Empress, and the disgrace of the Arch- 
duke Charles alone prevent it." . 

In a second bulletin, dated the i8th June, Bonaparte 
said : " General Desaix brought from Egypt two little 
negroes given to him by the King of Darfour. These 
children w^ore mourning for their deceased master, after 
the manner of their country, and in an exceedingly 
touching way. 

*^ The body of the general has been conveyed by post to 
Milan, where it will be embalmed. It is not yet decided 
whether the First Consul will send it to Paris or place it in 
a monument which is to be erected on the St. Bernard to 
commemorate the passage of the French army. 

" General Desaix was the first European who carried 
the glory of the French arms beyond the Cataracts. He 
was adored by the inhabitants of Upper Egypt, who called 
him ' The Just Sultan.' He was greatly irritated by the 
bad treatment he received from Admiral Keith." 

Then followed all kinds of accusation against the British 
admiral, '' who invented so many ridiculous things while 
drinking punch off Genoa,'' and had forged a letter full of 
absurdities which the First Consul was supposed to have 
written to Massena. 

Massena, by the way, has left a very different story of 
how he was treated by Lord Keith when he was forced to 
capitulate at Genoa. Bonaparte, when he arrived from 



MRS. BILLINGTON. 313 

Egypt, refused to observe quarantine, and one of the 
principal grievances of Desaix was that he was obliged to 
submit to that precautionary measure before landing at 
Leghorn. Inde irce. 

To CITIZEN CARNOT. 

" Milan, 20th June, 1800. 

** Write to General Kleber that when the news of the 
capitulation arrived, the Brest squadron was about to sail 
with 4,000 troops and war stores ; that we have only just 
learned the capitulation has been broken, and that he has 
reconquered Egypt ; that it will be impossible to send him 
reinforcements during the months of Messidor, Thermidor, 
and Fructidor, but that during the winter, if peace be not 
concluded, he shall receive powerful succour ; that in all 
probability peace will be signed in six months. 

" Send this despatch in cipher and make General Kleber 
understand that it is necessary for the interest and safety 
of his army, the glory of the French arms, and the pros- 
perity of our commerce, that he should keep Egypt, 

" Bonaparte/' 

To GENERAL BERTHIER. 

" Milan, 21st June, 1800. 
'' I beg you will invite two of the best virtuosos to go to 
Paris in order to sing a duo in Italian at the fete of the 
14th July. You will give them all that is necessary for 
their voyage, &c. 

'' Bonaparte.'' 

Another letter, dated the same day and addressed to 
brother Lucien, gives the names of the two virtuosos — 
Madame Billington and Madame Grassini. Bonaparte- 
was so much smitten with the charms of the latter that he 
gave her a place in Josephine's household. Madame Bil- 
lington (whose memoirs were translated by no less a person 



314 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

than M. Thiers) had at that epoch married a French army 
contractor. 

BULLETIN TO THE ARMY. 

"Milan, izrdjune^ 1800. 

'^A Turkish ambassador coming from Leghorn on board 
an English frigate has arrived at Genoa. He has informed 
Admiral Keith of the deplorable condition of the Grand 
Vizier who has been driven back across the desert. 

*' Generals Willot and Danican, paid by England, have 
despatched eight or ten agents to the south of France to 
organise assassi7tation and to pillage diligences ; these two 
wretches have fallen into the greatest contempt. 

'' General Pichegru was also destined to command a force 
which was to be landed in France. It is to be regretted 
that a man who rendered such great services to the Republic 
should have tarnished his glory by meddling in wretched 
intrigues. . . . 

'' Bonaparte." 

Bonaparte now determined to hand over the command 
of the army of Italy to Massena, and to return to Paris. 

order of the day to the army. 

"Milan, i\th Jtme, 1800.^ 
" On leaving the army the First Consul congratulates it 
on the victories it has gained. The battle of Marengo will 

^ On the same day we find Nelson, who had evidently not heard of 
Marengo, writing an encouraging letter to the Pope thus worded : — 

" Leghorn, 2^th Jtme, 1 800. 

" Holy Father, — As an individual who, from his public situation, 
has had an opportunity of using his utmost exertions to assist in 
bringing about the happy event of your Holiness's return to Rome, I 
presume to offer my most sincere congratulations on this occasion ; 
and with my most fervent wishes and prayers that your residence may 
be blessed with health and every comfort this world can afford. 

'* Your Holiness will, I am sure, forgive my mentioning a circumstance 
which, although at the time it was spoken of appeared impossible, 



NEGOTIATIONS OF LUNEVILLE. 315 

be celebrated in history. Thirteen fortified places, con- 
taining ijOOO heavy guns have fallen into our power, and 
we find ourself in a position to conclude a solid peace, or, 
should the enemy be bUndly opposed to this, to commence 
a brilliant and decisive campaign for the repose of Europe 
and the glory of the nation, &c. 

" Bonaparte/' 

Negotiations for peace were opened at Luneville. 

To LUCIEN BONAPARTE. 

"Lyons, 2%th June, 1800. 
'^ I have received your letter, Citizen Minister. I shall 
arrive unexpectedly in Paris. It is not my intention to 
have triumphal arches or any kind of ceremony. I have 
too good an opinion of myself to care about such nonsense. 
I know no other triumph than public satisfaction.; 

"Bonaparte." 

On the 4th July Bonaparte put two questions to 
Talleyrand — 

" 1st. Are there any means of communicating with 
Constantinople } 

" 2nd. In the event of means existing why not employ 
them for making known the situation of Europe to the 
Grand Signor, and convincing him that he should labour 
under no apprehensions as regards Egypt, which will be 

and yet the fact did happen. Father MacCormack, a friar, coming 
to the house of Sir W. Hamilton in September, 1798, to congratulate 
me on the battle of the Nile, said: — 'What you have done is great, 
but you will do a greater thing — you will take Rome with your ships.' 
And although I do not believe that the father had the gift of pro- 
phecy, yet his guess was so extraordinary, and has turned out so 
exactly, that I could not in my conscience avoid telhng your Holiness 
of it. I will now only trespass on your time by assuring your Holiness 
with what respect I am your most obedient servant, 

"Bronte Nelson of the Nile." 



3l6 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

restored to him as soon as the Porte resumes its ancient 
relations with France ? '' 

It was only on the 20th June that Carnot had been told 
to order Kleber to hold Egypt, and had been promised 
reinforcements. 

To GENERAL MOREAU. 

" Paris, wth July, 1800. 
" I congratulate you, General, on the brilliant results of 
your campaign. We are expecting every moment an 
answer from Vienna, and if it does not arrive in a few days 
we shall recommence hostilities in Italy. 

'*■ Although we are threatened with several invasions and 
although the English squadrons swarm along our coasts, a 
strong force of Batavians and Frenchmen are going to take 
up a position on the other side of Mayence. 

" The organisation of the second army of reserve is 
actively progressing. 

'' Bonaparte." 

And in fact since Moreau opened the campaign he had 
gained five victories, and had inflicted a loss of 30,000 men 
upon Kray, who was driven back upon Ulm. 

To CITIZEN LUCIEN BONAPARTE. 

"Paris, \^th July, 1800. 

'* The Minister of the Interior will inform the members 
who wrote to him — 

"• 1st. That there is no French Academy, 

" 2nd. That they ought to know that it was dissolved by 
a law of the Republic. 

"3rd. That the Institute [of which Bonaparte was a 
member] represents the ex-Academies of Science, French, 
and belles-lettres. 

"4th. That I do not, however, see any inconvenience in 
citizens uniting in order to form a literary society on the 
condition of its not assuming a name capable of recalHng 



THE FRENCH ACADEMY. 317 

abolished institutions, that its rules contain nothing contrary 
to the Republic, and that it resembles the Lyceum of Arts 
and other establishments of the kind. 

"Sth. As for the proposal that I should become a 
member of this society, you will cause it to be understood 
that I have more important afi^airs to attend to. 

" 6th. And if this society continues to take the ridiculous 
title of French Academy and to observe is ancient statutes, 
it is the intention of the Government to suppress it at 
once.i 

'' Bonaparte.'' 

to the conservative senate. 

" Paris, 18M ^i/fy^ 1800. 

*' Senators, for the last two years the garrison of Malta 

has resisted the greatest privations. In taking the oath to 

the social pact the garrison of Malta promised to hold out 

to the last ounce of bread, and to bury themselves under 

^ The Academy, which was quite contrary to all ideas of equality 
was naturally abolished during the Revolution. The Academicians 
were regarded as belonging to a patrician order of letters. When 
calmer times came, the Institute, which had also been abolished, was re- 
established, and the French Academy became the second class of that 
body. In the year VIII. (1800) an attempt was made to re-establish 
the Academy on its ancient footing, and the idea was encouraged by 
Lucien Bonaparte, then Minister of the Interior. There were still 
fifteen Academicians alive, and it was proposed to complete the forty 
by electing Napoleon Bonaparte, his brother Lucien, the third Consul 
Lebrun, Talleyrand, &c., 8cc. Bonaparte, however, on his return from 
Marengo, disapproved of the scheme. It became repugnant to his 
feelings to be called cker collegue by tlie members of the Institute, and 
he had no desire to be elected a member of the Academy. Bernardin 
de St. Pierre, the author of Paul and Virginia^ in his reception speech 
(1807), spoke of Napoleon as having, among other glorious actions, 
re-established the French Academy; and in 1810, on a similar occa- 
sion, Esmenard said that the Academy ^* buried under the ruins of the 
throne " had been '' re-animated by the voice of a hero." As a matter 
of fact, however, the Academy was re-established only in 18 16 by a 
Royal Ordinance, 



3l8 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON 

the ruins of that impregnable fortress. The First Consul 
believes that he cannot give a greater proof of his satis- 
faction of the French people and of the interest which he 
takes in the gallant garrison of Malta than by proposing 
General Vaubois, who commands it, as a member of the 

Conservative Senate, &c. 

''Bonaparte." 

It was only in September that Malta, which neither 
French nor Spanish fleets could relieve, was obliged to 
capitulate. Out of ten tartans^ despatched to Malta in 
rapid succession, one only had run the blockade. 

DECISION. 

" Paris, 20th July, 1800. 
'' The Minister of War is authorised to pay the Citoyenne 
Beaufranchet, the mother of General Desaix, killed at 
Marengo, the sum of 3,000 francs by way of indemnity." 

Madame Beaufranchet was also to have a pension of 
;^I20 a year, which was not much for the mother of a hero 
who had saved the country and whose bones were deposited 
on the summit of the Alps, especially if one takes into 
account the enormous sums lavished by Bonaparte on his 
lieutenants. 

To general MASSENA. 

" Paris, i272djuly, 1800. 
'' I have received your different letters. . . . The con- 
tribution of Milan, that which you have imposed on 
Lucca, the extraordinary contribution which you have 
levied in Piedmont, and the million in gold which I sent 
you by Savary, ought to enable you to meet the wants of 
your army. 

" It is necessary to make seme examples. Plunder and 
burn the first village which revolts in Piedm.ont 

" Bonaparte." 

^ Boats with one mast and a lateen sail. 



CAPITULATION OF MANTUA. 319 

Bonaparte himself when campaigning in Italy managed 
to pay his troops and to send money home, but in 1800 
Italy was well-nigh exhausted. 

To GENERAL SUCHET. 

'' Paris, 2/^h July^ 1800. 
"I received your letter of the 23rd Messidor. I am 
very glad that General Massena has given you the. com- 
mand of his centre. He has made the most favourable 
report of your operations. . . I see by your letter that you 
are zealous to acquire glory ; this is the way to accomplish 
great things,. Count upon my esteem and friendship. 

" Bonaparte." 

Suchet was one of the most gallant and humane lieu- 
tenants of Bonaparte. We shall find him hereafter com- 
manding in Spain, where his conduct formed a strong 
contrast to that of the other French marshals. 

To CITIZEN CARNOT. 

" Paris, 2\th July, 1800. 
" The Consuls have been informed that the citizen 
Foissac-Latour has returned from Austria and dishonours 
the French uniform by wearing it. Let him know that he 
ceased to belong to the service of the Republic the day he 
basely surrendered the citadel of Mantua. . . . He is more 
accountable to public opinion than to the courts for his 
conduct at Mantua. The intention of the Government is 
to hear nothing more of that shameful siege which will 
long be a stain on our arms. 

" Bonaparte." 

This gives one an idea of the authority usurped by 
Bonaparte at this epoch. Mantua had been surrendered in 
July, 1799, and Bernadotte, who was then War Minister, 
had ordered a court martial. The First Consul, however, 
without awaiting the decision of the court, took upon 



320 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

himself to pronounce the condemnation of the general. 
Whatever may have been the merits of the case it is 
certain that Foissac-Latour obtained better terms from 
Souwarrow than Wurmser did from Bonaparte, and that he 
was allowed to march out with the honours of war. Bona- 
parte, however, held that good terms were equivalent to a 
bad defence. 

'* In order to be honourable," he wrote, *'a capitulation 
ought to stipulate hard conditions for the garrison. There 
is always a presumption unfavourable to a garrison which 
marches out of a place over a bridge of gold."^ 

One of General Foissac-Latour's sons afterwards served 
on Napoleon's staff. 

To CITIZEN TALLEYRAND. 

"Paris, 2Zth July^ 1800. 
" It is my intention to send General Berthier to Spain 
without any apparent diplomatic title. He will take a 
letter from you to M. Urquijo, and from me to the King 
of Spain." 

Berthier was to negotiate the cession of Tuscany to the 
Duke of Parma (the son-in-law of the King of Spain) in 
exchange for Louisiana and twelve vessels of war. 

2nd. He was to excite Spain to declare war against 
Portugal (the King of Portugal was the King of Spain's 
son-in-law). 

3rd. He was to visit the naval ports of Spain, and report 
on her maritime resources. 

4th. He was to send corn and other stores to Malta 
from Barcelona, or any other Spanish ports along the 
Mediterranean. 

The feeble King of Spain, who had become irretrievably 

entangled in the meshes of the crafty First Consul was 

destined to pay dearly for that French alliance, which was 

productive of nothing but a series of cruel humiliations 

^ Vol. X. p. 204, Military Cor^^espondence of Napoleon I. 



MASSENA REMOVED. 32 I 

and ultimate imprisonment and ruin. He was only at 
the commencement of his tribulations. 

Great deference was shown at this period to the Czar and 
the King of Prussia. All the Russian prisoners in France 
received new uniforms and were sent home, and the 
Prussian monarch was assured that he enjoyed the 
peculiar esteem of the First Consul. Negotiations, 
however were dragging on very slowly with Austria. 

At this critical moment an important change was made 
in the army. 

To GENERAL BRUNE. 

" Paris, 13//^ August^ 1800. 

** The War Minister will forward you an order to assume 

the command of the army of Italy, which is the principal 

army of the Republic in a military, and more especially 

in a political, point of view. This is the greatest mark 

of confidence I can accord you. . . . You will find the 

army in a tolerable condition, but embezzlement is at its 

height, and the individuals who are the most closely 

in contact with Massena are the most seriously 

compromised. . . . 

" Bonaparte." 

To general massena. 

"Paris, i^th August, 1800. 

"The First Consul has just appointed General Brune 
to the command of the army of Italy. You will con- 
sequently hand him over the command of that army should 
he have reached your head-quarters on the receipt of this. 
In the contrary case hand over the command to one of 
your lieutenant-generals. 

" It is the intention of the First Consul to employ your 
talents and yoMX zeal in a different manner equally useful 
to the Republic, and he authorises you to come straight to 
Paris if you desire to do so, or to return home for a while 
in order to enjoy some necessary repose. . . . 

''Bonaparte." 

VOL. I. Y 



32 2 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

It is suspected that Massena on this occasion was re- 
moved from his command on political grounds and not for 
larceny. His rapacity had not prevented Napoleon from 
employing his great talents before, and did not prevent 
him from having recourse to them again. 

To GENERAL MOREAU. 

" Paris, id,th August^ 1800. 
'' I have already informed you that you have been called 
by the esteem and confidence of the Consuls to the chief 
command of the forces in Germany. The modesty with 
which you refused to accept this important command has 
proved an additional motive for conferring it upon you. 
They anticipate that the delays of the Court of Vienna 
may render it necessary at any moment for the Govern- 
ment to break the armistice." 

And in order to insure unity of action and energy the 
army corps commanded by Angereau was placed under 
the orders of General Moreau, who this time was allowed 
complete liberty of action. 

It does not appear that Moreau refused the command ; 
he merely objected, and this much to the annoyance of 
Bonaparte, to the plan of campaign drawn out for his 

guidance in Paris. 

DECREE. 

''Paris, 6//; September, 1800. 

*' Art. 1st. A monument shall be raised to the memory 
of Generals Desaix and Kleber, who fell the same day, at 
the same hour, the one in Europe after the battle of 
Marengo, by which the arms of the Republic reconquered 
Italy, the other in Africa, after the battle of Heliopolis, 
which reconquered Egypt for the French. 

'' Art. 2nd. This monument shall be raised in the centre 
of the Place des Victoires" [where a statue to Louis XIV. 
stood, and still stands!] "The first stone will be laid by 
the First Consul on the ist Vendemiaire. An orator shall 
pronounce the funeral oration of these two illustrious 
citizens. -Bonaparte." 



LETTER ATTRIBUTED TO LOUIS XVIIL 323 

To THE COMTE DE PROVENCE. 

" Paris, ^th September ^ 1800. 
" Sir, — I have received your letter, and I thank you for 
the flattering things it contains. 

" You ought not to desire your return to France ; you 
would be obliged to march over 100,000 dead bodies. 

" Sacrifice your interests to the repose and happiness of 
France. . . . (words omitted). History will not forget 
this. 

*' I am not insensible to the misfortunes of your family. 
.... (more words omitted). I shall contribute with 
pleasure to the pleasantness and tranquillity of your 
retreat. 

'' Bonaparte." 

It is much doubted whether Louis XVIIL ever wrote 
the letter referred to above. What is certain, however, is 
that Bonaparte wrote to Louis XVIIL when he was at 
Warsaw m 1803, offering him ^; 80,000 a year if he would 
renounce his claims to the French throne, and that this 
proposition was refused with great dignity in a letter 
which was published in the Morning Chronicle on the 
2Sth July, [803. 

To LUCIEN BONAPARTE. 

"Paris, \oth Septeinber^ 1800. 
" I beg you will send me a list of our ten best painters, 
our ten best sculptors, our ten best composers, our ten 
best singers, besides those on the stage, our ten best 
architects, as well as the names of artists in any other 
line who are deserving of public attention. • 

" Bonaparte." 

In spite of a certain desire to patronise art, the 
Napoleonic was certainly not an Augustan age. 

Y 2 



324 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

To CITIZEN CARNOT. 

" Paris, 13//^ September^ 1800. 
*' Telegraph to Strasburg for a courier to take this 
despatch to General Moreau. 

** The courier who was expected has returned from 
Vienna, bringing no positive answer. This proves that 
the Court of Vienna wishes to gain the winter. Inform 
the Austrian General that you are obliged to recommence 
hostilities because his Imperial Majesty has refused to 
ratify the preliminaries of peace signed by the Comte de 
St. Julien. . . . 

'' Bonaparte." 

And hostilities once more commenced. On the one 
hand Austria refused to negotiate without England, and 
on the other it is doubtful if Bonaparte really desired 
peace. Count Miot de Melito says he merely wished to 
persuade the French people that he was anxious to bring 
the war to a dose. The maritime truce alluded to below 
was out of the question, as in accepting it England would 
have lost all the trouble and expense of blockading Malta 
and Egypt. 

To THE PUBLIC FUNCTIONARIES. 

"Paris, 22,rd September, 1800. 
" The preliminaries of peace were signed at Paris on the 
9th Thermidor (28th July), between Citizen Talleyrand 
and the Count St. Julien, and ratified twenty-four hours 
afterwards by the Consuls. Citizen Duroc was charged to 
carry them to Vienna. The intrigues of the faction 
opposed to peace have induced the Emperor to refuse his 
ratification. This refusal was caused by a note from the 
King of England, who demanded that his envoys should 
be admitted to the Congress of Luneville conjointly with 
the plenipotentiaries of the Emperor. The Government 
therefore felt obliged to break the armistice so as not to 



THE TELEGRAPH. 325 

lose the rest of the autumn in vain discussions. . . . The 
Government have also informed the King of England that 
there will be no inconvenience to admit his envoys if he 
will consent to a maritime truce. . . . 

" Bonaparte. '* 

To CITIZEN LUCIEN BONAPARTE. 

"Paris, 2\th September^ 1800. 
'* I beg you will give an employment at Marseilles to 
Citizen Gamier, a friend of General Dugommier, who for a 
long time has taken care of his daughter. 

" Bonaparte." 

Dugommier was the gallant old officer under whose 
orders Bonaparte distinguished himself at Toulon, and he 
seems always to have remembered him with the most lively 
affection. 

DECISEGN. 

" Paris, 26th September, 1800. 
"Art. 1st. Citizen Chappe must not, no matter under 
what pretext, transmit any order by telegraph which has 
not been signed by the First Consul. . . . 

" Bonaparte." 

Poor Chappe was not allowed the use of his own inven- 
tion. A few years later, disgusted with life, he threw 
himself down a well and perished. 

Having received an address on escaping an attempt 
jnade on his life, Bonaparte replied : — 

" i6th October, 1800. 
'' I thank the Tribunate for this proof of affection. I did 
not run any real danger. The seven or eight wretches, in 
spite of their desire, were unable to commit the crimes they 
meditated. . . I enter into details because it is necessary 
for France to know that the life of her first magistrate is 
never in danger. 

" Bonaparte." 



326 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

The attempt referred to above is known as the Ceracchi- 
Arena conspiracy, in which Demerville, Topino-Lebrun, the 
Duke of BonneUi, and the Prince of Santa-Croce were im- 
phcated. The plan of the conspirators was to assassinate 
the First Consul as he left the opera. It was afterwards 
suspected that this affair was got up by the police, and the 
fact is that the accused were never tried : not that this 
prevented several of them from being executed. 

The first CONSUL to the MINISTER of the INTERIOR, 

on Presenting General Moreau with a Pair of Pistols Ornamented 
with Diamonds. 

" Paris, 2\st October^ 1800. 

'' Have the names of some of the battles gained by 
General Moreau engraved on them ; do not put all, for 
there would not be sufficient place for the diamonds. 
Although General Moreau does not attach a great price to 
them, the design of the artist ought not be too much 
interfered with. 

'' Bonaparte." 

To general LACNEE. 

*' Paris, 22nd October^ 1800. 

" General Brune writes to me that General Dupont 
has entered Tuscany and has beaten the insurgents who 

had invaded the Cisalpine General Brune must 

disarm Tuscany as quickly as possible and make some 
severe examples. 

" Inform the General also that the Government desire he 
will not touch the pictures and statues in the gallery of 
Florence. For the moment he zvill 7nerely send the statue of 
Vemts de Medecis by way of Lucca and Genoa. . . . 

'' Bonaparte." 

And a few days later General Brune was instructed to 
hold Tuscany ; to despatch a vessel from Leghorn to 



ENGLISH SHIPS AT LEGHORN. 327 

Alexandria with newspapers, muskets, and sabres for 
General Menou ; to live in harmony with the Pope ; to levy 
a war contribution of 2,000,000 or 3,000,000 francs on 
Leghorn in order to pay a month^s arrears to the army, &c. 
And in the event of the Tuscans resenting these exactions 
and exhibiting a spark of patriotism, they were to be treated 
lite brigands. They had done nothing to deserve these 
arbitrary measures, but Leghorn was a port much fre- 
quented by English ships, and Tuscany was required to 
enable Bonaparte to pay the King of Spain for Louisiana ! 



To GENERAL MENOU. 

" Paris, 2\th October, 1800. 
'' Rear- Admiral Ganteaume will hand you this letter. 
Peace has been concluded with America, Algeria, and 
Tunis. The separate negotiations with Austria, Russia, 
and England lead us to hope in the conclusion of a 
general peace. . . . The news received from Constanti- 
nople acquaints us with the disorganisation of the army 
of the Grand Vizier and the dissolution with which that 
vast empire is menaced. . . . All those officers and men 
who have returned to France in an honourable manner 
have received proofs of public esteem and gratitude. I pity 
those who have not sufficient virtue to second you in your 
noble resolution, and whose courage has failed them. They 
will find in France that contempt due to men who, no 
matter what their services, are deficient in the necessary 
amount of constancy. 

" Bonaparte.'' 



It is almost needless to remark that this letter never 
reached its destination. The number of officers who, in 
imitation of Bonaparte, considered their presence necessary 
in France, and who found means to return home, was 
highly displeasing to the First Consul. 



328 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

To GENERAL BRUNE. 

"Paris, \th November^ 1800. 
'' Citizen Dupard ought to have reached you with 
2,50o,ooof. in gold. ... I hope you have made a severe 
example of the inhabitants of Arezzo. When a town 
allows itself to be taken by assault it must pay the penalty. 
You must show no pity in such cases. If any revolts take 
place in remote corners, make severe examples. All foreign 
people^ but especially Italians^ require to be dealt with 
severely from time to time. . . . 

''Bonaparte." 

On the 5th November, 1800, Bonaparte caused a note to 
be sent to General Toussaint Louverture, congratulating him 
on the end of the civil war in St. Domingo, and saying : — 

" The happiness of the inhabitants of this beautiful 

colony interests the Government as much as even that of 

the inhabitants of France. . . . The First Consul will 

shortly write to you himself. He has already bestowed 

attention on an organisation for St. Domingo, which will 

convince you of the peculiar esteem in which he holds the 

gallant blacks. . . . 

'' Bonaparte." 

To THE KING OF SPAIN, 

" Paris, Zth November ^ 1800. 

'' Seeing the present state of Europe, I have thought fit 
to charge the Citizen Lucien Bonaparte, my brother, to 
represent to your Majesty the utility of the conquest of 
Portugal. Malta and Mahon have fallen into the power of 
our enemies, and even Louisiana is threatened. 

*' The greatest damage we could inflict upon English 
commerce would be to seize upon Portugal. Besides, this 
conquest would compensate Spain for her losses and ex- 
penses, and would illustrate the reign of your Majesty. . . 

'' Bonaparte." 



THE NAUTILUS. 329 

Then followed the usual invectives against England, and 
a promise of French troops should the king deem their 
assistance necessary. 

To REAR-ADMIRAL GANTEAUME. 

"Paris, 22nd November, 1800. 
" I send you the Citizen Jerome Bonaparte to serve his 
apprenticeship in the marine. You know he will have to 
be kept in order so as to make up for lost time. See that 
he performs all the duties of the career he has embraced 
with exactitude. ... I need not say how impatient I am 
to learn that you have succeeded in your new mission. . . . 

" Bonaparte." 

DECISION. 

" Paris, 4/^ December, 1800. 
'* The Minister will treat this affair with Fulton, Volney, 
and others." 



This was the abrupt note dictated by Bonaparte on the 
subject of the steamship Nautilus, which had been sub- 
mitted by Fulton to the French Minister of Marine. 

On the 14th December Bonaparte issued confidential 
instructions with the view of sending aid to Egypt. 
Citizen Miot de Melito, who has left us an account of 
his expedition, was to be dropped at Ajaccio. He was to 
proclaim Corsica kors la Constitution ; to establish an 
extraordinary tribunal, and to judge and execute all the 
robbers, assassins, and persons guilty of provoking rebellion, 
detained in prison. He was to burn down the houses of 
the principal rebels, like the Quenzas and the Cesares, and 
to re-establish tranquillity in the island. The real destina- 
tion of the naval force, which was commanded by Admiral 
Ganteaume, was kept secret. It was supposed to be 
bound for St. Domingo, and it was only when the squad- 
ron had passed the Straits of Gibraltar that a number of 



2SO THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

coloured officers, who were under the impression they 
were going to serve under Toussaint Louverture dis- 
covered they had been misled. 

To CITIZEN TALLEYRAND. 

" Paris, i6//z Decejuber, 1800. 
'' I think that a letter written to the Grand Seignor, and 
sent through the channel of the Ottoman Ambassador in 
Paris, might be useful under present circumstances. The 
situation of Europe should be laid before him m a suitable 
manner, and the fact that the English alone are opposed to 
the evacuation of Egypt ; that we shall evacuate it only on 
the conclusion of a general peace, and that it is in the 
interest of the Porte to resume its ancient relations with 
France. "BONAPARTE." 

To CITIZEN CHAPTAL. 

"Paris, 227td December^ 1800. 
" I wish you to send a company of French comedians to 
Egypt ; the state of prosperity in which the army of the 
East finds itself, and its idleness in the great city of Cairo, 
render this matter, which at first sight may appear trivial, 
necessary, even from a political point of view. A sufficient 
number of artists might be found at Marseilles and 
Toulon. ... I should not regret expending 40,000 
francs in this affair. . . . ''BONAPARTE" 

On the same day Talleyrand was ordered to see that 
every vessel which tried to reach Egypt carried 1,000 
muskets, 10,000 cannon balls, 250 pairs of pistols, 250 
sabres, and medical stores. 

To CITIZEN TALLEYRAND. 

"Paris, 24M December^ 1800. 
'* I beg you will inform Citizen Belleville that according 
to all accounts received from England he showed too much 



ATTEMPTS ON BONAPARTE S LIFE. 33 1 

indulgence towards the neutral vessels in Leghorn, so that 
the English managed to save over 500,000/. which ought to 
belong to the Republic. 

"Bonaparte." 

No letters are published for the 4th and Sth Nivose, a 
fact which may be attributed to the attempt made to blow 
up the First Consul on the 3rd, as he was on the way to 
the theatre to see one of his favourite actresses perform. 
On the 7th Nivose Bonaparte called for a report on this 
affair, the number of people wounded, and the amount of 
damage done. Thanks to the dexterity of his coachman, 
Caesar, Bonaparte's carriage cleared the " infernal machine," 
and the First Consul and his party escaped unhurt. 

The consequence of this attempt fell upon the innocent 
and the guilty alike. Ceracchi, Arena, Demerville, and 
Topino-Lebrun were at once condemned to death and 
executed. 

A Cabinet Council was held on the nth Nivose, at 
which a report by the Prefect of Police, Dubois, was read, 
enumerating the various attempts on the life of the First 
Consul. In addition to the Ceracchi-Arena affair and that 
in the Rue St. Nicaise, a man called Chevalier had formed 
a plan for blowing up Bonaparte. He and his accomplices 
were arrested on the Sth November, 1800. A plot was 
then formed to introduce several assassins into the Grena- 
diers of the Guard ; but this conspiracy was discovered and 
frustrated. A French Brutus then appeared in the shape 
of one Metgen, who was to stab the tyrant at the Theatre 
Frangais during the performance of Britannicus. The 
First Consul did not go to the play on the evening \n 
question, and the attempt was adjourned. Gombault- 
Lachaise then invented a machine with which the First 
Consul was to have been slaughtered during the funeral 
ceremony in honour of Desaix and Kleber, but the deco- 
rations were in the way. A machine containing '^ Greek 
fire " was about to be tried, when it fell into the hands of 



^^2 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

the police. All these and other attempts were laid to the 
charge of a company of tyrannicides. 

Bonaparte determined to visit the attempt of the 3rd 
Nivose on the Jacobins, although soon made aware by 
Fouche that the guilty parties were Royalists. He selected 
133 names from ^' his dictionary/' the names of Jacobins 
who had opposed him on the i8th Brumaire ; and a few 
days later most of these innocent victims were transported 
to Cayenne, from which place only two lived to return. It 
is related that the list was so carelessly made out, that it 
included not only people quite inoffensive, but several 
persons in the employment of the Government, such as 
Baudray, who had been acting as a judge at Guadaloupe 
for five years ; and Paris, who had been dead for six 
months when the explosion in the Rue St. Nicaise took 
place. 

Before the end of Nivose the real authors of the crime 
of the 3rd were arrested. They were Carbon, a Ven- 
dean who had served under Bourmont, Timoleon, who 
had been chief of Bourmont's staff; and St. Regeant, a 
C/iouan. 

The attempt to blow up the First Consul resulted there- 
fore in the execution of Ceracchi, Arena, Demerville, and 
Topino-Lebrun ; of Chevalier and four of his accomplices ; 
of Carbon and St. Regeant (Timoleon made his escape), 
and the transportation of 130 Jacobins. 

On the 7th Nivose Bonaparte called for a report on this 
affair, from which it appeared that ten persons had been 
killed on the spot, or had died of their wounds, and that 
forty-six houses had been damaged. It was decided that 
the damaged houses should be pulled down in order to 
carry out improvements, which was turning the crime to 
some advantage. 



CHAPTER VII. 

THE YEAR 1801. 

The principal events of 1801 were — 
The signature of the treaty of Luneville between France 
and Austriai, by which the independence of the Bata- 
vian, Helvetic, Ligurian, and Cisalpine Republics was 
guaranteed. Austria lost Tuscany, which was ceded to 
the son of the Duke of Parma. 

The reconstruction of the League of Neutres under 
the auspices of Russia and Prussia. 
The victory of Nelson in the Baltic. 
The assassination of Paul I. 
The dissolution of the League of Neutres. 
England makes proposals of peace. 

The coronation of the Emperor Alexander. Peace 
concluded between Russia and England. 

Preliminaries of peace with France signed on the 21st 
October. England consented to restore the Cape of Good 
Hope, Guiana, Tobago, Martinique, St. Lucia, and Pondi- 
cherry, and to evacuate Minorca and Elba. Malta was to 
be given back to the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, and 
Egypt to the Sultan. The preliminaries also stipulated 
the integrity of Portugal ; the evacuation of the Papal 
and Neapolitan States by the French troops. General 
Lauriston, who brought these conditions to England was 



334 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

received with every demonstration of delight ; the horses 
were taken out of his carnage and he was drawn by the 
people to Whitehall. 

By this treaty England gave up all her conquests with 
the exception of Ceylon, which had been taken from the 
Dutch, and Trinidad, which had been taken from Spain. 

France sacrificed nothing but two islands belonging to 
her allies, and agreed to evacuate the Papal States. If 
she consented to withdraw her troops from Naples, that 
was owing to pressure on the part of Russia, which Power 
protested strongly against French interference, not only in 
the south of Italy, but in Piedmont, Switzerland, Bavaria, 
and Portugal. 

In July the Concordat between France and Rome was 
signed, but owing to certain difficulties respecting the 
nomination of bishops it was not promulgated for more 
than a year. 

In 1 80 1 the King of Spain, who had been forced to make 
war on his son-in-law, the King of Portugal, signed the 
treaty of Badajoz. 

Tuscany was erected into the kingdom of Etruria, and 
in exchange France received Louisiana from Spain. 

A great many efforts were made by France to reinforce 
her army in Egypt, but they all failed, thanks to the 
vigilance of the British navy. An English force under 
Abercromby landed at Aboukir, and beat General Menou 
in March. In April the French, after the defeat of 
Canope, capitulated at Cairo and Alexandria, and in 
September they evacuated Egypt. 

The Emperor Paul and Bonaparte had agreed to invade 
India. A force of 35,000 French soldiers under the command 
of Massena was to march to Ulm, thence to descend the 
Danube to the Black Sea, and to be transported on board 
a Russian fleet to Taganrog, to make its way to the Volga, 
and to be conveyed in boats to Astrakan, where the 
French were to be joined by 3S,ooo Russians and 50,000 
Cossacks ; this force was to cross the Caspian to Astrabad 



INVASION OF INDIA. 335 

and to push on for Candahar by way of Herat. It was 
calculated that Massena would be able to reach the Indus 
in 130 days., With the death of Paul, and the succession 
of Alexander, who, as a French writer remarked, refer- 
ring to the coronation ceremonies, walked preceded by 
the assassins of his grandfather, followed by those of 
his father, and surrounded by his own, the scheme was 
abandoned. 

Several camps were formed along the coast of the 
Channel with the view of invading England. 

ORDER. 

" Paris, ^th Ja7iuary^ 1801. 
"Art. 1st. The Minister of Marine will have Citizen 
Tallien placed under arrest for having left Egypt without 
a passport after having fomented troubles there. 

** Art. 2nd. Citizen Gilot, apothecary, will be sent back to 
Egypt to be brought before a court-martial of the Army of 
the East on the charge of having left the army without 

^^^v^- '' Bonaparte." 

In a letter of the 7th January, addressed to Talleyrand, 

Bonaparte wrote : — " Since the English appear desirous of 

attacking Egypt, the Republic must deprive them of the 

only ally which remains to them on the Continent," meaning 

Portugal. 

To GENERAL MOREAU. 

"Paris, (^th January^ 1801. 

"I have received your letter, and thank you for what 

you say on the subject of the extraordinary event of the 

3rd Nivose. I need not tell you with what interest I have 

followed your splendid and skilful manoeuvres ; you have 

again surpassed yourself during this campaign. These 

wretched Austrians are very obstinate ; they counted upon 

the snow and ice ; they were not yet acquainted with you. 

*' I salute you affectionately, 

" Bonaparte." 



336 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

There was a good deal of rejoicing over the victory of 
HohenHnden, which brought Austria to her knees, and 
almost completed the isolation of England on the Continent. 
Salutes were fired in honour of this important event, 
especially at Calais, with the view of announcing the defeat 
of our last ally of any importance ; but the admiration 
expressed by the First Consul was hardly sincere. 

When at St. Helena, Napoleon, in his *' Observations on 
the Military Events of 1800 in Germany,"^ said Moreau did 
not understand his plan of campaign, and that had it been 
possible for him to leave Paris he would have placed 
himself at the head of the army of the Rhine ; that Moreau 
might have defeated and have captured half the Austrian 
army in a fortnight ; that Moreau spread out his army and 
compromised it ; that he remained inactive after the battle 
of Egen, and by his faal indecision rendered the blood 
shed there useless. " Moreau," wrote Napoleon, *' three 
times in forty days repeated the same demonstrations 
without attacking ; he only succeeded in rendering his 
enemy bolder, and in giving him an opportunity of beating 
his divisions separately. . . . During this campaign the 
French army, which was the more numerous, was always 
inferior in number on the field of battle. This is what 
happens to irresolute generals, who act without principles 
and without plans. This feeling your way, this mezzo 
termine, is fatal in war." Napoleon terminated a long 
criticism on the operations which terminated with the 
battle of Hohenlinden by saying — " No doubt the battle 
of Hohenlinden was very glorious for General Moreau and 
for the French army. It was one of the most decisive of 
the war, but it cannot be attributed to any manoeuvre, to 
any combination, or to any military genius." Not a word 
is said of the manner in which Moreau's summer opera- 
tions were hampered ; nor is he accorded the slightest 
praise for his "skilful and splendid manoeuvres" in 
December. 

^ Napoleon^ s Military Correspondence^ vol. x., chapters viii. and ix. 



THE TREATY OF EL ARISH. 337 

On the same day, in a message to the legislative body, 
Bonaparte referred at some length to the situation in 
Egypt.* He said El Arish had fallen into the hands of 
the Grand Vizier, thanks to the intrigues of the English 
and the discouragement of the French army. Kleber, he 
said falsely, had men and supplies sufficient to enable him 
to resist the forces with which he was menaced. '^ But 
our warriors had only one desire, one hope, that of re- 
turning to save their country. Kleber yielded to their 
impatience. The English deceived, menaced, caressed, 
and finally, by means of artifice, tore from him the capi- 
tulation of El Arish. The most courageous and skilful 
generals were in despair. The virtuous Desaix groaned 
on signing a treaty of which he disapproved." 

Bonaparte then referred in violent language to the 
refusal of the British Cabinet to ratify the treaty of El 
Arish (of which he himself so highly disapproved), to which 
conduct, he said, France owes the finest of her possessions. 
It was this refusal, in fact, which enabled Bonaparte to 
assure Selim III. that he desired to evacuate Egypt, but 
that he was prevented from doing so by England. This 
was certainly turning a misfortune to the best account. 

On the 13th January Bonaparte ordered the Minister 
of Marine to organise an expedition to the Cape of Good 
Hope, which was to be undertaken in connection with the 
Batavian Republic. 

INSTRUCTIONS. 

^'' Paris, i\th January^ 1801. 

" General Toussaint Louverture, in the midst of the 
storms and ravages of the Revolution, has managed, by 
his prudence and courage, to save France a large and 
important colony. His virtues have merited the con- 
fidence of all parties, and his successes the admiration 
of Europe." 

And by way of reward, Toussaint Louverture was 
appointed Captain-General of the French part of St. 
VOL. I. z 



338 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

Domingo. At the same time, however. Citizen Lequoy 
Montgiraud was nominated Colonial Prefect, with special 
powers from the First Consul, who protested that he had 
no intention of interfering with the liberty which had been 
acquired, but merely of regulating its enjoyment, &c., &c. 
We shall presently see how the coloured general was 
rewarded for saving a large and important colony. 

On the 15th January Bonaparte wrote to Abdallah 
Menou that the armies of the Republic were under the 
walls of Prague, Vienna, and Venice, and that the Army 
of the East, operating on the Red Sea, in Syria, and in 
Africa excited the hopes, the curiosity, and the solicitude 
of all ; that the Englishman trembled and shuddered, 
being abandoned by all Europe and being at war with 
Russia, which had become one of the best friends of France. 
Hopes were held out of relief arriving from Ancona and 
other Italian and Spanish ports, as well as from Brest and 
Rochefort. The letter concluded : '* Let the Army of the 
East remain worthy of itself; let it not be frightened at 
phantoms, and it will have rendered the Republic the 
most signal service." 

To CITIZEN TALLEYRAND. 

"Paris, i']th Janua7y^ 1801. 

*' I beg you will send a courier to Madrid, and inform 
the ambassador of the Republic (Lucien Bonaparte) that 
the Emperor of Russia has written me a very friendly letter 
with his own hand ; that already the relations between 
France and the northern Powers are on the best footing ; 
that the influence of France and Russia will decide 
Prussia, and that then England will be entirely cut off 
from the Continent ; that France, Spain, and Holland 
should take advantage of this circumstance to strike a 
blow, and thus change the aspect of the war. . . . The 
naval forces of the three powers can undertake — ist, an 
expedition against Ireland ; 2nd, against Brazil and India 



THE CZARS LETTER. 339 

(sic) ; 3rd, against Surinam, Trinidad, and the American 
isles ; 4th, several expeditions in the Mediterranean." 
And the Spanish Government was to be asked to place 
at the disposal of France the fifteen Spanish ships of war 
lying in Brest ; to send four ships of the line and two 
frigates, with 2,000 soldiers, to Trinidad ; and to arm all 
the vessels it possessed at Cadiz, Barcelona, and Cartha- 
gena, in order to attack Mahon. ** The King of Spain," 
concluded these long and elaborate instructions, " has ten 
frigates at Carthagena and Barcelona; he would much 
please us by selling, ceding, or lending us three or four. 

" Bonaparte." 



The letter to which Bonaparte referred as having been 
written to him by Paul III., was in reality a very imperious 
note drawn up by Count Rostopchine. In this kind of 
ukase, as Lanfrey calls it, the Count informed the First 
Consul, not of the wishes, but of the will of the Emperor 
his master, and the conditions upon which harmony might 
be restored between the two countries. These conditions 
were — the restitution of Malta, the restoration of the King 
of Sardinia, the integrity of the states of the King of 
Naples, of Bavaria, and of Wurtemburg. 

To CITIZEN TALLEYRAND. 

'■' Paris, 4.//1 February, 1801. 

" I beg you will send a courier to Madrid to acquaint 
the ambassador of the Republic with the nomination and 
departure of General St. Cyr, and to inform him that 
Admiral Ganteaume sailed from Brest on the 3rd Pluviose 
with seven ships of the line, two frigates, and 4,000 troops; 
that his destination is Egypt; that this must be kept 
secret. . . . The frigates La Justice and U Egyptienne left 
Toulon on the 4th, with 500 men and supplies for Egypt. 
They must stir themselves at Madrid. . . . Make the 

z 2 



340 thp: correspondence of napoleon. 

Spaniards feel how shameful it is for the Spanish monarchy 
that two vessels should blockade seven in the port of Cadiz. 
If they are no longer the proud Castilians who subdued 
the New World, at least let them not become the last nation 
in the world. . . . Reiterate my desire to see Mazarredo 
recalled ; let him be given an honourable place in Spain ; 
but he has neither the genius nor the heart for war. . . . 
Tell our ambassador to let the Prince of the Peace under- 
stand that instead of Tuscany it is Naples itself that we 
may give to the young Prince of Parma, a kingdom upon 
which he has incontestable claims. . . . 

"Bonaparte." 

The idea of giving Naples to the Duke of Parma was 
never seriously entertained, and was certainly never carried 
out. Ganteaume, after passing the Straits, was obliged 
to seek shelter in Toulon ; while, after the battle of 
Algesiras, Saumarez blockaded Linois and the "proud 
Castilians " in Cadiz with a force, numerically speaking, 
only half as strong as that of the enemy. 

On the 4th February we see by instructions sent to 
Murat and Berthier that the King of Naples was to be 
warned that, if he did not evacuate the Papal States and 
lay an embargo on English vessels, the French army w^ould 
pay him a visit. On the same day the First Consul com- 
plained of the apathy reigning in French ports, and sent 
instructions to Rear-Admiral Villaret Joyeuse to sally out 
of Brest with twenty vessels every time the blockading 
squadron was reduced below eighteen. 

On the 6th February Bonaparte issued orders for the 
reception of the new Russian ambassador, M. de Kalitcheff. 
Commandant Caffarelli was to go to the frontier to meet 
him, and was to accompany him to Paris. He was to be 
escorted by detachments of cavalry and gendarmerie, &c. 
This system of personal cajolery was frequently resorted 
to. Bonaparte had soon to complain of the ambassador 
and his instructions. 



ATTACKS UPON ENGLAND. 34 I 

MESSAGE TO THE SENATE. 

'•' Paris, 13M February^ 1801. 

"Peace has been signed at Luneville; it was such as 
the French people desired ; " — Rhine boundary ; hberty of 
Cisalpine, Batavian, Helvetic, and Ligurian Republics, &c. 

" The King of Spain has been our faithful ally and has 
suffered in our cause. Neither reverses nor the perfidious 
insinuations of our enemies could detach him from our 
interests ; he shall receive his recompense. A prince of 
his blood is about to seat himself on the throne of 
Tuscany. He will remember that he owes it to the 
fidelity of Spain and the friendship of France ; his roads 
and his ports will be closed to our enemies and will 
become the asylum of our commerce and our ships. 

"Austria — and this is a pledge of peace — Austria, 
separated henceforward from France by vast regions, will 
no longer suffer from that rivalry which for several cen- 
turies has caused so many troubles to two great Powers, 
and so man}^ calamities to Europe." 

These assurances were followed by the usual invectives 
against England, whose ambition was boundless, and who 
was arming against Russia, Sweden, and Denmark. The 
Message terminated thus : — 

" The French Government will avenge with them an 
insult common to all nations, without, however, losing 
sight of this fact, that it should fight only to secure the 
peace and happiness of the world. 

'' Bonaparte." 

This last phrase was considered necessary because the 
French nation was most anxious for tranquillity, and had 
hailed the signature of the treaty of Luneville with un- 
mistakable symptoms of delight. People, however, were 
beginning to regard with suspicion this continual fighting 
in order to secure the blessing^s of peace. They were 



342 _ THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

doubtless reminded of the sonnet in Moliere's Misanthrope^ 
ending — 

" Belle Phillis, on d^sesp^re, 
Alors qu'on espere toujours." 

On the gth January Talleyrand had declared that 
Tuscany should be restored to the Grand Duke, but on 
the 24th he informed Austria that she must for ever 
relinquish the possession of that country. Between those 
two days the Neutral League, under the auspices of 
the Czar, had been reconstituted, and Russia, Sweden, 
Denmark, and Prussia went over to the enemy. Austria 
was obliged to accept any terms, deeming it fortunate 
that Bonaparte did not carry out a threat to restore 
to Venice her ancient organisation. How Spain was 
rewarded for her fidelity will be seen. 

To CITIZEN TALLEYRAND. 

*^ Paris, I'^th February, 1801. 

" By a secret treaty concluded with Spain, she is to give 
us six ships of the line As for Portugal, inde- 
pendently of the conditions inserted in the treaty, we 
must insist upon having 15,000,000 or 20,000,000 francs, 
and above all, the four ships of the line and the frigate 
which blockaded me at Alexandria. Make the Spanish 
ambassador feel the importance of this condition : it will 

be a lesson given to small powers to respect France 

You will also inform the ambassador of the Republic at 
Madrid that we wish to preserve the portion of the island 
of Elba which belongs to Tuscany, and that we hope to 
be able to obtain that portion which belongs to the King 
of Naples. In settling with Naples we will arrange for 
the union of Piombino to Tuscany, in which case Spain 
must give us five out of the ten frigates lying out of 

commission at Barcelona 

" BONAPARTE." 



THE ARMY OF THE EAST. 343 

Bonaparte could never get over those Portuguese 
vessels which helped the English squadron to maintain 
the blockade of Alexandria. He constantly reverted to 
this subject, which evidently influenced the relentless policy 
he adopted towards the House of Braganza. It will be 
remarked that Portugal, instead of 8,000,000, was now 
called upon to pay from 15,000,000 to 20,000,000 francs. 
It becomes difficult to follow all the territorial combi- 
nations in which the First Consul indulged. He was 
constantly robbing Peter to pay Paul, and finally cheating 
both parties. 

PROCLAMATION to the ARMY OF THE EAST. 

** Paris, 20th Februajy, 1801. 

" Soldiers, the French people triumph in Europe : the 
Army of the East will never betray its destinies 1 It will 
defend that land, the object of so many hopes, the fruit of 
so many labours. 

"You are numerous, you are brave, all covered with 
wounds, and escaped from the chances of a hundred 
fights. . . ., . If bravery is the first quality of the soldier, 
constancy is the second. 

"To-day a European army, which has dishoqoured 
itself in Batavia, at Ferrol, and at Cadiz, has joined the 
contemptible army of the Grand Vizier. It has been 
wandering for nine months on the ocean. 

" The seas of Egypt have been fatal to pur sailors ; 
let them witness the shame and defeat of the English 
battalions ; let all who disembark remain dead or captive ; 
let the desert be the tomb of the Grand Vizier, and let so 
many lofty deeds attest to future ages the glory of a great 
people, &c„ a Bonaparte." 

Bad nevirs had been received respecting the discipline 
of the army of the East, in which partial revolts had 
occurred, and in which suicides were rife. A little flattery 
was deemed essential. 



344 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

On the 25th Bonaparte sent further urgent instructions 
to Admiral Ganteaume : — "Take advantage of the re- 
mainder of the bad season to fulfil your mission, for you 
must relieve the army of the East at no matter what price. 
If Admiral Warren has only four ships of the Hne and 
a few frigates, do not allow yourself to be blockaded 
by him." 

To THE EMPEROR OF RUSSIA. 

** Paris, I'jth February^ 1801. 

"I have received your Majesty's letter of the i8th 
December 

^^ The arrogance and insolence of the English exceed 
all example. I am going to assemble, as your Majesty 
appears to wish, 300 or 400 gun launches in the ports 
of Flanders, where I shall concentrate an army. I have 
given orders for an army to be assembled in Brittany, 
which can be embarked on board the Brest squadron/' 

Bonaparte added that the ports of Naples and Sicily 
were closed to the English, and that a corps of observation 
at Bordeaux was forcing Portugal to close hers ; he ex- 
pressed the hope that the Emperor Paul would prevent all 
British commerce with the northern powers. 

*' The English/' he continued, *' are attempting to invade 
Egypt. The interest of all the Mediterranean Powers, and 
those of the Black Sea, is that Egypt should belong to 
France. The Suez Canal, which will join the Indian 
Ocean to the Mediterranean, is already traced ; it is a 
work which could be easily accomplished in a short time 
and which would be of incalculable advantage to Russian 
commerce. If your Majesty is of the same opinion as 
before with regard to a portion of the commerce of the 
north passing through the south, you can attach your 
name to a great undertaking, which will exercise immense 
influence on the future of the Continent, by bringing 
pressure to bear on the Porte in the matter of Egypt 

" Bonaparte." 



THE SUEZ CANAL. 345 

The Czar probably failed to see how Russian commerce 
was to be benefited by the Suez Canal as long as 
Constantinople remained in the hands of the Turks. 

Aides-de-camp were sent in hot haste to Brest, Rochefort, 
Toulon, Marseilles, Lorient, &c., touching the great expe- 
dition, and General Lacuee was to harangue the naval 
captains at Toulon on the immense interest which a 
favourable issue would have on the general peace. 

To CITIZEN TALLEYRAND. 

" Paris, ind March ^ 1801. 
" Send a courier to the Ambassador of the Republic at 
Madrid, and say that I attach great importance — ist, to 
see activity displayed at Cadiz, so that the Spaniards may 
have ten vessels in a month's time, either to intercept the 
English squadrons in the Straits, or to act with the French 
and Russian squadrons in the Mediterranean. 2nd, to 
obtain the six vessels which are owing to us. 3rd, you 
will authorise him to offer Lucca for the Duke of Parma, 
in addition to Tuscany ; but on the condition of the 
Spaniards giving us three of the frigates at Barcelona or 
Carthagena, and six of the line of battle ships at the 
Havannah. 4th, if the King of Spain wants to avoid 
occupying one of the provinces of Portugal, he can do 
so on condition of the King of Portugal handing us the 
three ships which blockaded me at Alexandria, and that 
independently of other conditions. . . . 

"Bonaparte." 

For the moment ships were absolutely necessary, and 
ulterior designs were to be temporarily sacrificed in order 
to procure them. It is not so clear where the requisite 
officers and crews were to come from. 

On the 4th March, 1801, Bonaparte decided that there 
should be an annual exhibition held in Paris during the 
five complementary days, or the sans culottides of the 
Republican calendar. The objects to be admitted were 



346 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

new inventions or manufactured goods very highly 
finished. 

On the 6th March, Bonaparte sent several pages of in- 
structions to General Schuguet who was about to embark 
for Egypt, and to take with him 200,000 francs in gold. 
He was to sail on board Admiral Ganteaume's squadron, 
which had managed to get out of Brest, and through the 
Straits, but alarmed by the appearance of a large Eng- 
lish fleet had taken shelter in Toulon. Bonaparte was 
greatly incensed at this mishap. He wrote to Ganteaume 
saying : — 

" Since you are not blockaded there can be no doubt 
that you fell in vv^ith Admiral Warren's squadron only. 
You missed a fine opportunity. You might have been at 
Alexandria by this time, and Egypt would have been 
saved. It now remains for you to make up for lost time. 
Admiral Keith will soon learn that you have entered the 
Mediterranean. . . . The English have only eighteen 
vessels of the line in the Mediterranean. Admiral Warren 
and the officers of the English navy know their duty too 
well not to blockade Toulon if they had ships at their 
disposal. . . . With promptitude, boldness, and skilful 
manoeuvres you will able to throw a body of troops into 
Egypt. . . . 

'' Bonaparte." 

Numerous were the letters and despatches now written 
on the subject of Egypt. On the 12th March, referring to 
the armistice between the French and Neapolitan armies, 
Bonaparte wrote to Talleyrand saying that he was in a 
hurry to conclude something with Naples in order to be 
able to send succour to the army of the East, '* which is 
the principal motive of our conduct." 

What Bonaparte wished and intended was to establish 
himself in the Gulf of Taranto, so as to be as near Egypt 
as possible. 



FULTON S INVENTION. 347 

To CITIZEN FORFAIT. 

"Paris, 13//^ March, 1801. 
" Order Brigadier-General Houdetot to start immediately 
for Rochefort. Give the same order to two or three officers 
who can fix public attention on the proposed expedition 
to India. "Bonaparte." 

To CITIZEN TALLEYRAND. 

" Paris, 14M March, 1801. 
'* The ambassador of the BLepublic at Madrid writes 
that the King of Spain has decided on giving us the three 
vessels at Cadiz, and a SO-gun ship, and two frigates which 
are at Carthagena. ... a BONAPARTE." 

On the 20th March, Bonaparte issued a pompous pro- 
clamation in which he announced that a glorious peace 
had terminated the war on the Continent. He was not 
then aware that the maritime confederation had experi- 
enced two fatal blows, and that the Russian alliance was 
at an end, owing to the death of Paul, and Nelson's 
victory in the Baltic. 

DECISION. 

" Paris, 20th March, 1801. 

*' The First Consul consents to this arrangement " — an 
arrangement authorising the Minister of Marine to advance 
10,000 francs to Fulton to enable him to terminate his 
trials with the Nautilus at Brest, and to give him certain 
sums by way of recompense. 

To CITIZEN TALLEYRAND. 

"Paris, 12nd March ^ 1801. 
" I beg you will write to our minister at Rome telling 
him to inform the Pope that I regret to see the reception 
accorded to Cardinal Maury in his States, and the bad 
conduct of that prelate. << BONAPARTE." 



348 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

Maury, of lamp-post fame, the inventor of the appellation 
sans culottes^ was at that moment acting as agent for 
Louis XVIII. at the Papal Court. He soon afterwards 
became the devoted adherent of Bonaparte, and remained 
devoted until 18 14. 

To GENERAL BERTHIER. 

"Paris, 25M March, 1801. 
" The English when in dread of an invasion had carriages 
constructed capable of transporting twenty-two men, which, 
drawn by four horses, conveyed them rapidly from one 
point to another. 

" Circumstances constantly occur when similar carriages 
might be employed with advantage. I beg you will have 
one constructed. If it succeeds, you can have others 
built. . . . 

'' Bonaparte." 

The interest of this letter lies not only in the fact of 
Bonaparte borrowing from us, but because when he 
broke up the camp at Boulogne some years later, he 
hurried a portion of his army into Germany in waggons, 
and thus caught Mack at Ulm. 

On the 5th April, Bonaparte sent instructions to General 
Berthier on the subject of Soult's conduct in Naples. He 
was to maintain strict discipline ; he was not to mix 
himself up with any revolutions ; he was to go to mass on 
sXXfete days, with the military bands ; he was to live on 
good terms with the priests, and the officers of the King 
of Naples. Efforts were to be made to get hold of the 
Isle of Elba. Murat was to take measures for occupying 
Porto-Longone and Porto-Ferrajo, and an expedition was 
to be directed against the island from Corsica. 

Soult was also to be informed that — " We are so pressed 
for money, owing to all our armies re-entering the territory 
of the Republic, that we cannot send him a sou!' Tuscany 
was to provide him w^ith funds. Tuscany which had 



THE PRINCE OF THE PEACE. 349 

recently been exchanged against Louisiana ! The fact 
is that the *' Exterior Receipts '' which used to figure in 
the budget as a regular item, and which represented so 
much plunder, could no longer be counted upon. Hence 
the penury to which the French treasury was temporarily 
reduced. 

Writing on the 7th April to Talleyrand on the subject 
of Parma Eonaparte said : — 

" Tell M. Azara what measures have been adopted, so 
that he may acquaint his Cabinet with them. Let him 
know that we have no desire to take that country. The 
question is whether we shall unite it to the Italian Re- 
public or to Tuscany. If Spain is in favour of its being 
united to Tuscany, she must give us Florida ! " 

Lucien Bonaparte having asked for the portrait of the 
First Consul, &c., for the Prince of the Peace, received 
this reply : — 

" 1st. The French Government gives presents only on 
the conclusion of treaties of alliance. 

" 2nd. None of the treaties mentioned enter into this 
category. The usual presents will be made on peace with 
Portugal being concluded. 

"4th. I shall never send my portrait to a man who 
keeps his predecessor in a dungeon, and who adopts the 
customs of the Inquisition. I may make use of him, but I 
owe him nothing but contempt. 

'' Bonaparte." 

Urquijo, the minister referred to, had been confined at 
Pampeluna and then transported to the Philippine Islands 
for slighting the advances of the Queen of Spain and for 
attempting to suppress the Inquisition. Such was his 
hostility to the Church of Rome, relates Lord Holland, that, 
when charge d' affaires in London, on hearing that General 



350 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

Bonaparte, by the peace of Tolentino, had spared the 
Papal Government, he ran like a maniac for more than 
a mile along the Uxbridge Road and threw himself into 
a pond, out of which he was dragged in a state of 
insensibility. 

To CITIZEN JOSEPH BONAPARTE. 

" Paris, \2th Aprils 1801. 

''The Emperor of Russia died on the night of the 
24th March of an ^attack of apoplexy. The grief I ex- 
perience at the death of a prince I held in such great 
esteem prevents me from entering into details. His eldest 
son, who has succeeded him, has received the oath of the 
army and of the capital. 

" Bonaparte." 



It was probably at first repugnant to the feelings of Bona- 
parte to admit publicly that Paul had been assassinated. 
When Talleyrand brought him the news he said : — *' The 
English missed me on the 3rd Nivose, but they did not miss 
me at St. Petersburg." And he afterwards caused it to be 
inserted in the Moniteur that ** Paul met his death on the 
24th, and on the 31st March the English fleet passed the 
Sound. History will unveil the connection which may 
exist between these two events." 

The fact is that the alliance with Paul was of the most 
flimsy description, and would soon have come to a natural 
termination. Paul was the sworn champion of all legiti- 
mate sovereigns, and Bonaparte had determined to seize 
upon Piedmont and Naples. Paul could not bear to hear 
even of the revolution of heavenly bodies, and Bonaparte 
was engaged in revolutionising all Europe. 

On this same 12th April the First Consul wrote several 
other letters and despatches, which show the little effect 
created on his mind by the tragedy enacted at St. 
Petersburg. 



EXTRADITION OP^ GEORGES DEMANDED. 35 I 

To CITIZEN TALLEYRAND. 

"Paris, iith Aprils 1801. 
" I beg you will forward the inclosed note to Citizen 
Otto. You will let him know that after having presented 
it he must endeavour to have Dutheil and Georges 
arrested, or at least sent to America, should objections be 
raised to handing them over to the French Government. 

" Bonaparte." 

INCLOSURE. 

" The undersigned has received orders from his Govern- 
ment to present the following note to His Excellency 
Mr. Addington. 

" Europe has resounded with the event of the 3rd Nivose. 
The attempt on the life of the First Consul, which com- 
promised the innocent population of a portion of the 
city of Paris, bears a dreadful character, almost without 
example in modern history. 

" The First Consul is far from thinking the late or the 
present ministry capable of having paid for, or ordered, 
a crime which would be disavowed by the least civilised 
hordes. 

" However Dutheil and Georges are both in England, in 
the pay of the British Government ; they ordered this and 
other crimes which have resulted in the death of several 
unfortunate persons. Two paid journals have publicly 
written, in London, an apology of this crime, and have 
expressed the regret that it did not succeed." 

After blaming this protection accorded to monsters who 
dishonoured human nature, Bonaparte went on to say that 
if a similar crime had been perpetrated in London he 
would have handed over the guilty parties, and would 
have acted as Fabricius did towards the King of Epirus. 

On the same date (12th April), in spite of the emotion 
caused by the death of Paul, Bonaparte wrote instructions 



352 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

to General Berthier concerning the French troops in Pied- 
mont, how they were to be reinforced, where quartered, 
how fed, and that they were to be paid out of the Sardinian 
treasury. He entered into minute details on military and 
civil administration, finance, judicial affairs, and police. 
He then wrote a long despatch to the War Minister, com- 
plaining of certain errors committed in the remount 
department. 

" The commandant of the depot of Versailles," he said, 
" makes no mention of 1,226 horses inscribed in return No. 4 
as having been delivered by the depot of Bee ; of 209 horses 
delivered by the depot of Rouen ; of 60 horses delivered 
by the depot of Vaugirard ; of one horse delivered by the 
depot of Compiegne. . . . The depots of Bee should, ac- 
cording to the returns, have sent 2,235 horses to Milan, 
700 to Turin, 884 to Pavia, 200 to the army of Italy," and 
so on for pages. 

On the 13th Bonaparte, who appears to have been often 
better informed than his Minister of Police, wrote as 
follows to Fouche : — 

** Here are some notes on the fidelity of which you can 
count : 1st, Georges has sent some money to Maine. 
2nd, Chandelier is in London. 3rd, On the 20th Ger- 
minal, at 2 P.M., two individuals named Eward were met 
in the Rue de la Loi ; they are brothers, satellites of 
Georges, and his usual emissaries. The elder is tall and 
slight ; the younger small, with a full dark face. Although 
they have good sight, they both wear spectacles. The 
younger has long whiskers. 

" A third sabreur of Georges was seen in Paris on the 
20th Germinal at 7 P.M. ; he goes by the name of Sa^ts 
Quartier, 

" Guillot,who goes frequently from Paris to Versailles, 
has recently received 15,000 francs from Hamburg. He is 
shortly to receive more. . . . 

'' Bonaparte/' 



DUROC'S INSTRUCTIONS. 353 

To CITIZEN DUROC. 

"Paris, 2d^th April, 1801. 

*' You will start on the 6th Floreal (26th April) for St. 
Petersburg. You will pass through Berlin, where you can 
remain for two days. You will get presented to the king. 
You will seize a favourable opportunity to tell him that I 
have taken advantage of your passage through Berlin to 
congratulate his Majesty on the occupation of Hanover, 
and to reiterate my sentiments of esteem, &c. . . On reach- 
ing St. Petersburg you will ask permission to deliver the 
inclosed letter into the hands of the Emperor. You will 
get presented to the Empress and you will take care to 
speak to her of my esteem and attachment for her family, 
and that of the Margrave of Baden. . . Both at Berlin and 
St. Petersburg you will speak as if we are sure of being 
able to hold Egypt. You will speak of the King of Sar- 
dinia as pitying us greatly because the English fleets 
revictualled at Cagliari, and because large convoys sup- 
plied the army of Abercromby ; ^ of the King of Naples 
as being on excellent terms with him, and decided to sup- 
port him and. to preserve the integrity of his states ; of the 
English expedition to Egypt as a failure, adding, however, 
that should it succeed it will be a great misfortune for 
Europe ; of Catherine as a princess who foresaw the fall of 
the Turkish Empire, and who felt that there would be no 
prosperity for Russian commerce until it passed through 
the South. . . . You will say that we always considered 
the interest which Paul I. took in some Italian princes as a 
personal and not a political interest. . . 

" Bonaparte." 

1 On the 13th, Bonaparte, in a letter to Talleyrand, said — " Tell Mde. 
Kalitcheff that I feel indignant at the little respect which the King of 
Sardinia has shown me during these negotiations. Besides, the Duke 
of Aosta, who is in Sardinia, never ceases sending corn to Malta, 
aiding the English, and fomenting disturbances in Corsica, &c." 
VOL. I. A A 



354 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

Duroc was naturally to visit all the naval and military 
establishments and to see all he could see without 
exciting displeasure and uneasiness. 

The paragraph concerning Paul and the Italian princes 
proves that Bonaparte had little idea of sacrificing his own 
political views to the caprices of his imperial friend, and 
that he was entirely ignorant of the views of Alexander. 

To GENERAL MURAT. 

" Paris, 24M Aprils 1801. 

" The King of Tuscany has left Madrid and will arrive 
in Paris in twenty days. He will be at Florence in forty 
days, and I desire you will remain there in order to instal 
him. ... I await with impatience the news of the occupa- 
tion of the isle of Elba. Gauteaume has returned to 
Toulon ; but he has no doubt sailed again by this. We 
are impatiently expecting news from Egypt. . . . Let me 
know if the Abbe Bonaparte of San-Miniato is still alive. 

" Bonaparte." 

" P.S. I have authorised your wife (Sister Caroline) to 
go to Florence." 

Two days later Bonaparte received anything but good 
news from Egypt. He learned the arrival at Toulon of a 
large number of officers and men who had been made 
prisoners by the English at the battle of Canope, and had 
been sent home on parole. He wrote to General Cervoni, 
who commanded at Marseilles, for information respecting 
this disaster and the capture of Aboukir. 

In spite of promises concerning the integrity of the 
kingdom of Naples, Murat was ordered to fortify a posi- 
tion in the neighbourhood of Tarentum. '' Give Murat 
to understand,'' wrote Bonaparte to Berthier on the nth 
May, that the Government attaches the greatest import- 
ance to having a good port, and erecting fortifications 



THE FRENCH FLEET READY TO SAIL. 355 

there, capable of resisting all the efforts of the kingdom of 
Naples ; in a word, a kind of Gibraltar, giving us influence 
in the Adriatic and in the Mediterranean." 

To ADMIRAL BRUIX. 

" Paris, \(^th Afay, 1801. 
*^ I see with pleasure that you are ready to sail. Your 
arrival in the Mediterranean is all the more important 
because the English are preparing to reinforce their army 
at Aboukir. . . . Gauteaume has passed in sight of the isle 
of Elba, which is in our power, and has continued his 
voyage so as to throw reinforcements into Egypt. Admiral 
Villeneuve is at Tarentum arming three Neapolitan frigates, 
and he writes that forty ships of the line might take shelter 
in the roads ''BONAPARTE." 

Despatch after despatch followed in rapid succession on 
the subject of this attempt to relieve the army of the East, 
the First Consul doing all in his power to stimulate the 
zeal of Bruix, Gauteaume, Villeneuve, Rosily, and Linois. 
Lannes was sent to Toulon to encourage the crews of the 
vessels lying in that port; rumours were spread that the 
English had been beaten in a second battle, and that their 
sailors were exterminated with fatigue. Accidents, how- 
ever, were always happening ; now the Spanish contingent 
either could not or v/ould not sail ; again, a ship got 
aground ; then an epidemic broke out ; and the encounters 
with the English fleet were far from satisfactory. 

To CITIZEN CHAPTAL. 

*' Paris, 22nd May, 1801 . 

" The prefects in the departmients, owing to over zeal, 
have exceeded the honours to be paid to the Count and 
Countess of Leghorn. I beg you will inform the Prefect 
of the Seine that none of the civil authorities are to visit 
these travellers. ^ Bonaparte." 

A A 2 



356 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

To CITIZEN FOUCHE. 

'* Paris, 22nd May ^ 1801. 
"The commissary -general of police at Bordeaux was 
stupid enough to allow couplets to be sung in honour of 
the King of Tuscany. As he is called Louis this gave 
rise to ill-natured allusions. I need hardly recommend 
you to see that no verses be either read or sung in the 
theatres or other public places. 

" Bonaparte." 

The Count of Leghorn was the Duke of Parma, who 
had married a daughter of the King of Spain. The 
First Consul had made him King of Etruria, giving him 
Tuscany to reign over. Tuscany, as we have seen had 
been wrested from Austria at Luneville. It was made 
over to the son-in-law of the King of Spain in exchange 
for Louisiana, which Bonaparte afterwards sold to the 
United States. 

The First Consul forced the royal couple to visit Paris, 
to see what reception Bourbon princes would meet with 
in France. At that time he had some idea of divorcing 
Josephine and marrying another daughter of Charles IV. 

The Count and Countess of Leghorn were nearly 
frightened out of their lives on entering France ; but 
looking at the above letters, their minds must soon have 
been set at ease. They expected to be guillotined, and 
met with nothing but adulation. 

To CITIZEN TALLEYRAND. 

" Paris, 2Zth May, 1801. 
"You will inform citizen Otto that the insinuations of 
Lord Hawkesbury, tJiat injiue7itial persons surrotmdijig the 
First Consul desire peace^ should be regarded as anecdotes. 
Let him tell this Lord Hawkesbury that the French 
cabinet is one; it no doubt wishes for peace, but an 
honourable peace, founded on the equilibrium of the seas 



THE EMPEROR ALEXANDER. 357 

and other portions of the world ; . . . that neither the 
French nation nor the First Consul are to be intimidated ; 
that the feelings of Alexander I. and his cabinet are ill 
known in London if it be supposed he will ever betray the 
cause of the continental Powers ; that the French and 
Spanish armies have entered Portugal ; . . . that as for 
the few assassins acting in the interior at the instigation 
of England, they are not very formidable, and that the 
Government would be wrong to repose much hope in 
their aid ; that it is in the power of the English ministry 
to terminate negotiations in the course of a few days, 
and thus prove its love for humanity and the repose 
of the world. . . . 

" Bonaparte." 

The English cabinet was better acquainted with the 
intentions of the cabinet of St. Petersburg than was 
supposed. Alexander cared little for the grand-master- 
ship of Malta, about which Paul had made a casus belli. 
Bonaparte was soon aware of the great change which had 
been operated by the haughty demands of the Russian 
ambassador, who threatened to leave Paris if the First 
Consul did not fulfil his five promises, which, in addition 
to the restoration of Malta to the Order, included the 
re-establishment of the King of Sardinia, and that the 
integrity of the states of the King of Naples, of Bavaria, 
and of Wirtemburg should be g;uaranteed. 

To CITIZEN TALLEYRAND. 

" Paris, i^th June^ 1801. 
*' I send you a copy of the magnificent treaty concluded 
by our ambassador. I beg you will let him know by an 
extraordinary courier that this treaty is contrary to his 
instructions, contrary to the treaty with Spain, contrary 
to the interests of the Republic, and favourable to those 
of England ; that the treaty has not been, and is not 
capable of being, ratified ; that if the three provinces be 



358 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

not immediately occupied by the French and Spanish 
troops / shall not be able to answer for the restitution of 
the Spa?iish colonies. 

'"■ That this treaty is an unexpected blow, which the 
First Consul regards as one of the most signal reverses 
he has experienced during his magistrature. . . . 

" Bonaparte/' 

This ^* magnificent treaty " was the treaty of Badajos, 
concluded between Spain and Portugal. In obedience to 
the orders of Bonaparte, Charles IV. had invaded the latter 
country, which was also menaced by a French force under 
Generals Leclerc and Gouvion St. Cyr. Under these cir- 
cumstances the King of Portugal agreed to close his ports 
to England, to cede Olivenza to Spain, and to pay France 
20,000,000 francs. This treaty was signed by Lucien 
Bonaparte, who was heavily bribed by the two contracting 
parties. The First Consul blustered in the most formid- 
able manner, and swore that the last hour of the Spanish 
monarchy had sounded. Lucien was recalled, although the 
order to occupy the Portuguese provinces never assumed 
an absolute character.^ 

Fortunately for Spain and Portugal, continental affairs 
at this juncture wore so gloomy an aspect that Bonaparte 
was unable to put his threats into execution. His inten- 
tion was to get possession of Portugal, to enable him 
to exchange that country against Malta or Egypt with 
England, and not that a treaty should be concluded. 

To CITIZEN TALLEYRAND. 

"Paris, \^th June., 1801. 
'' I beg you will inform M. Azara that it will be neces- 
sary for him to write to the Spanish minister at Rome 
for the Pope to send a legate to Florence in order to 
compliment the King of Etruria, in conformity with time- 

^ Vide Despatch, March 2, 1801. 



THE KING OF ETRURIA. 359 

honoured custom. ... It will be proper for the Batavian, 
Helvetic, Ligurian, and Cisalpine Republics to recognise 
the new monarch. . . . 

'' Bonaparte." 

It was only fitting that this puppet, who owed his crown 
to the eldest son of the Church, should be recognised 
by the Pontiff and by the lesser republics revolving in 
the French system. 

To CITIZEN FORFAIT. 

" Paris, ijth June, 1801. 

" The sick are not well cared for at Toulon. The naval 
officers do not visit them frequently enough. They are 
nursed by convicts. Would it not be possible to establish 
Sisters of Charity at Toulon as at Brest ? 

" Bonaparte." 

to citizen talleyrand. 

'^ Paris, jth July, 1801. 

" You will see by the inclosed letters that the Prince 
of the Peace, who has captured nine fortresses and de- 
livered I know not how many battles, assumes the tone 
of Suwarrow with our ambassador. Let me know your 
opinion on this subject as soon as possible. I am awaiting 
a reply from Otto. It appears as if we shall be able to 
settle matters with the Cardinal. It was necessary to 
address him a few observations. I had a second blister 
on my arm yesterday. It is a fitting moment to come to 
terms with the priests when one is laid up ill. News from 
Egypt, melancholy. The army, however, will be able to 
hold Alexandria for eight or ten months. . . . 

"Bonaparte." 

The Prince of the Peace seems to have compared 
himself rather favourably to Frederick the Great ! 



360 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

Concerning Egypt, Bonaparte had learned the defeat of 
Generals Friant and Lanusseon the 13th March ; the more 
serious defeat of Abdallah Menou on the 21st March ; the 
loss of Rosetta, the capitulation of Cairo by General 
Belliard, and the failure of Gauteaume's last attempt to 
succour the army of the East. 

It was under these circumstances that the First Consul, 
a few days later, consented to the restoration of Egypt 
to the Porte. 

On the loth of July Bonaparte wrote a very long and 
comminatory despatch to be forwarded to Lucien at 
Madrid. The King and Queen of Spain were to be 
warned that if they followed the advice of the Prince of 
the Peace, who had been bought by England, they might 
consider the doom of the Spanish monarchy sealed. His 
Majesty was to be informed that any movement of his army 
in the direction of the French troops would be regarded as 
a declaration of war ; that the First Consul would never 
ratify the treaty of Badajos, &c,, &c. 

Bonaparte then condescended to explain his reasons for 
furnishing the King of Etruria with a minister, and for not 
ordering his troops to evacuate the territory of the new 
sovereign, both of which acts infringed the conditions upon 
which Louisiana had been ceded to France. 

To CITIZEN JOSEPH BONAPARTE. 

" Paris, 20th July, 1801. 

*' I beg you will continue your conferences with Cardinal 
Consalvi and your other colleagues (on the subject of the 
Concordat) : 

'' 1st. To settle what appertains to the Constitutional 
clergy, and to make arrangements for the Constitutional 
bishops being as eligible as the others. 

*' 2nd. Agree as to the wording of the Bull. I wish this 
Bull to be published in France as soon as possible, so 
that I may at once nominate bishops and archbishops. 



THE CONCORDAT. ^6l 

.... Let it be understood that I attach great importance 
to this matter, and that I desire to see it concluded with 
celerity. . . . 

'' Bonaparte." 

Bonaparte was doomed to experience many vexations in 
this matter, the machinery of the Sacred College not at all 
keeping pace with his own impetuosity. 

The Concordat itself had been signed on the 15th July, 
but a Bull was still necessary to confirm the nomination of 
the new bishops. Bonaparte had several times given 
Consalvi to understand that he had abandoned the Consti- 
tutional clergy, but the legate in this, as in many other 
matters, had been deceived. The First Consul insisted 
upon having Galilean bishops, and would not hear of the 
Constitutionals retracting. Rome was powerless to offer 
any open resistance, but excuses were found for delaying 
the despatch of the necessary Bull, and it was more than a 
year before the Concordat was promulgated. 

At the time the Concordat was signed there were 
50 Constitutional bishops in France and 10,000 married 
priests. 

NOTE to be handed TO LORD HAWKESBURY. 

" Paris, 22,rdjufy^ 1801. 
*'. . . The question divides itself into three parts : 
the Mediterranean — India — America. Egypt to be restored 
to the Porte. The Republic of the Seven Isles to be 
recognised. All the ports in the Adriatic and the Medi- 
terranean occupied by French troops to be restored to the 
King of Naples and the Pope. Mahon to be restored to 
the King of Spain. Malta to be restored to the Order, and 
if the King of England deems it to be in conformity with 
his interests, as preponderating Power on the high seas, 
that the fortifications be demolished, this clause will be 
accepted. In India England to keep Ceylon. . . The 
other establishments, including the Cape of Good Hope, to 
be restored to the allies. 



362 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

*^ In America everything to be restored to the ancient 
possessors. The King of England is so powerful in that 
part of the world that to desire more is to wish to be 
absolute master of America (West Indies). Portugal to be 
maintained in all its integrity. 

" These are the conditions which the French Government 
is ready to sign." 



Bonaparte added that France w^ould never renounce 
Martinique, which had not been conquered. As the birth- 
place of Josephine, the First Consul was naturally anxious 
that this island should remain in the possession of France. 

On the same day a note was forwarded to the above 
effect to Citizen Otto — a note in which, however, one finds 
that " France may consent to England keepi?ig Trinidad, but 
not TobagoT 

It was in this way that Spain was to be punished for 
signing the treaty of Badajos ; the Spanish island was to be 
ceded, and the French island retained. 

During the alliance with Paul it had been agreed that 
35,000 French soldiers under Massena should descend the 
Danube to the Black Sea, and be transported to Taganrog 
by a Russian fleet. Thence they were to reach the Volga 
and be conveyed in boats to Astracan, at which point they 
were to be joined by 35,000 Russian troops and 50,000 
Cossacks. This combined force was to cross the Caspian 
to Astrabad, where large magazines were to be established. 
It was calculated that it would require eighty days to 
march from the French frontier to Astrabad, and fifty to 
march from Astrabad, via Herat, Ferah, and Candahar, to 
the banks of the Indus. Bonaparte considered this march 
perfectly practicable, and he more than once returned to 
the idea of commanding such an expedition, and seating 
himself for a while on the throne of Delhi. We shall have 
more to say on this subject when we come to General 
Gardanne's mission to Persia. 



CARDINAL CONSALVI. 363 

To H.H. THE POPE. 

"Paris, 27/^ July, 1801, 

" Most Holy Father, — Cardinal Consalvi has handed 
me the letter of your Holiness. I recognise in it those evan- 
gelical sentiments which distinguish you. Cardinal Consalvi 
will inform you of my desire to do all in my power to 
contribute to your happiness. 

" It will depend only on you to find in the French 
Government the support which has always been accorded 
to your predecessors, when they regarded it as their first 
duty to preach maxims of peace ^ morality, and obedience to the 
civil power, 

" It does not depend upon me to dry up the tears of 
Europe and to cause an era of peace to succeed wars and 
revolutions. 

" On all occasions I beg your Holiness to count upon the 
aid of your devoted son. 

" Bonaparte." 

To GENERAL MURAT. 

"Paris, i^th July, 1801. 
" I have received your letter. . . Troops are stationed 
on the Adriatic in order to menace the Turks and the 
English. . . . Since you have not been to Naples I see no 
objection to your going there after you have arranged 
matters in Tuscany. One never repents picking up local 
information. Examine Capua and the other forts. You 
can return by Ancona. . , 

'' Bonaparte." 

The General little thought, at that epoch, that he would 
one day sit on the throne of Naples. 

To CITIZEN CHAPTAL. 

" Paris, loth August, 1801. 
" I beg you will give orders to the prefects of the five 
departments in which there are the largest number of 
Protestants, and to the Prefect of Geneva, to send, each of 



364 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

them, to Paris, one of the principal ministers of the Pro- 
testant religion, taking care to select a man who is not 
fanatical, who is upright, sensible, enlightened, and who 
enjoys general esteem. You will inform the prefects that 
the despatch of these citizens should be made without 
noise, and that the object of this measure is to arrange 
means for maintaining order, liberty, and independence of 
worship. . . 

'' Bonaparte." 

After a long period of persecution Lomenie de Brienne, 
Archbishop of Toulouse, in 1787, two years before the 
Revolution, laid before the Parliament of Paris a royal 
edict removing Protestant disabilities, and the Parliament 
did not for an instant hesitate to register the edict. 
Naturally, under the Revolution, the Protestants enjoyed 
freedom. When settling the bases of the Concordat with 
the Pope, Bonaparte, who was determined to tolerate no 
religious persecution, confirmed the privileges of the 
Reformed Church. It was hardly to be supposed that the 
First Consul would leave that Church entirely free ; he 
gave it an official status which, at the same time, fettered 
and protected it. It was recognised by the Government, 
and subjected to the administrative machinery of local 
consistories, and provincial and general synods. 

It is melancholy to think that the toleration shown by 
Bonaparte in 1801 should have brought down on the Pro- 
testants the most dire revenge when the Empire fell. After 
the battle of Waterloo the most terrible scenes were 
enacted in the south of France under the pretext that the 
Protestants were Bonapartists. Bonnechose says : *' The 
Calvinists were massacred even in the prisons ; their wives 
were outraged, and their houses and temples burned to the 
ground ; and these atrocities remained unpunished. The 
Chamber of 1815 branded itself with infamy by calling 
Deputy d'Argenson to order with frantic transports, when 
he demanded an inquiry into those horrible crimes. The 



LORD BROUGHAM. 365 

cry of justice and humanity arose from a foreign tribunal ; 
the illustrious Brougham invoked the intervention of his 
Government in favour of the Protestants of France, and in 
various places Austrian bayonets intervened between the 
victims and their persecutors/' 

To CITIZEN TALLEYRAND. 

" Paris, Uh September^ 1801. 
" You will find inclosed a despatch from Citizen Otto. \ 
beg that before you go to bed you will send him a courier, 
stating in the most positive manner that the French 
Government will never consent to the demands of the 
English Government respecting Essequibo and Demerara. 

'^ As for the prisoners, the governments will pay the 
different indemnities, inserting a clause that what France 
has expended for the prisoners of the Powers in the pay of 
England, such as the Russians, the Bavarians, and the 
princes of Italy, shall be carried forward by way of 
compensation. 

'' Bonaparte." 

The First Consul had excited the admiration, the grati- 
tude, and the sympathy of the Emperor Paul by sending 
home the Russian prisoners in new uniforms \ but it 
appears that, after all, England was to bear the expense of 
this extravagant fit of generosity. 

To CITIZEN TALLEYRAND. 

" Paris, 17M September^ 1801. 
** You will find inclosed a letter from Citizen Otto. 
Reply that we will not cede Tobago. ... It appears that 
we have come to terms as regards Demerara and Portugal. 
. . The equinox is approaching ; time is precious, and 
the First Consul, who is engaged in diplomatic nego- 
tiations with all the Powers of Europe, has adopted as a 
rule never to give the slightest colouring of ill faith to any of 
his acts ; and, in his opinion, it would be an act of bad 



366 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

faith to order the squadrons of Toulon, Brest, and Cadiz to 
sail [squadrons which, for months, had been unable to 
leave port], which, by their success or non-success, would 
change the state of the question. 

" The preliminaries must be signed in the first decade of 
Vendemiaire (before the ist of October) or the negotiations 
must be broken off. 

'' Citizen Otto will distinctly state that in addition to 
Trinidad the First Consul will not only refuse to cede 
Tobago but even a rock. . . . 

'' Bonaparte." 



The above letter concerns the preliminaries of London 
which preceded the treaty of Amiens. It is interesting 
to see what the Anmcal Register for 1802 has to say on 
this matter. It commences by remarking that it was 
shrewdly suspected when the first article of the treaty was 
signed, " Egypt shall be evacuated," the French Govern- 
ment was aware of the capitulation of Alexandria and of 
the French army. Therefore this concession to England 
was in fact no concession. The Annual Register then 
relates how, after the signature of the preliminaries, other 
treaties were brought to light, adding — 

''Among those treaties were one with Turkey and 
another with Portugal. In our treaty, as an equivalent 
for the vast colonial restitutions we made to France and 
her allies, we had expressly stipulated for the integrity of 
the territory of those two Powers, and the evacuation of 
the kingdom of Naples ; but although the negotiation in 
London lasted a considerable time, and France expressly 
stated those cessions to our allies as equivalents for the 
cessions we had agreed to make to her and to her allies, 
yet, when the preliminaries were signed, and she had 
calculated that the English ministry would rather submit 
to be so imposed upon than recede from them, she pro- 
duced the underhand, clandestine, and fraudulent treaties 



THE BATAVIAN REPUBLIC. 367 

that she h^id been making at the same time separately 
with our allies. 

" By those treaties the Porte had engaged that the 
French should be on an equality with the most favoured 
nation throughout the whole extent of the Turkish 
empire, and consequently that the best of its allies should 
not, even ia a commercial view, be more favoured than 
those who, without provocation, invaded and plundered 
its dominions." 

As regards Portugal, the breach of faith was so flagrant 
that England insisted upon and obtained concessions, but 
for which, the congress at Amiens would have been broken 
up. The concession, however, which had been obtained 
from Turkey, 07t condition of the evacuation of Egypt^ 
which had been evacuated when the Turkish ambassador 
signed the treaty, was not disputed. 

To CITIZEN TALLEYRAND. 

^' Paris, 19/^ September, 1801. 
" I beg you will send a copy of the convention concluded 
with the Batavian Government to the Minister of War . . . 
mentioning at the same time that we maintain our rights 
on Flushing, and that secret instructions should be given 
to the French officer commanding in Batavia to this 
effect. . . . 

" Bonaparte." 

Thus after having forced the Batavian Republic to pur- 
chase a town which belonged to it, that town was to remain 
at the disposal of the French military commander 1 

On the 25th Bonaparte wrote to Talleyrand, begging 
him to ask M. Markoff for passports for Russia whither he 
wished to send Duroc (who was to have started on the 
26th of April), in order to open up direct communications 
with the new Czar similar to those engaged in with Paul. 
On the same date he wrote a second letter to his Foreign 
Minister, saying — 



368 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

" I beg you will write to Citizen Clarke, our minister at 
Florence, saying I have received the letters addressed to 
me by the King of Etruria ; that I authorise Murat to 
withdraw all the troops not necessary for the internal and 
external safety of Tuscany." 

Bonaparte went on to say that it would be necessary to 
keep at le^st 6,000 men in the country ; that he desired 
the king should be quite i7idependent ; that the 6,000 men 
would cost 16,000/. a month, a considerable sum for 
Tuscany, but necessary for her interests. General Clarke 
was also to try and persuade his majesty to raise a Polish 
legion. 

This was Bonaparte's manner of giving Tuscany in 
exchange for Louisiana. He everywhere pursued the 
same system of quartering troops on feeble states, and 
making them pay for them. 

To CITIZEN ABKIM., Minister of Justice, 

^^ Paris, 30/^ September^ 1801. 
" The criminal tribunal instituted by Citizen Miot (who 
had been sent on a mission to Corsica) has failed in its 
objects. He composed it of five jurisconsults of the most 
respectable character, but too old, and remarkably weak. 
Tell him to suppress this tribunal and to create a new one, 
which must reside at Ajaccio, and be composed of five 
judges, two of them being military men. The three 
jurisconsults must be French, foreign to the enmities of 
the island. If he cannot find these three men, let the 
court be entirely composed of moderate and enlightened 
ofiicers. 

'' Bonaparte." 

Corsica was in a very disturbed state, but according to 
his own account, Miot de Melito, by a mixture of justice 
and severity restored order in the course of three months. 
His stories concerning the vendetta and other Corsican 



THE GRAND MASTER OF MALTA. 369 

customs are highly interesting, and are to be found in 
his memoirs. 

To CITIZEN TALLEYRAND. 

'' Paris, 10th Septe7nber, 1801. 
^^ It will be necessary to know what the courts of Vienna 
and Rome think of Hompesch. I beg you will instruct 
Champagny and Cacault to give those two courts to 
understand, in an off-hand way, the interest we take in 
him, and that if they are disposed to support him, we 
are quite prepared to lend them our aid. 

" Let Citizen Cibou also know that I take an interest in 
Hompesch, and that I shall see him with great pleasure 
resume his functions of Grand Master ; as I know he is in 
distress, authorise Citizen Cacault to give him 500 louis, 
without a letter or anything ostensible. 

'' Bonaparte." 

The last Grand Master, on the capitulation of Malta, 
had been conveyed to Trieste, after receiving 12,000/. for 
his plate and the promise of a pension, which was not 
paid. He consequently protested against his deposition, 
and made over his rights to Paul I., who accorded him an 
annuity. On the death of Paul, Hompesch found himself 
in reduced circumstances, and was no doubt glad to receive 
the 500 louis referred to above. He afterwards sent in a 
claim for 80,000/. arrears of pension, but was only granted 
600/. He had been originally promised 24,000/. and a 
German principality, or 12,000/. a year, by the French, 
who also agreed to indemnify the other knights. 

To CITIZEN CHAPTAL. 

" Paris, (yth October^ 1801. 

''The First Consul begs that you will have made the 

model of a sabre of moderate and commodious dimensions, 

to be worn by him on the occasion of great solemnities ; 

it should agree with the usages and with the civil cut of 

VOL. I. B B 



370 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

the consular costume, and be designed to receive for 
ornament the Regent and other diamonds of great price. 
The First Consul begs you will present him this model 
as soon as possible ; his intention being to have that 
weapon for the i8th Brumaire, and to wear it at the 
Feast of Peace." 

The preliminaries of London having been signed, we 
now come to a series of despatches relating to the St. 
Domingo expedition, to the Concordat, and to the 
Congress at Amiens, where Joseph Bonaparte and Lord 
Cornvvallis met to discuss the conditions of a definitive 
peace. 

To H.H. THE POPE. 

''Paris, \oth October^ 1801. 

'' The peace with England, Portugal, Russia, and the 
Ottoman Porte having been signed, I hasten to inform 
your Holiness of this fact, knowing the interest you take 
in the happiness and tranquillity of nations. The French 
are about to evacuate Southern Italy, and I beg your 
Holiness will let me know if you have made any arrange- 
ment with the court of Naples respecting the principality 
of Beneventum, and if you desire that I should take any 
steps to have it restored to you. 

*' Your Holiness should also think about organising a 
corps of troops as promptly as possible, in order to occupy 
Ancona. I beg also that you will use your influence 
with the different courts for the reorganisation of the 
Order of Malta, which is about to be reinstated in 
the island. 

'' Bonaparte/* 

Ancona was one of those positions which Bonaparte 
had no idea of giving up ; its strategical importance was 
too great. The Pope naturally requested the First Consul 
to aid him in recovering Beneventum, which the French 
Emperor afterwards seized for himself and presented to 



SEBASTIANI SENT TO CONSTANTINOPLE. 37 1 

Talleyrand. After the abdication of Fontainebleau the 
quondam Bishop of Autun restored the principaHty to 
Pius VII. 

On the loth October Bonaparte wrote several other 
letters ; he wrote at considerable length to the Emperor 
Alexander. He said it had been agreed to restore Malta 
to the Order under the protection of one of the great 
Powers, and he asked the Czar, " whose august father was 
recognised as Grand Master/' to let him know his wishes on 
this subject. In a letter to the King of Etruria he said that 
peace having been signed with England, Portugal, Russia, 
and Turkey, he was prepared to give orders for the 
French troops to evacuate Tuscany. He then directed 
the Minister of the Interior to give 10,000 francs to the 
^' Buffons ItalienSy' and to remove any obstacles in the 
way of their performing — "it being well to improve the 
taste of song in France, and advisable, in a political 
point of view, owing to our preponderance in Italy.*' 
In another letter he gave orders for the sum of 600,000 
francs to be laid out in preparing St. Cloud for a consular 
residence. The furniture was to be taken from the 
national museums in Paris and Versailles, the tapestry 
from the Gobelins, la Savonnerie, and Beauvais, &c. The 
sixth letter, written on the loth October," deals with 
Batavian finance. The next day Bonaparte despatched 
General Sebastian! to Constantinople with a letter to the 
Sultan Selim, in which he expressed the desire to see the 
ancient friendship which had endured for many centuries 
between the two states re-established. 

"The expedition to Egypt," he added, "was not under- 
taken through any feeling of hostility towards the Ottoman 
Empire. But God willed that it should be the pretext for 
a rupture between the two nations, in order to convince 
both the one and the other that their true interests are 
union and peace. If your Highness shares the sentiments 
which animate the French Government, the past will be 
for ever forgotten, and a solid peace and reciprocal 

B B 2 



'^']2 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

commercial advantages will consolidate the prosperity of 
both nations." 

On the same day the First Consul wrote a letter to 
Berthier on the subject of the return of the army of the 
East. This army was to be broken up, and Leopold 
Berthier was to thank the various corps in the name of 
Bonaparte for the gallant efforts they had made to 
preserve Egypt. 

To CITIZEN TALLEYRAND. 

"Paris, 12th October^ 1801. 

*^ I beg you will send me back the minute relative to 
the Prince of the Peace, on the margin of which I wrote a 
note expressing my opinion concerning that prince. 

"Bonaparte." 

The probability is that Bonaparte considered he might 
soon stand in need of the services of Manuel Godoi. 

To general berthier. 

" Paris, \/^th October^ 1801. 

" Lord Cornwallis is going to land at Calais in order to 
come to Paris. I beg you will give orders that he may be 
received with the greatest distinction. On his arrival at 
Calais a salute must be fired, and he must have a guard 
of honour to escort him on his journey. 

" Bonaparte." 

Lord Cornwallis, who narrowly escaped shipwreck, was 
received with every demonstration of delight. There were 
public rejoicings and illuminations in Paris, and when 
he repaired to Amiens he was visited by all the local 
authorities, and treated with an amount of respect which 
soon aroused his suspicions concerning its sincerity. 



THE ST. DOMINGO EXPEDITION. 2>7Z 

To CITIZEN TALLEYRAND. 

"Paris, 21st October, 1801. 
" I beg you will desire Citizen Otto to inform Lord 
Hawkesbury without delay that the French Government 
intends sending the Rochefort squadron and a portion of 
the Brest squadron with 12,000 troops, to re-establish order 
at St. Domingo. 

*-" It will be necessary to inform the court of Spain that 
it is essential for it to send some one with full powers 
to Amiens, the English and ourselves being determined to 

arrange ^natters promptly 

" Bonaparte." 

Spain was sorely tempted not to send an ambassador 
to Amiens, knowing the fate that awaited her, and the 
manner in which Bonaparte had determined to avenge 
himself for the over-hasty conclusion of the treaty of 
Badajos with Portugal. King Charles knew, in fact, that 
all his ambassador would have to do would be to consent 
to England keeping Trinidad. 

It was a bold stroke on the part of Bonaparte de- 
spatching so large an expedition to St. Domingo before 
the conclusion of a definitive peace, but the prize was 
worth a considerable amount of risk. The French portion 
of St. Domingo before the war was more productive than 
all our West Indian possessions put together, and that 
portion was barely a third of the least fertile part of the 
island. Its annual exports were valued at 7,000,000/., 
giving employment to 1,640 ships and 26,770 seamen. 
It was not likely that Napoleon, with time and means at 
his disposal, should consent to leave so rich a prize in the 
hands of the blacks, without making an effort to secure its 
possession for himself. 

The Spanish Government exhibited a certain amount of 
objection to take part in the expedition to St. Domingo in 
spite of the assertion of Bonaparte that it was " in the 



374 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

interest of civilisation to destroy this new Algiers organised 
in the middle of America." Hence the following violent 
letter to Citizen Talleyrand : — 

" I beg you will see M. Azara on the subject of the 
inclosed letter. You will ask him categorically if he has 
been authorised to take this step ; you will say that the 
King of Spain never mentioned the matter ; that his 
vessels are bound by treaty to serve us ; that I shall force 
them to sail ; that I shall never forget this proof of ill- 
feeling on the part of the ministry. If M. Azara has 
acted on his own authority, let him know that he exposes 
himself to nothing more nor less than the seizure of the 
Spanish fleet ; for I am tired of dealing with an idiotic 
cabinet. I beg you will send me an answer to-morrow. . . . 

" Bonaparte." 

To CITIZEN FOUCHE. 

"Paris, 2nd November, 1801. 
'^ You will find inclosed fourteen decrees of radiation 
which I have signed. You will send passports to the 
persons concerned, and when they arrive in Paris you 
will hand them the decrees, but only after they have sworn 
fidelity to the Republic and have renounced all foreign 
naturalisation. Bonaparte." 

Being desirous of conciliating the Royalists, the First 
Consul struck a great many members of that party off 
the list of emigres, allowing them to return to France, 
restoring to several their property which had been con- 
fiscated, and employing others in offices of great trust. 
The amount of ingratitude he afterwards encountered was 
perfectly disgraceful. 

proclamation. 

" Paris, Zth November, 1801. 
'' Inhabitants of St. Domingo, no matter what your 
origin and your colour, you are Frenchmen. You are all 
free and equal before God and before the Republic. 



PROCLAMATION. 375 

"France has been, like St.. Domingo, the prey of 
factions, and torn by civil and foreign war. But everything 
is changed. AH the nations have embraced the French and 
have vowed them peace and friendship ; Frenchmen have 
also embraced each other and have sworn to remain friends 
and brothers. Come and embrace the French and rejoice 
yourselves with the sight of your friends and brothers of 
Europe. 

**The Government sends you General Leclerc. He takes 
with him a large force to protect you against your enemies 
and the enemies of the Republic, If people say, ^ These forces 
are destined to deprive us of our liberty ; ' answer, * The 
Republic has given us liberty, it will not suffer us to be 
deprived of it 1 ' 

" Rally round the Captain-General. He bears you 
abundance and peace. Whoever dares to separate himself 
from the Cciptain-General shall be considered as a traitor to 
his country, and the wrath of the Republic shall consume 
him as the fire burns up your withered sugar-canes. 

" Bonaparte." 

The inhabitants of St. Domingo naturally suspected the 
intentions of this mighty host which came to protect them 
against enemies which had no existence. St. Domingo 
itself was at peace, and had not all the nations of the 
world embraced France, and all Frenchmen embraced 
each other } Where were the enemies } 

On the 13th November Bonaparte wrote to Talleyrand 
complaining,^ of the suspicious manner in which England 
watched the St. Domingo expedition. Citizen Otto was 
to give the British Government all kinds of explanations, 
and to dwell on the incalculable benefits which would 
result for England in consequence of France preventing 
the sceptre of the new world from falling into the hands of 
the blacks. 

In a long letter addressed to General Toussaint Louver- 



376 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

ture, in which he announced the departure of his brother- 
in-law, General Leclerc, Bonaparte said : — 

'* He is accompanied by forces suitable to cause the 
sovereignty of the French people to be respected. . . . 
We have conceived esteem for you, and we are pleased to 
acknowledge and to proclaim the great services which you 
have rendered to the French people [helping them to drive 
out the English]. If their flag floats over St. Domingo 
they owe this to the gallant blacks. Called by your 
talents, and by the force of circumstances, to the chief 
command, you destroyed civil war, put a bridle on the per- 
secutions of atrocious men, and re-established religion and 
the worship of God from whom all things emanate." 

However, he was told that his constitution was at vari- 
ance with that of France, and contained clauses contrary 
to the dignity and sovereignty of the French people. 
Bonaparte then expressed the hope that the gallant blacks 
would accept the authority of his Captain-General, as it 
would greatly distress him to have to punish rebellion. 

The expedition to St. Domingo was undertaken not only 
on account of the value of the colony, but because Bona- 
parte, who feared Moreau, desired to get rid of the army of 
the Rhine which was devoted to that general. 

On the i8th November, in a further letter to Toussaint 
Louverture, the First Consul said : — 

^' What do you desire t The liberty of the blacks ? You 
know that we have given liberty to all the nations which 
were deprived of it." 

What instructions were given to General Leclerc it 
wouJd be difficult to say, for they have been suppressed in 
the Correspondejtce, but it is very improbable that Napoleon, 
who re-established slavery in Guadeloupe, Martinique, 
Tobago, St. Lucia Guiana, and the Mauritius had any 
idea of allowing the gallant blacks of St. Domingo to 
enjoy their liberty, and it was when this fact became 
apparent that Toussaint Louverture took up arms against 
the Captain-General and his host. 



THE POSITION OF FRANCE. 377 

In a long message, dated 22nd November, 1801, Bona- 
parte announced that brigandage had been put down ; 
that religious peace had been established and the liberty 
of conscience proclaimed; that the continental war had 
been brought to a conclusion ; that the Government enjoyed 
the love and respect of the country, and had such con- 
fidence in public opinion that it had ventured to offer 
honours and hospitality to a prince sprung from a house 
which had reigned over France. The people had remained 
perfectly calm, and had forced the enemies of the country 
to acknowledge that the Republic had already attained 
the maturity of centuries in the hearts of Frenchmen. 

After paying a tribute of praise to the army and the 
navy he declared that the soldiers of the army of the East 
had yielded rather to the force of circumstances than to 
the Turks and the English. 

St. Domingo was to be entirely subjected to French 
law ; slavery had been abolished in that island and in 
Guadeloupe, but it would be maintained at Martinique — 
" it having cost humanity too much to warrant a new 
revolution." 

Finance, public instruction, public works, commerce, 
fine arts, hospitals were all dwelt upon, and it is astonish- 
ing to remark the vast impulse which this master mind 
gave to every branch of the administration. 

Turning to foreign affairs, one perceives that Batavia 
had voted a new constitution, which had been recognised 
by France, but 10,000 French troops were to be quartered 
on the country. 

The French troops had received orders to evacuate 
Helvetia, but 6,000 men were to remain behind. 

The King of Tuscany, or Etruria, reigned tranquilly 
on his throne, but 4,000 French soldiers were to hold 
Leghorn. 

Piedmont had been turned into the twenty-seventh French 
military division, *' and under a milder regime is forgetting 
the misfortunes of a long anarchy." 



378 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

The Holy Father, sovereign of Rome, possessed his 
states in all their integrity, but 1,500 French soldiers 
occupied Ancona in order to preserve communications 
with the army of the south ! 

*' Paul L," said Bonaparte, "loves France; he desires 
the peace of Europe and especially the liberty of the seas. 
His great soul is affected by the pacific sentiments mani- 
fested by the First Consul ; 8,000 Russians were made 
prisoners fighting with the allies, but England refused to 
exchange them against French prisoners." [The proposi- 
tion was made after Paul had receded from the alliance.] 
'^ The Government restored these brave warriors, abandoned 
by their allies, to their native country." 

After referring to various other foreign states, Bonaparte 
then made the following perfidious remarks : — 

^^ Portugal, which had become a province of Gt. Britain, 
alone remained to England. It was there that Spain ought 
to have foimd a compensation for the restitution of the island 
of Trinidad. But after a few skirmishes the Spanish 
minister ratified separately the treaty of Badajos. From 
that moment it was clear that Trinidad was lost for 
Spain, and in fact England regarded it henceforth as a 
possession acquired by her. . . ." 

It would be difficult to crowd a greater number of 
falsehoods into so small a space. 

After writing a letter to the King of England expressing 
the hope that, seeing the good faith which had been 
observed on both sides, a definitive treaty of peace would 
soon be concluded between the two countries, Bonaparte 
begged Talleyrand to send a certain, inclosure to the 
French ambassador at Madrid. 

''Tell him," he continued, " to procure an interview with 
the Queen, to show her the letter, and to let her under- 
stand that she will never be able to count upon the 
support of France as long as her lot remains bound up 
with that of the Prince of the Peace. Let him explain 
himself publicly and strongly respecting that prince, to 



THE BEY OF TUNIS. 379 

whom he should attribute the loss of Trinidad. Let him 
protest against the title of generalissimo by land and sea 
given to that prince, which tends to eclipse the King, and 
which reveals ambitious projects. Let him keep us in- 
formed of the opinions of their Majesties, those of the 
public, and the court intrigues. . . .'' 

Bonaparte, whose wrath was often manifested in the 
most grotesque manner, also wrote very strongly to 
General Gouvion St. Cyr, who had succeeded Lucien Bona- 
parte as ambassador at Madrid. He concluded his letter 
thus : — 

'' Tell the Queen and the Prince of the Peace boldly 
that if this system continues it will end in a thunderclap." 

To GENERAL MENOU. 

"Paris, \st December, 1801. 
" I have received your letter. I am aware that it was 
no want of will on your part or of love for the fine 
countries of Egypt that this conquest did not remain to the 
Republic. Your long resistance at Alexandria was useful 
to the negotiations. ... 

" Bonaparte." 

Bonaparte had a strange liking for this incompetent 
general — a liking which sprang from the fact that Abdallah 
Menou thoroughly believed in him. Menou was never 
again employed in any active military capacity, but was 
made governor of an Italian province, and treated the 
inhabitants with unnecessary severity. 

To HAMUDA PASHA, Bey of Tunis. 

" Paris, 5/A December, i8or. 

'Illustrious and Magnificent Signor,— I know 
that among the princes of Barbary those of the kingdom 
of Tunis have always been distinguished by their love of 
France, and that you interrupted that friendship with regret, 
to owing your habitual respect for the Ottoman Porte. . , . 

" Bonaparte." 



380 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

And the illustrious and magnificent signer was informed 
that the First Consul was about to send him an envoy in the 
person of M. Devoise, who had already represented France 
at Tunis, and had been cast fettered into a dungeon when 
the war resulting from the invasion of Egypt broke out. 
At that period the Bey was on intimate terms with us, as 
the following letter from Nelson shows — a letter all the 
more interesting now that the French have seized on 
Tunis : — 

To HIS HIGHNESS THE BEY OF TUNIS. 

"^Vanguard.' Palermo, i^th March, 1799. 

" Sir, — I have received through the hands of Mr. Magra 
the very interesting letters from the French at Malta, for 
which I beg leave to thank your Highness, and return them 
by a vessel I have fitted out for that express purpose. The 
infamous conduct of the French during the whole war, 
which they have wantonly waged against all religion and 
civil order, has at last called down the vengeance of all 
true Mussulmans; and your Highness, I am. sure, will agree 
with me that Divine Providence never will permit these 
infidels to God to go unpunished. 

*' The conduct of your Highness reflects upon you the 
very highest honour, and if any state has failed to exert 
its utmost abilities against the enemies of God and His 
Holy Prophet, I rely with confidence that they will be 
your enemies, as they will be of all good men. 

'' Nelson." 

To CITIZEN HAUTERIVE. 

"Paris, 26ih December, 1801. 
'' You will inform M. Azara that the negotiations of 
Amiens are drawing to a close ; that they have been 
delayed by Spain for six weeks ; that France and England 
cannot possibly lose another day ; that peace will therefore 
be promptly signed whether Spain participates in it or not ; 
and that the First Consul, who has a personal feeling of 



CHARLES IV. OF SPAIN. 38 1 

kindness and attachment for his Majesty the King of 
Spain, will sign in the name of his majesty, not wish- 
ing that Charles IV, should be offended by finding himself 
constrained, in spite of himself ^ to agree to what is done. 

''That as the King of Spain is the most intimate ally of 
the Republic, the First Consul considers it his duty to act 
according to the domestic circumstances of that court ; that 
the illness of the King, and of the Queen, and the extra- 
ordinary, not to say insane, conduct of the Prince of the 
Peace, oblige him treat the interests of the King of Spain 
like those of France. 

"That the confidence of his Majesty Charles IV. will 
be better placed in the First Consul, and that his interests 
will be better defended by him than by his present 
minister. . . . 

'' Bonaparte." 

It is to be doubted whether a similar communication 
was ever before addressed to a power occupying the rank 
which Spain enjoyed at the commencement of this century, 
even by the most arrogant ruler. Bonaparte afterwards 
fell into a grievous error concerning the Spanish nation, 
but he made no mistake in his estimate of the Spanish 
court. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

THE YEAR 1802. 

In this year we find Bonaparte exciting the distrust of 
Europe by accepting the Presidency of the new Italian 
Republic, by concluding clandestine treaties with Spain, 
Portugal, and Turkey, by his violent interference in 
Switzerland, and his expedition to St. Domingo. In 
March the treaty of Amiens, after a long negotiation, 
which is said to have cost England 1,000,000/. a week, 
was signed. Ceylon and Trinidad remained in the pos- 
session of England ; the Cape of Good Hope was restored 
to the Dutch, and Malta was to have a garrison of Neapo- 
litan troops until a Maltese force could be raised to protect 
the island. This peace excited very little enthusiasm in 
England when proclaimed with great pomp throughout 
the cities of London and Westminster by Garter King-of- 
Arms at the head of a procession in which figured Rouge 
Dragon, Portcullis, and Rouge Croix, Norrey King-at- 
Arms, Horse Guards, beadles, constables, &c., &c. In 
April Bonaparte signed the Concordat with Rome, and in 
August he was invested with the consulship for life. In 
June General Andreossi came as French ambassador to 
London. He was represented as a man universally 
admired and esteemed, eminent alike for his learning 
and his urbanity. In October Switzerland took up arms 
to oppose the new constitution which Bonaparte wished to 



ADDRESS IN THE HOUSE OF LORDS. 383 

force upon her, and the consequence was that on the 15 th 
Ney entered at the head of 40,000 troops. A mild protest 
addressed to France by the British Government was re- 
ceived with the greatest indignation. The order of the 
Legion of Honour was instituted. Slavery was re-estab- 
lished in some of the French colonial possessions ; it was 
the same with the system of the marque^ and convicts 
were once more marked with a red-hot iron on the 
right shoulder. 

On moving the Address in the House of Lords in 
October, Lord Bolton said : '^ It was a grand and mag- 
nificent triumph for England to make a peace when her 
navies and armies were everywhere conquerors, from the 
frozen seas of the north to the Pillars of Hercules, and 
from Africa to the remotest shores of Asia and America. 
When the unexampled achievements of that band of 
heroes, who had rescued Egypt from the invaders, were 
made only to restore it to its rightful owner, and the 
triumphs of our armies were only accessary to that spirit 
of moderation which dictated an appeal to arms '' 

Mr. Fox, in the House of Commons, expressed himself 
delighted with the peace, but this enthusiasm was shared 
neither by Mr. Pitt, Mr. Wyndham, nor Mr. Sheridan. 

One of the most beneficial measures of this year was 
the creation of Commercial Chambers in Paris and in all 
the principal towns of France. 

To CITIZEN JOSEPH BONAPARTE. 

" Paris, ^th January^ 1802. 
'' I am about to start for Lyons. ... I believe that General 
Bernadotte [Joseph's brother-in-law] is at Amiens. I beg 
that he will let you know whether it will suit him to go to 
Guadeloupe as Captain-General. That island is prosper- 
ous; it is well cultivated; but Lacrosse having offended 
the inhabitants, and having only 500 whites with him, has 
been driven out, and a mulatto has been placed at the 
head of the colony. They were ignorant of the peace 



384 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

Three vessels and four frigates, with 3,000 infantry are 
about to sail in order to disarm the blacks and to restore 
tranquillity. It is an important and agreeable mission. . . . 

'' Bonaparte." 

Bernadotte naturally refused this tempting offer, being 
probably aware that it was made with the intention of 
getting rid of him. The command of the expedition was 
afterwards confided to the able lieutenant of Moreau, 
General Richpance, who tranquillised the island by ex- 
terminating the blacks. The mulatto leader, Pelagie, 
submitted, like Toussaint Louverture, but his fate is a 
mystery to this day. 

At Lyons Bonaparte found the soldiers who had 
returned from Egypt. 

This visit to Lyons formed part of a bold conception. 
While Lord Cornwalhs and Joseph Bonaparte were dis- 
cussing at Amiens, Bonaparte was busy establishing his 
authority over the Batavian, Helvetic, and Cisalpine 
Republics. He forced a constitution down the throats 
of the Dutch in order to secure their independence ; he 
behaved with great duplicity in Switzerland, so as to 
prevent the people having a popular government ; and he 
treated the Cisalpine in this wise. He presented a con- 
stitution to that Republic, and, the constitution accepted, 
it became necessary to select the authorities. Napoleon 
was asked to make the necessary nominations. He con- 
sented, and directed the representatives of the Cisalpine 
to meet him at Lyons to arrange matters, thus obliging 
450 notabilities to cross the Alps in the depth of winter. 
Matters went on smoothly until the question of electing 
a president came on. The Cisalpines had cast their eyes 
on Melzi, but on perceiving that Bonaparte desired to be 
chosen himself, they at once implored him to accept the 
post of chief magistrate. The offer was not rejected. The 
Cisalpine became the Italian Republic, and Napoleon 
Bonaparte became President. 



THE HELVETIAN REPUBLIC. 385 

To THE CONSULS CAMBACfiRES AND LEBRUN. 

" Lyons, i^^rd Ja7iuary^ 1802. 
"... All the officers of the army of the East whom 
I meet here confirm the reports made against several 
generals of that army. ... I suppose that by this time 
M. Azara has left for Amiens. . . . 

" Bonaparte." 

to the emperor of russia. 

" Paris, \(^th February^ 1802. 
*'I have received your majesty's letter of the 5th 
December. The tender interest which you take in the 
affairs of Helvetia is in every way worthy of the paternal 
character your majesty displays in the government of 
your own states, which causes you to be blessed by your 
people. I have great pleasure in acquainting your 
majesty with what I have done in order to restore the 
tranquillity of that estimable nation. . . . 

" Bonaparte." 

The French troops were to be withdrawn as soon as a 
definitive organisation had been adopted. Bonaparte also 
expressed the hope that the treaty of Amiens would soon 
be signed; that Malta would be handed over to the Grand 
Master ; that direct commerce would be established 
between France and Russia by way of the Mediterranean 
and the Black Sea, &c. At the same time the Czar was 
implored not to repose faith in evil rumours circulated by 
designing persons. M. de Markoff, the Russian ambas- 
sador, had been prying into the Sebastiani and other 
affairs, to the great irritation of the First Consul. 

On the 24th February Bonaparte addressed two letters 
to Fouche. In the first he gave orders that Laharpe 
should be told to leave Paris within twenty-four hours, 
and to take up his residence in some small village at 
twenty-five leagues from the capital, where he was to 

VOL. L C C 



386 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

remain under the supervision of the police. As for 
Madame Champcentz and Madame Damas, those ladies 
were to be shown over the frontier. Bonaparte thus 
concluded his second letter, after dealing with a variety 
of brigands : — 

** The re-establishment of peace with the Powers allow- 
ing me to pay more attention to the police, I desire to 
be informed at greater length of all that passes, and to do 
business with you at least once, and often twice, a day, 
when that is necessary. The hours which will suit me 
best are 11 A.M. and 11 P.M. . . . 

" Bonaparte." 



To CITIZEN JOSEPH BONAPARTE. 

^' La Malmaison, nth March, 1802. 
" It is 5 P.M., and the courier you announced has not 
yet arrived. However, the despatches from Otto and all 
the letters from England confirm the report of consider- 
able armaments and the departure of successive squadrons. 
Lord Hawkesbury has informed Otto that Cornwallis has 
received his last instructions. . . . Let me know twice a 
day, morning and evening, all that is done and all that is 
said. It is clear to me that if peace has not been signed 
by this, or has not been agreed to, there must be a change 
of system in London. 

" Bonaparte." 

Brother Joseph was then instructed to assure Lord 
Cornwallis that the First Consul had received the most 
flattering letters from Russia, Prussia, and Austria, and 
that those three Powers and all the princes of Italy had 
recognised the Italian Republic. Citizen Otto was directed 
to speak up, and to protest against the threatening tone 
adopted by the British Government, which could not be 
tolerated by a Power like France. 



ST. DOMINGO REBELS. 387 

To CAPTAIN GENERAL LECLERC. 

" Paris, i(^th March, 1802. 
"... . France has learned v/ith delight your successful 
commencement, which presages the return of St. Domingo 
to the mother country. The squadrons of Toulon, of 
Cadiz, of Flushing, and of Havre ought to have reached 
you. . . . Follow out your instructions to the letter, and 
as soon as you can get rid of Toussaint, Christophe, 
DessaHnes, and the principal brigands, and that the mass 
of the blacks has been disarmed, despatch all the coloured 
men who have taken a part in the troubles to the 
Continent. . . . 

'^Bonaparte." 

To CITIZEN TALLEYRAND. 

" Paris, \Zih March, 1802. 
'* I beg you will have the accouchements of princesses, 
and the deaths which are notified to us, inserted in the 
Moniteur, for I know that the courts pay particular 
attention to this publication. The elector of Bavaria and 
the princesses of Baden and Denmark are in this category. 

" BONAPARTE.'' 

To CITIZEN TALLEYRAND. 

*' Paris, 20th March, 1802. 
" The Valais affair must be settled. You will perceive 
how I look upon the question. Have inquiries made, and 
draw me up a memorandum on the ancient organisation 
of that country. . . . Write to Citizen Verhinac that 
Helvetia, not being a French province, and having recog- 
nised its government, I ought to allow it to govern itself; 
what interests me is the affair of the Valais. Let Citizen 
Reding be informed that if he is not satisfied with the 
mezzo termine which I have taken he will lose all. . . 

'' BONAPARTE. ' 
C C 2 



388 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

A great many of Bonaparte's negotiations were opened 
and carried on with the view of making persons believe 
that, while he was actuated by the purest and most 
philanthropic motives, it was quite the contrary with his 
opponents. As a curious example of this we may quote 
the following paragraph from a letter to Talleyrand, dated 
the 24th March, and dealing with the Malta affair during 
negotiations at Amiens : — 

*' As far as the Barbary Powers are concerned it must be 
inserted in a protocol, or a note must be presented setting 
forth how improper it will be for the Order of Malta, 
instituted to wage war against the Barbary Powers, to 
receive the ships of those Powers in their ports, from 
which they will be able to ravage the States even of the 
Pope. . . . That this upsets all received ideas, and is con- 
trary to the nature of things. ... At the sametime, after 
having remained firm, and above all, after having recorded 
the presentation of the note, or the insertion in the pro- 
tocol, the French ambassador is authorised to waive the 
matter, and must not for a single hour delay his signature 
to the treaty on account of this article ; it will be sufficient 
for me to be able to show that it was England which 
desired this absurd injustice." 

Neither before nor after this despatch did Bonaparte 
show himself a respecter of Papal territory. 

On the 26th March Bonaparte informed the Pope that 
the peace with England had been signed, and desired to 
have his opinion with regard to Malta. On the same day 
the First Consul wrote : — 

To CITIZEN MELZI. 

'* Paris, 26/y^ March^ 1802. 
"You will find inclosed the definitive treaty of peace 
with England. There is no question of the King of 
Etruria, nor of the Ligurian, Italian, or Helvetian 
Republics ; but they will shortly be recognised in a 
suitable manner. ... u BoNAPARTE." 



CHURCH AFFAIRS. 389 

The Republics were not mentioned because it was felt 
on both sides that no agreement could be arrived at 
respecting them. From this fact alone it soon became 
clear that the peace was nothing but a truce. 



ALLOCUTION TO CARDINAL CAPRARA, Legate a Latere. 

" Paris, ^th Aprils 1802. 

*' The apostolical virtues which distinguish you cause 
me to see you with pleasure the depositary of so great an 
influence over the consciences of the people. 

*' You will draw from the Gospel rules for your 
conduct ; and in this manner you will contribute power- 
fully to the quelling of hatred and to the consolidation of 
union in this vast empire. . . . The result of your 
mission will be, for the Christian religion, which in all ages 
has done so much for mankind, a new subject of triumph, 
and you will receive congratulations both from the 
enlightened philosopher and from the veritable friends 
of men." 

To CITIZEN PORTALIS. 

" Paris, <^th Aprils 1802. 

"You will find inclosed a list of the ecclesiastical nomi- 
nations. The First Consul desires that you will inform 
the citizens in question that their nominations have been 
definitively settled, although I cannot yet deliver them 
their brevets. . . . The First Consul begs you will settle 
with the Legate so that the archbishops and bishops 
nominated may be consecrated and receive canonical 
institution before the 27th. They will take the oath, in 
presence of the First Consul, on Easter-day." 

The archbishops were to receive 15,000, and the bishops 
10,000 francs each for preliminary expenses, but this 
matter was to be kept secret. 



390 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

To CITIZEN BARB^ MARBOIS. 

"Paris, i^th April ^ 1802. 
'' I beg you will select nine diamonds among those in 
the Public Treasury, suitable for rings for the archbishops, 
and have them mounted. Select a tenth for the Cardinal 
Legate of superior quality and greater value. 

'' Bonaparte." 

To general berthier. 

^' Paris, 10th Aprils 1802. 
" I beg you will inform General Thurreau, while recom- 
mending him to treat the Valaisians well and to push on 
with the Simplon road, that the Government is aware of 
the obstacles thrown in his way, and is satisfied with 
his conduct. u Bonaparte." 

Thurreau was the general who commanded the " Infernal 
Columns" in La Vendee, and the Valaisians soon became 
painfully aware that he was not to be trifled with. 

WORDS pronounced IN THE COUNCIL OF STATE. 

*' Paris, 4/// May^ 1802. 
^' In all countries force yields to civil qualities. Bayonets 
are lowered before the priest, who speaks in the name of 
heaven, and before man, who imposes by his sciOLnc^, I 
have predicted to military men with scrupules that a 
military government will never take root m France unless 
the nation be besotted by fifty years of ignorance. All 
attempts will fail, and their authors will be the victims. 
It is not as a general that I govern, but because the 
nation believes that I possess civil capacity. ... I 
knew what I was about when, a general m the army, I 
accepted the title of Member of the Institute ; I felt sure 
of being comprehended by the smallest drummer.^ . . ." 

^ This hardly tallies with what Bonaparte said about governing 
France booted and spurred, and with his making a soldier of Joseph 
as he might have been called on to succeed him. 



THE TRINIDAD BUSINESS. 39 1 

In a message to the Legislative Body of the 6th May, 
1802, Bonaparte thus referred to the Trinidad affair: — 

*' The RepubHc was bound by its engagements, and by 
the fidelity of Spain, to make every effort to preserve the 
integrity of that kingdom. This duty it fulfilled with 
energy as far as circumstances would permit. The King 
of Spain has acknowledged the loyalty of his allies, and in 
the interest of peace he has generously made a sacrifice 
which the}^ fain would have spared him. He acquires by 
this new claims to the attachment of France, and a sacred 
title to the gratitude of Europe." 

With regard to St. Domingo, the First Consul declared 
that that brigand Toussaint, with some other brigands like 
himself, was wandering about without men and without 
money. 

ALLOCUTION TO GENERAL MENOU. 

" Paris, 7//^ May^ 1802. 

" The fate of battles is uncertain. You did all in your 
power after the unfortunate day of the 30th [battle of 
Canope] which could be done by a man of heart and 
experience. Your long resistance at Alexandria contri- 
buted to the happy issue of the preliminaries of London. 
.... I know all that happened in your army. Your 
misfortunes have no doubt been great, but they have not 
made you lose my esteem, and I shall hasten to show 
this openly, in order that no public clamour may assail 
your conduct." 

In the tenth volume of Napoleo7is Military Correspon- 
dence the reputation of Abdallah Menou, as we have seen, 
is very rudely assailed. The whole collapse in Egypt was 
attributed to him. '' His irresolution and want of talent," 
wrote Napoleon at St. Helena, ''banished all hope and all 
confidence." But, for the moment, all this was to be kept 
dark, and everything was to be painted in the brightest 
colours. 



392 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

ORDER OF THE DAY. 

" St. Cloud, 12I/1 May, 1802. 

'' The Grenadier Gobain committed suicide through love. 
He was a very good fellow. This is the second event of 
the same nature which has taken place in the corps within 
a month. 

'^ The First Consul directs that it be put in the orders of 
the Guard : * That a soldier should know how to conquer 
the pain and the melancholy of his passions ; that there is 
as much courage evinced in suffering with constancy 
mental pain as in remaining firm under a storm of grape. 
That to give oneself up to chagrin without resistance and 
to kill oneself is to abandon the battlefield before being 
conquered.' " 

To REAR-ADMIRAL DECR^S. 

*' Paris, 2is^ Afay, 1802. 
" You will order Major Hercules [who distinguished him- 
self, with his trumpeters, at Areola] to embark on the first 
vessel that sails. He will carry despatches to General 
Leclerc, and will serve on his staff. You will acquaint 
General Leclerc of all the succours which are leaving our 
ports. You will inform him that more shall be sent, and 
that the Government has full confidence in all the measures 
he may take to re-establish the metropolis in all its rights, 
and to subdue those African felons for ever. 

" BONAPARTE." 

Bonaparte was beginning to find out that the St. 
Domingo affair was more serious than he had anticipated, 
and that Colonel Vincent, who had warned him of the 
difiiculties of the undertaking, was not mistaken. 

In a letter to the King of Spain on the subject of the 
King of Etruria, who was in a precarious state of health 
and might soon leave his throne vacant, Bonaparte 
mentioned that — 



SECULARISATION OF TALLEYRAND. 393 

" Admiral Gravina has rendered such signal services to 
the French army at St. Domingo that I beg your Majesty 
will accord him some special mark of favour. ... I must 
thank your Majesty for the horses you gave me, which 
I ride every day. . . . 

'' Bonaparte." 

Gravina endeavouring to recover for France a colony 
which she had wrested from Spain ! What humiliation ! 
But the unfortunate Admiral had not yet finished with 
Bonaparte. 

To H.H. THE POPE. 

" Parts, 24M May, 1802. 

'' Most Holy Father-I have left it to Cardinal Caprara 
to inform you of all that happened on Easter Day. You 
would have been greatly affected at the splendid spectacle 
offered by the entire Republic upon that occasion. . . . 
General Murat, who has arrived here, assures me that your 
Holiness is afflicted in consequence of some " constitu- 
tionals" having been nominated to French bishoprics. Your 
Holiness will perceive that I have also nominated a great 
number of ex-bishops, and the history of the Church 
clearly proves that schisms have never been terminated ex- 
cept by the reconciliation of parties. Your Holiness has, 
therefore, no cause for sadness. The whole of France has 
adhered to the Concordat, and astonished Europe admires 
a work which consolidates religion and re-establishes the 
Holy See upon bases which, for a moment, appeared to 
have been compromised. 

'' I send your Holiness a note, which has been handed to 
me, on the subject of a demand for a brief for the secu- 
larisation of Citizen Talleyrand. This demand is personally 
agreeable to me. 

'^ I beg your Holiness to believe me, with all filial 
respect, the very devoted son of your HoHness. 

" Bonaparte." 



394 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

Although the Concordat had been signed on the iSth 
July, 1801, it was not sanctioned by the French Chambers 
until May, 1802. To celebrate the reconciliation between 
Church and State the First Consul ordered a Te Deiim to 
be performed at Notre Dame, to which all the authorities 
were bidden. The army alone made some show of resis- 
tance, Augereau, on the part of several of his comrades, 
requesting permission not to attend — a permission which 
Bonaparte refused. Delmas, having been asked what he 
thought of the ceremony, replied : *^ Very fine. General, but 
there are missing a million men who have perished in order 
to destroywhat you are re-establishing." Delmas was exiled. 
Bonaparte had employed his usual perfidy in this matter. 

Cardinal Consalvi relates in his memoirs how, when after 
much squabbling, the treaty between France and Rome 
had been drawn up and the copies made, he went to Joseph 
Bonaparte's house to affix his signature. What Vv^as his 
astonishment, on taking up his pen, to perceive that the 
document laid before him was the exact reproduction of 
the primitive proposals of the French Government which 
he had rejected. The Cardinal was highly indignant. 
Joseph declared that he was ignorant of the substitution, 
and the Abbe Bernier, who had brought the fraudulent 
copy, affirmed that he had received it from the hands of the 
First Consul. The question was re-discussed during nine- 
teen consecutive hours, and the text previously accepted 
by Cardinal Consalvi was restored. This treaty Bonaparte 
tore in pieces, threatening, at the same time, to change the 
religion not only of France, but of Europe. ** Rome," he 
added, ''shall shed tears of blood." After a few slight 
concessions Consalvi signed the treaty, which., like many 
other treaties enforced by Bonaparte on negotiators who 
could offer but a feeble resistance, in no way answered the 
purpose for which it was concluded. 

In signing the Concordat Bonaparte had several objects 
in view ; he thought that he would be able to attach the 
clergy to the new order of things and to utilise them ; that 



A BARBARA SHIP. 395 

they would become, as the sa}ang went, his sacred gen^ 
darmerie, and that he would thus snap the last link which 
existed between France and the ancient regime, and would 
appease La Vendee, which, like Rachael weeping for her 
children, was not to be comforted. Bonaparte, as usual, 
wished to have the lion's share. At St. Helena Napoleon 
aid that had he returned victorious from Moscow he would 
have made Paris the capital of the Christian world ; he 
would have held his councils there, and the Popes would 
have been merely Presidents. As it was he forced Pius 
VII. to concede all he asked for the moment. His Holiness 
consented even to secularise the ex-bishop of Autun, who 
became his ''very dear son," though he would never acknow- 
ledge Madame de Talleyrand. And what did he receive in 
return for his concessions } Neither Avignon, nor Car- 
pentras, nor the Legations which he had been led to 
expect ; nothing but a few spiritual advantages — the 
remains of Pius VI., and the image of Our Lady of Loretto 
which had been stolen some years previously from the 
Santa Casa. 

To CITIZEN TALLEYRAND. 

" Paris, 30/A May^ 1802. 
" It is indispensable for you to inform Citizen Alquier 
that the King of Naples must allow the Pope to enjoy 
the integrity of his States, and that Beneventum and 
Ponte Corvo should be placed on their ancient footing. 

" Bonaparte." 

Soon afterwards Bonaparte seized on both these princi- 
palities, and gave the first to Talleyrand and the second 
to Bernadotte. 

To REAR-ADMIRAL DECRES. 

*' Paris, 7/// June^ 1802, 
" A Barbary ship has been blockading a dozen Ligurian 
vessels at St. Tropez, and the Maritime Prefect has done 
nothing to disengage the port. It \s a dishonour to the 



396 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

Republic that these Barbary wretches should insult our 
Coasts. Take measures to prevent any vessel, no matter to 
what nation it belongs, being blockaded or captured in our 
waters. 

'' Bonaparte." 

After having set forth all the benefits he had conferred 
on the Church, the First Consul ordered the following note 
to be despatched to Rome : — 

" 1st. At the epoch of the Revolution France possessed 
five cardinals, to wit, Cardinals Bernis, Larochefoucault, 
Rohan, Lomenie, and Montmorency. The two first are 
dead ; the third is no longer a Frenchman ; the fourth is 
dead ; and the fifth is a rebel to the State and to the 
Holy See." 

Then followed a demand that France should have seven 
cardinals, the same number as Austria, so that she might 
exercise an equal amount of influence with that Power in 
future conclaves. 

To THE ITALIAN REPUBLIC. 

^^ Paris, ist July, 1802. 
" I hasten to lay before you the constitution of the 
Republic of the Valais, and to communicate to you my 
intention, as President of the Italian Republic, to place 
that Republic under the protection of France and of the 
Italian and Helvetian Republics, so that the Republic of 
the Valais, guaranteed by three powers, may be sheltered 
from the vicissitudes of time, and be able to preserve a 
strict neutrality. . . . 

'' Bonaparte." 

A few days afterwards Bonaparte commenced a long 
note to his War Minister in these terms : ^' The indepen- 
dence of the Valais, with the exclusive faculty of the 
French to march their armies through it, will change the 
system of war in Italy." The independent Valaisians 



THE ISLAND OF ELKA. 397 

were to keep the military roads in proper repair at their 
own expense. 

In a letter to Captain-General Leclerc, Bonaparte gave 
a very brilliant account of the political situation in France 
at this epoch : — 

'' Affairs in Germany," he wrote, " have been settled to 
our advantage and to that of our allies. By our peace 
with the Turk we have obtained the commerce of the 
Black Sea. We have gained possession of the Isle of 
Elba, which has been united to France. Piedmont is 
definitively united to the Republic. The English have 
evacuated Malta, Mahon, and Egypt. Our colonies in 
Asia are prosperous, and so are Guadeloupe, Tobago, and 
Martinique. Rid us of those 'gilded Africans' and there 
will remain nothing for us to desire. ... As for you, you 
are on the road to glory. The Republic will enable 
you to enjoy a suitable fortune, and my friendship is 
unchangeable." 

There were several misstatements in the above extract. 
The English had not evacuated all the positions alluded 
to. As for Elba, we find the First Consul writing to 
Berthier on the 3rd July, to disarm the inhabitants of 
Porto-Ferrajo, to arrest a dozen of them and to send them 
on board a frigate by way of hostages. A government com- 
missioner was to select a dozen of the most honest families 
in the island and to send their children to school in Paris 
so as to attach them to France. 

This is the way in which Elba was treated by its 
future sovereign. 

To TALLEYRAND. 

'' Paris, 'jth July, 1802. 

"Write to Citizen Dubois-Thainville at Algiers that by 
order of the First Consul he is to demand the head of the 
reis who bastinadoed the French captain in the roads of 
Algiers ; that the vessel must be restored ; . . . that the 
Dey must be informed that should he listen to the 
counsels of Vekhil Hardgi, who is the enemy of France, 



398 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

he will be ruined ; that no one has ever insulted me with 
impunity ; that unless he behaves well I shall punish him 
as I did the Mamelukes." 

And the consul was to be instructed to speak im- 
periously to the Dey, and not to fear bringing about a 
rupture. No less a personage than General Hulin was to 
be the bearer of the following letter, which was to be 
backed up by three ships of the line : — 

''Paris, 18M July, 1802. 

**To THE MOST High and Most Magnificent Dey 
OF Algiers. 

" May God preserve him in prosperity and in glory ! 

** I write this letter direct to you because I know that 
you are deceived by your ministers, who lead you to act 
in a manner which may be productive of great misfortunes." 

And the Dey was called upon to give satisfaction. 

The First Consul wrote three other letters on the same 
subject on the i8th, and declared to his Minister of Marine 
that unless the French flag were treated with due respect 
by Tunis and Algiers, he was to send ten ships of the 
line and five frigates to punish the Barbary Powers and 
to insist upon reparation being made. 

On the 22nd July Bonaparte wrote to General Leclerc, 
saying — 

'^ We await with impatience the arrival of Christophe 
and Dessalines in France. The capture of Toussaint was 
extrejnely honourable to you, and is a cause of tranquillity 
and hope for our commerce." 

On the same day the following decree was issued : — 

" Art. I. The so-called Toussaint Louverture shall be 
transferred to and detained as a prisoner in the fort of 
Joux. He shall be kept in solitary confinement, without 
the power of writing or of communicating with any one 
but his domestic. 



THE DEY OF ALGIERS. 399 

"Art II. The Ministers of War and of Marine are 
charged with the execution of this decree." 

Nothing could exceed the perfidious conduct of Bona- 
parte on this occasion. Toussaint Louverture had laid 
down his arms on the solemn promise of pardon, which 
was basely violated. He was never even tried, but was 
flung into a cold underground dungeon, where he did not 
long survive. The precise cause of his death remains a 
mystery. Christophe did not share the fate of his chief, 
but revenged him. 

To THE DEY OF ALGIERS. 

"Paris, 27//^ July^ 1802. 
"Great and Magnificent Dey,— An adjutant of my 
palace has been sent to demand reparation for insults to 
my flag. ... I must also express my indignation at the 
demand for 200,000 piastres which your ministers have 
dared to make [because French subjects had been coral 
fishing on the coast of Algiers]. I have never paid any- 
thing to any one, and, thank God, I have imposed the law 
on all my enemies. I destroyed the Mamelukes because 
they dared to demand money after having insulted the 
French flag. . . . Before marching against you with land 
and sea forces I have communicated with the ambassador 
of the Sublime Porte," &c. 

Bonaparte threatened the Dey with an army of 80,000 
men, and the Dey threatened the First Consul with the 
horrors of war unless he were paid his 200,000 piastres, 
and there the matter stopped. 

To CITIZEN ABRIAL, Minister of Justice, 

^^ Paris, 21st August, 1802. 
" I have the honour to forward you the Papal brief 
which restores Citizen Charles Maurice Talleyrand to his 
secular and lay existence. I beg you will have the same 
inserted in the Bulletin des Lois, 

^' Bonaparte," 



400 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

The Bishop of Meaux, having asked permission to repair 
to Paris in order to have his eyes looked after — 

DECISION. 

" I shall see him with pleasure in Paris, where he will 
be able to» attend to the affairs of his diocese. 

*' Bonaparte/' 

Cazenove, Archbishop of St. Domingo, having asked 
what day he could take the oath to the First Consul — 

DECISION. 

" To be sent to Citizen Portalis, to ask him why he 
assumes the title of archbishop, and if he is one, who 
nominated him. 

'' Bonaparte.'' 

To H.H. THE pope. 

" Paris, 28M August^ 1802. 

" Most Holy Father, — I have read the letter of your 
Holiness with the greatest attention. / can but approve 
of the mteittion of your Holiness to 7iomi7iate one of my 
subjects Grand Master of Malta. 

'^ I see with pain that your Holiness does not consider 
that you can conclude a Concordat with the Italian Re- 
public The cardinals I would propose to your 

Holiness are the Archbishop of Paris (de Belloy), the 
Archbishop of Lyons (Fesch), and the Bishops of Troyes 
and of Autun. Your Holiness knows the Archbishop of 
Paris. . . . Although ninety-three years of age his mind 
and body are still unimpaired. 

'* The Archbishop of Lyons, young and less deserving^ 
is an ecclesiastic distinguished for the severity of his 
morality ^ and for the attachment I bear him, being my 
near relative. . . . 

^ No mention is made of the sums embezzled by his future 
eminence when he was acting as army contractor in Italy. 



THE DEY OF ALGIERS. 4OI 

" I must inform your Holiness that I have just obtained 
from the Dey of Algiers the release of a great number of 
Christians, several of whom are subjects of your Holiness ; 
this was brought about in connection with the arrangements 
made with the Dey to repair an insult offered to the 
French flag. 

** I have caused the Holy Sepulchre, all the Christians 
in Syria, and all the churches of Constantinople to be 
placed under the protection of France. . . . 

" I should like to give a fresh impulse to the missions in 
China, and I will not conceal from your Holiness that, in- 
dependently of the general welfare of religion, I am 
actuated in this matter by a desire to deprive the English 
of the direction of those missions [which were somewhat 
commercial]. . . . 

''Bonaparte." 

Sebastiani was to look after the Christians in the Levant, 
and other matters. 

DECISION. 

'' Parts, 30/A August, 1802. 
"Sent back to the Minister of the Interior. It is not 
proper that Vestris should leave. I desire that when he 
no longer performs he shall be granted a pension. The 
Minister will make a report on the subject of Vestris and 
his debts. 

" Bonaparte." 

Vestris had asked permission to pass six months a 
year in England, where he had been offered 1,300 guineas 
for the season. 

In a letter to the Minister of Marine Bonaparte said 
that he desired to make the Pope a present of two brigs, 
the Speedy and the Colibri ; the names of these vessels 
were to be altered to the St. Peter and the St. Paul ; on 
the poop of each was to be inscribed in letters of gold — 

VOL. I. D D 



402 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

** Given by the First Consul Bonaparte to the Pope Pius 
VII. ; " and they were to be " painted and carved internally 
in a manner analogous to their new names." 

Many little facts of the above description show how 
times had changed. In 1796 General Bonaparte had levied 
'' black mail " on the Pope, and had forced him to con- 
tribute 4,000,000 francs towards the expenses of the French 
navy ! A year afterwards, when the General seized on 
Venice, he announced to the Directory that he had 
changed the names of the nine ships and the twelve 
frigates he had captured — vessels ayant des noins de saints 
inconvenants. 

As a matter of fact none of the Venetian vessels were 
called after saints with the exception of the St. George ! 

It may be asked how it came that Bonaparte, who was 
intent upon levying ships from Spain and Portugal, should 
have presented even two brigs to the Pope. We know 
something of the Speedy, She had been captured by the 
squadron under Admiral Linois after a resistance so 
gallant that her captain had his sword returned to him. 
The captain in question was Thomas Cochrane, afterwards 
Earl of Dundonald. He described the Speedy 2.^ "the least 
efficient craft on the station." The probability is that the 
St. Paid was not w^orth much more than the St. Peter. 

On the 5th September Bonaparte addressed a series of 
instructions to Sebastiani, who was to visit Tripoli, Alex- 
andria, Cairo, Jaffa, St. Jean dAcre, Jerusalem, &c., with 
what view is tolerably well known. He was to assure 
every one of the good wishes of France, and was to avoid 
compromising himself 

To CITIZEN PORTALIS. 

^' Paris, 6th September, 1802. 

'^ I send you a note which has been forwarded to me by 

the Inspector General of Gendarmery concerning the 

Bishop of Rennes. Write to him that all this must come 

to an end ; that he makes me regret the confidence I 



GENDARMES AND BISHOPS. 4O3 

reposed in him ; that he is culpable in removing a Con- 
stitutional priest; that a prelate who, after ten years of 
revolution and trouble, does not experience the necessity 
of peace is deserving of no consideration/' 

And the bishop, whose passions were not to be re- 
strained by the morality of the Evangelists, was threatened 
with criminal proceedings. 

The Bishop of Clermont was to be written in language 
less harsh, and told that his conduct was *'the art of 
rendering religion odious and impotent." Other prelates, 
no doubt, on the report of the Inspector General of 
Gendarmes, were to be sharply reprimanded. 

On the 23rd September Bonaparte, in a long letter to 
Talleyrand, said he had his eye on the Helvetian Republic, 
and that unless the terms of his proclamation were ac- 
cepted he would send Ney into that country at the head of 
30,000 men. He was determined, he wrote, to have a 
frontier to cover Franche-Comte ; there was no middle 
course between a Swiss Goverjiment solidly organised aitd 
friendly to France, and no Szvitzeidand. 

On the 2nd October Bonaparte drew out an elaborate 
document on the organisation of the Isle of Elba, which 
was to have its Captain General, a Government Com- 
missioner, a Council of Administration and Justice. No 
more young men were to be sent to the schools or uni- 
versities of Tuscany. A French master was to be 
established in every parish, and the French language was 
to be used in the courts of law, &c., &c. 

The Archbishop of Turin, having asked to be dispensed 
from coming to Paris owing to his great age, his ill-health, 
the requirements of his diocese, and want of means: 

DECISION. 

*' Paris, nth October, 1802. 
" The weather is about to become severe ; it is necessary 
for him to hasten his departure. Send him 3,000 francs 
for his travelling expenses. '< Bonaparte." 

D D 2 



4C4 THE CORRESPONDENXE OF NAPOLEON. 

INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE AMBASSADOR AT CONSTAN- 
TINOPLE (GENERAL BRUNE). 

** St. Cloud, \Zth October^ 1802. 
"The intention of the Government is that the Ambas- 
sador at Constantinople shall recover the supremacy which 
France has exercised in that city for 200 years. He has 
a splendid residence and he ought constantly to occupy a 
rank superior to that of other nations ; be surrounded by a 
numerous suite, and make a great display. . . . He must 
give it to be understood that if Russia and Austria have 
an interest in dividing the states of the Sultan, it is the 
interest of France to maintain the balance between those 
two powers. ... If any events happen in the vicinity ot 
Constantinople he must offer his mediation, and as a 
general rule the French Ambassador must seize every op- 
portunity to attract attention. Acting upon this principle 
there will be no inconvenience in illuminating the French 
Embassy on the fete day of the prophet. . . . Care must 
be taken never to shock the habits and customs of the 
people, &c. u BONAPARTE." 

To CONSUL CAMBACERES. 

'^ Rouen, 31^-/ October^ 1802. 
*' I rode at 8 A.M. to visit the heights of Rouen. The 
Archbishop, who is much loved and esteemed here, was 
good enough to say mass, but he gave us neither holy 
water nor oraison. We shall take our revenge to-morrow, 
which is All Saints' Day. . . . The Grand Judge should 
not lose a moment in having the notary Petit arrested and 
confined in the Temple. The eight cures ought to be 
arrested at once and sent to Italy under safe guard. . . . 

'' Bonaparte." 

to the archbishop of lyons. 

"Rouen, 2nd November, 1802. 
'* I have been for the last three days at Rouen. I am 
highly satisfied with the people of this department, w^ith 



INSTRUCTIONS TO UNCLE FESCH. 405 

the feelings which animate the clergy, and especially with 
the archbishop. 

" It is time for you to start for your diocese, you must 
keep up a handsome establishment, but without luxury ; 
regulating it by the most considerable households in Lyons. 
You must act with dexterity, but you must in reality 
appoint as many constitutional priests as possible. . . . 
You must unite to this a great respect for the Pope. . . . 
I beg you will send me your pastoral before publishing it. 
You will greatly displease me, and. you will damage the 
state if you say anything to offend the Constitutionals. 
.... Do not forget that in the position where you have 
been placed you will be closely watched. Act with the 
strictest raorality and decorum, and devote yourself 
entirely to your duties. Pretend not to meddle with 
politics, and if petitions are presented to you for me say 
that you are a minister of religion. Do not exhibit too 
much zeal even in the administration of the hospitals, or as 
regards the poor. ... I should like you to take by the 
hand one of the most prominent bishops of the refractory 
party and one of those having the most weight among the 
Constitutionals, to bless them and to embrace them, 
telling them that union and fraternity form the funda- 
mental basis of religion. Something striking in this line 

would have a good effect. . . . 

" Bonaparte." 

The nephew evidently did not place unweening con- 
fidence in the Cardinal, and in this he showed the keenness 
of his perception. 

On the 4th November Bonaparte wrote to Talleyrand 
evidently in reply to a despatch which had been forwarded 
from London by General Andreossy. In this letter the 
First Consul questioned the right of England to interfere 
with the affairs of the Italian, Ligurian, and Helvetian Re- 
publics, since nothing had been said about those Republics 
in the Treaty of Amiens. He expressed himself in a tone 
of irritation which boded ill for the peace of the Continent. 



406 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

In several despatches Bonaparte speaks in glowing 
terms of the position of Alessandria from a military 

point of view. 

DECREE. 

*^ Paris, iZth Nove7nber^ 1802. 
''Art. I. The cathedral of Alessandria, which 'encum- 
bers ' \\i^ place d'armSy shall be demolished. The materials 
shall be employed on the fortifications. 

" Art 2. The Ministers of the Interior, of Finance, and 
of War are charged with the execution of this decree. 

" Bonaparte." 

To THE KING OF SPAIN. 

" St. Cloud, 27/^ Noveinber, 1802. 
" I have received your letter of the i8th October, and 
I beg you will present my compliments of condolence to 
the Queen on the death of the Duke of Parma. Your 
Majesty is well aware that the French Republic had a 
right to take possession of your states two years ago 
according to the treaty of the 21st diarchy 1801. . . . 
However, desiring to be agreeable to your Majesty, I did 
not press for the execution of the treaty. . . . Your 
Majesty will at present feel that it has become impossible 
for me to violate a treaty signed and ratified at my own 
instigation, and that Europe might see with jealousy and 
displeasure that while Prince Ferdinand ^ is deprived of 
his states, and while the King of Sardinia, in whom so 
many princes are interested, remains uncompensated for 
the losses he has sustained, his Majesty the King of 
Tuscany should obtain, independently of his kingdom, 
a considerable increase of territory. The French Republic 
is at the present moment in possession of the States of 
Parma, and several demands have been made by other 
Powers. However, I am willing to do anything your 
Majesty may desire ; but this can never be accomplished 
without an equivalent compensation, of which Florida 
might form a portion. . . . 

'' Bonaparte." 

^ Brother of the Emperor of Austria, the dispossessed Grand-Duke 
of Tuscanv. 



'' MECANIQUE CELESTE." 407 

To CITIZEN LAPLACE. 

*^ St. Cloud, 26th November, 1802. 

*' All that I have read of your work appears to me 
perfectly clear. I long to be able to devote a few weeks 
to finish reading it, and I much regret not being able to 
give it the time and attention it deserves. This affords me 
a new opportunity for bewailing the force of circumstances 
which have diverted me into another career where I find 
myself so far removed from the sciences. I thank you 
for your dedication, which I accept with pleasure, and I 
desire that future generations in reading your Mecanique 
Celeste may remember my esteem and friendship for 
the author. 

" Bonaparte." 

In a letter to General Leclerc, dated 27th November, 
1802, Bonaparte said that he took the greatest interest in 
the sufferings of the troops, and acknowledged that he 
had miscalculated the dif^cultles of the St. Domingo 
expedition. He concluded by saying : — 

*' I am highly satisfied with the conduct of Paulette. 
She ought not to fear death, since she would die with 
glory in dying with the army and in being useful to her 
husband. Everything passes rapidly upon earth with the 
exception of the mark we leave in history. I am well 
satisfied with your brother-in-law and your sister; when 
you read this letter she will have made an addition to 
her family." 

General Leclerc had been dead a week when this letter 
was written. As for Paulette, who had been forced by 
her inexorable brother to accompany the expedition, she 
appears to have behaved with considerable resolution in 
St. Domingo. She exhibited great grief at the loss of her 
husband, and returned to France with his dead body. It 
is true, however, that she did not long remain a widow, 
and that she gave her hand to Prince Borghese. 



408 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF NAPOLEON. 

In a letter to the Pope, on the 13th December, 
Bonaparte said : — 

'' The Legate has informed me that the Grand Master 
nominated by your Holiness has refused the post. I have 
advised the Legate to send him, on the part of your 
Holiness, who is his spiritual and temporal superior, an 
order to accept it, and to tell him that he was not created 
a Knight of Malta to run about the world amusing himself, 
but to support religion. . . . 

" There are some small Swiss cantons containing a 
certain number of religious convents which during a portion 
of the war showed themselves favourable to England ; 
they remain under the same influence without perceiving 
that everything has changed, and that it is not natural for 
Catholic monks to submit to English influence in pre- 
ference to ours. I beg that your Holiness will write to 
the generals of their orders in Rome to enlighten them 
with regard to their duties. There is amongst others a 
Capuchin who wears the cross of a Protestant order which 
was given to him during the war by the King of England ; 
this appears scandalous and contrary to the principles of 
Catholicism. , . . 

" The Bey of Tunis having sent me an ambassador, 1 
have concluded a convention with him by which Christians 
falling into his hands will no longer experience ill- 
treatment, and will be allowed rations " 

It is amusing to find Bonaparte appealing to the 
spiritual power to help him in his temporal designs, and 
tacitly acknowledging the supremacy of the Pontiff. It 
is not mentioned what cross was conferred on the Capuchin, 
and the wonder is that the First Consul did not say he 
had been invested with the garter as well. 

END OF VOL. I. 



K. CLAY, SONS, AND TAYLUR, BREAD STREET HILL, E.C 



II, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, W,C. 
{Late 193, Piccadilly, W.) 

March y 1884. 



CATALOGUE OF BOOKS 



PUBLISHED BY 



CHAPMAN & HALL, 

LIMITED, 

INCLUDING 

DRAWING EXAMPLES, DIAGRAMS, MODELS, 
INSTRUMENTS, ETC. 

ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF 

THE SCIENCE AND ART DEPARTMENT, 
SOUTH KENSINGTON, 

FOR THE USE OF SCHOOLS AND ART AND SCIENCE CLASSES. 



MILITARY BIOGRAPHIES. 



Messrs. CHAPMAN & HALL, are pre- 
paring for publication a Series of Voluraes 
dedicated to the Lives of Great Military 
Commanders. 

The volumes are designed to form a set 
of critical Biographies, illustrative of the 
operations and the art of war, by writers of 
distinction in the profession of arms, whose 
competence to weigh the military qualities 
and deeds of the Chiefs can be accepted. 
Maps Vv7ill, w^hen necessary, accompany the 
volumes, for the convenience of students. 

The aim of these volumes is to be both 
popular and scientific, combining the nar- 
rative of the most romantic and instructive 
of human lives w^ith a clear examination of 
the genius of the soldier. 

The first volume, ^'FREDERICK THE 
GREAT/^ by Col. C. B. Brackenbury, 
containing Maps, will appear in March. 

'^MARSHAL LOUDON," by Col. 
Malleson, C.S.I., v^ill folloAv it; the tw^o 
Lives presenting the opposing aspects of 
the Seven Years' War. 



BOOKS 

PUBLISHED BY 

CHAPMAN & HALL, LIMITED. 



ABBOTT [ED WIN), formerly Head Master of the Philological School-^ 

A CONCORDANCE OF THE ORIGINAL POETICAL 

WORKS OF ALEXANDER POPE. Medium 8vo, 21s. 
ADAMS [FRANCIS]— 

HISTORY OF THE ELEMENTARY SCHOOL CON- 

TEST IN ENGLAND. Demy 8vo, 6s. 
BADEN-POWELL [GEORGE]— 

STATE AID AND STATE INTERFERENCE. Illus- 

trated by Results in Commerce and Industry. Crown 8vo, 9s. 
BARTLEY (G. C. T.]— 

A HANDY BOOK FOR GUARDIANS OF THE POOR. 

Crown Bvo, cloth, 3s. 

THE PARISH NET: HOW ITS DRAGGED AND 

WHAT IT CATCHES. Crown 8vo, cloth, 7s. 6d. 

THE SEVEN AGES OF A VILLAGE PAUPER. Crown 

8vo, cloth, 5s. 

BAYAED: HISTORY OF THE GOOD CHEVALIER, 

SANS PEUR ET SANS REPROCHE. Compiled by the Loyal Serviteur; 
translated into English from the French of Loredan Larchey. With over aoo 
Illustrations. Royal 8vo, 21s. 
BEESLEY [EDWARD SPENCER]— 

CATILINE, CLODIUS, AND TIBERIUS. Large crown 

Bvo, 6s. 
BELL [DR. JAMES], Principal of the Somerset House Laboratory— 

THE CHEMISTRY OF FOODS. With Microscopic 

Illustrations. 

Part I. TEA, COFFEE, SUGAR, Etc. Large crown 8vo, 2s. 6d. 
Part II. MILK, BUTTER, CEREALS, PREPARED STARCHES, Etc. 
Large Crown Bvo, 3s. 
BEN NET [WILLIAM] The Late— 

KING OF THE PEAK: a Romance. With Portrait. 

Crown 8vo, 6s. 
BENSON [W.]— 

MANUAL OF THE SCIENCE OF COLOUR. Coloured 

Frontispiece and Illustrations. i2mo, cloth, 2s. 6d. 

PRINCIPLES OF THE SCIENCE OF COLOUR. Small 

4to, cloth, 15s. 
BINGHAM [CAPT. THE HON. D.]— 

NAPOLEON'S DESPATCHES. 3 vols, demy 8vo. Un the Press. 

BIRDWOOD [SIR GEORGE C M.), C.S.I.— 

THE INDUSTRIAL ARTS OF INDIA. With Map and 

174 Illustrations. New Edition. Demy 8vo, 14s. 
BLACKIE [JOHN STUART] F.R.S.E.— 

ALTAVONA: FACT AND FICTION FROM MY LIFE 

IN THE HIGHLANDS. Third Edition. Crown 8vo, 6s. 
BLAKE [EDITH OSBORNE)— 

THE REALITIES OF FREEMASONRY. Demy 8vo, 9s. 

BLA THER WICK [DR. )— 

PERSONAL RECOLLECTIONS OF PETER STONNOR, 

Esq. With Illustrations by Jamks Guthrie and A. S. Boyd, Crown 8vo, 6s. 

A 2 



BOOKS PUBLISHED BY 



BOYLE {FREDERICK)— 

ON THE BORDERLAND— BETWIXT THE REALMS 

OF FACT AND FANCY. Crown 8vo, los. 6d. 
BRADLEY {THOMAS), of the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich— 

ELEMENTS OF GEOMETRICAL DRAWING. In Two 

Parts, with Sixty Plates. Oblong folio, half bound, each Part i6s. 
BRAY {MRS.)— 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF (born 1789, died 1883). 

Author of the "Life of Thomas Stothard, R.A.," "The White Hoods," &c. 
Edited by John A. Kempe. With Portraits. Crown 8vo, los. 6d. 

MRS. BRAY'S NOVELS AND ROMANCES. 

JVe7u and Revised Editions^ with Fro7itispieces. 

THE TALBA ; or. The Moor of Portugal. 
THE PROTESTANT; a Tale of the Times 
of Queen Mary. 

NOVELS FOUNDED ON TRADITIONS OF DEVON AND 
CORNWALL. 



THE WHITE HOODS ; a Romance of 

Flanders. 
DE FOIX ; a Romance of Beam. 



WARLEIGH ; or, The Fatal Oak. 
COURTENAY OF WALREDDON. 
HARTLAND FOREST AND ROSE- 
TEAGUE. 



FITZ OF FITZFORD ; a Tale of Destiny. 

HENRY DE POMEROY. 

TRELAWNY OF TRELAWNE, 

MISCELLANEOUS TALES. 
A FATHER'S CURSE AND A DAUGHTER'S SACRIFICE. 
TRIALS OF THE HEART. 

BROADLEY {A. M.)— 

HOW WE DEFENDED ARABI AND HIS FRIENDS. 

A Story of Egypt and the Egyptians. Illustrated by Frederick: Villiers. 
Second Edition. Demy 8vo. 12s. 

BUCKLAND {FRANK)— 

LOG-BOOK OF A FISHERMAN AND ZOOLOGIST. 

Third Edition. With numerous Illustrations. Crown 8vo, 5s. 
BURCHETT {R.)— 

DEFINITIONS OF GEOMETRY. New Edition. 241110, 

cloth, 5d, 

LINEAR PERSPECTIVE, for the Use of Schools of Art. 

Twenty-first Thousand. With Illustrations. Post 8vo, cloth, ys. 

PRACTICAL GEOMETRY : The Course of Construction 

of Plane Geometrical Figures. With 137 Diagrams. Eighteenth Edition. Post 
Z^o, cloth, 5s. 

BURNAND {F. C), B.A., Tri/^. Coll. Camb.— 

THE **A. D. C. ;" being Personal Reminiscences of the 

University Amateur Dramatic Club, Cambridge. Second Edition. Demy Svo, 12s. 
CAMPION {J. S.).— 

ON THE FRONTIER. Reminiscences of Wild Sports, 

Personal Adventures, and Strange Scenes. With Illustrations. Second Edition. 
Demy Svo, i6s. 

ON FOOT IN SPAIN. With Illustrations. Second Edition. 

Demy Svo, i6s. 
CARL YLE ( THOMAS)— See pages 18 a?zd ig. 

CARLYLE BIRTHDAY BOOK (THE). Prepared by 

Permission of Mr. Thomas Carlvle. Small crown, 3s. 
CHAMPEAUX {ALFRED)— 

TAPESTRY. With Woodcuts. Cloth, 2S. 6d. 
CHRISTIANITY AND COMMON SENSE. A Plea for the 

Worship of our Heavenly Father, and also for the Opening of Museums and 
Galleries on Sundays. By a Barrister. Demy Svo, 7s. 6d. 



CHAPMAN dr* HALL, LIMITED, 



CHURCH {A. H.), M.A., Oxon.— 

PLAIN WORDS ABOUT WATER. Illustrated. Large 

crown 8vo, sewed, 6d. 

FOOD : A Short Account of the Sources, Constituents, 

and Uses of Food. Large crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. 

PRECIOUS STONES : considered in their Scientific and 

Artistic Relations. With Illustrations. Large crown 8vo, 2s. 6d. 
CLINTON {R. H)— 

A COMPENDIUM OF ENGLISH HISTORY, from the 

Earliest Times to a.d. 1872. With Copious Quotations on the Leading Events and 
the Constitutional History, together with Appendices. Post 8vo, 7s. 6d. 

COBDEN, RICHARD, LIFE OF. By John Morley. With Por- 
trait. In 2 vols., demy 8vo, 32s. 

New Edition. Portrait. Large crown 8vo, 7s. 6d. 
Popular Edition, with Portrait, sewed, is.; cloth, 2s. 

CHAPMAN & HALL'S SIX SHILLING NOVELS: 

New and Cheaper Editions of Popular Novels, 

FAUCIT OF BALLIOL. By Herman Merivalk. 

AYALA'S ANGEL. By Anthony TROLLorK. 

THE VICAR'S PEOPLE. By G. Manvillk Fenn. 

AUNT HEPSY'S FOUNDLING. By Mrs. Leith Adams. 

AN AUSTRALIAN HEROINE. By Mrs. Campbell Praed. 

FASHION AND PASSION, OR LIFE IN MAYFAIR. By the Duke de Pomar. 

HARD LINES. By Hawley Smart. 

COLENSO [FRANCES E.)— 

HISTORY OF THE ZULU WAR AND ITS ORIGIN. 

Assisted in those portions of the vi^ork which touch upon Military Matters by 
Lieut. -Colonel Edward Durnford. Demy 8vo, i8s. 
COOKERY— 

OFFICIAL HANDBOOK FOR THE NATIONAL 

TRAINING SCHOOL FOR COOKERY. Containing Lessons on Cookery ; 
forming the Course of Instruction in the School. Compiled by "R. O. C* 
Tenth Thousand. Large crown 8vo, 8s. 

HOW TO COOK FISH. A Series of Lessons in Cookery, 

from the Official Handbook to the National Training School for Cookery, South 
Kensington. Compiled by ''R. O. C." Crown Svo, sewed- 3d. 

SICK-ROOM COOKERY. From the Official Handbook 

for the National School for Cookery, South Kensington. Compiled by " R. O. C." 
Crown 8vo, sewed, 6d. 
CRAIK [GEORGE LILLIE)— 

ENGLISH OF SHAKESPEARE. Illustrated in a Philo- 

logical Commentary on his Julius Caesar. Sixth Edition. Post 8vo, cloth, 5s. 

OUTLINES OF THE HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH 

LANGUAGE. Ninth Edition. Post 8vo, cloth, 2s. 6d. 
CRA WFORD [F. MARION)— 

TO LEEWARD. New Edition. Crown Svo, 5s. 

CRIPPS [WILFRED)— 

COLLEGE AND CORPORATION PLATE. With 

numerous Illustrations. Large crown Svo, cloth, 2S. 6d. 

DAME TROT AND HER PIG (The Wonderful History of). 

With Coloured Illustrations. Crown 4to, 3s. 6d. 
DAUBOURG [E.)— 

INTERIOR ARCHITECTURE. Doors, Vestibules, Stair- 

cases, Anterooms, Drawing, Dining, and Bed Rooms, Libraries, Bank and News- 
paper Offices, Shop Fronts and Interiors. Half-imperial, cloth, ;^2 12s. 6d. 



BOOKS PUBLISHED BY 



DAVIDSON {ELLIS A.)— 

PRETTY ARTS FOR THE EMPLOYMENT OF 

LEISURE HOURS. A Book for Ladies. With Illustrations. Demy 8vo, 6s. 

THE AMATEUR HOUSE CARPENTER : a Guide in 

Building, Making, and Repairing. With numerous Illustrations, drawn on Wood 
by the Author. Royal 8vo, los. 6d. 

DAVISON [THE MISSES)— 

TRIQUETI MARBLES in the ALBERT MEMORIAL 

CHAPEL, WINDSOR. A Series of Photographs. Dedicated by express per- 
mission to Her Majesty the Queen. The Work consists of 117 Photographs, with 
descriptive Letterpress, mounted on 49 sheets of cardboard, half-imperial. £10 los. 

DA Y ( WILLIAM)— 

THE RACEHORSE IN TRAINING, with Hints on 

Racing and Racing Reform, to which is added a Chapter on Shoeing. Fourth 
Edition. Demy 8vo, 12s. 

DHAUSSONVILLE {VICOMTE)— 

SALON OF MADAME NECKER. Translated by H. M. 

Trollope. 2 vols. Crown 8vo, i8s. 
DE KONINCK{L L.) and DIE TZ (E.)— 

PRACTICAL MANUAL OF CHEMICAL ASSAYING, 

as applied to the Manufacture of Iron. Edited, with notes, by Robert Mailst. 
Post 8vo, cloth, 6s. 

DICKENS [CHARLES)— Seepages 20-24. 

THE LETTERS OF CHARLES DICKENS. Edited 

by his Sister-in-Law and his Eldest Daughter. Two vols, uniform with *' Xhe 
Charles Dickens Edition " of his Works. Crown 8vo, 8s. 

THE CHARLES DICKENS BIRTHDAY BOOK. 

Compiled and Edited by his Eldest Daughter. With Five Illustrations by hi& 
Youngest Daughter. In a handsome fcap. 4to volume, 12s. 

DIXON ( W. HEP WOR TH)— 

BRITISH CYPRUS. With Frontispiece. Demy 8vo, 15s. 

DRAYSON [LIEUT.^COL, A. IV,)— 

THE CAUSE OF THE SUPPOSED PROPER MOTIQN 

OF THE FIXED STARS. Demy Svo, cloth, los. 

THE CAUSE, DATE, AND DURATION OF THE 

LAST GLACIAL EPOCH OF GEOLOGY. Demy Svo, cloth, los. 

PRACTICAL MILITARY SURVEYING AND 

SKETCHING. Fifth Edition. Post Svo, cloth, 4s. 6d. 

DYCE'S COLLECTION. A Catalogue of Printed Books and Manuscripts 
bequeathed by the Rev. Alexander Dyce to the South Kensmgton Museum. 
2 vols. Royal 8vo, half-morocco, 14s. 

A Collection of Paintings, Miniatures, Drawings, Engravings, 

Rings, and Miscellaneous Objects, bequeathed by the Rev. Alexander Dyce 
to the Sotuth Kensington Museum. Royal Svo, half-morocco, 6s. 6d. 
DYCE [WILLIAM), R.A.— 

DRAWING-BOOK OF THE GOVERNMENT SCHOOL 

OF DESIGN ; OR, ELEMENTARY OUTLINES OF ORNAMENT. Fifty 

selected Plates. Folio, sewed, 5s. ; mounted, x8s. 
Text to Ditto. Sewed, 6d. 
EGYPTIAN ART— 

A HISTORY OF ART IN ANCIENT EGYPT. By^ 

G. Perrot and C. Chipiez. Translated by Walteji Armstrong. With over 
600 Illustrations. 2 vols. Royal Svo, £2 as. 

EUJDT [FRANCES)— 

PICTURES OF OLD ROME. New Edition. Post 8vo, 

clotfa, 6s. 



CHAPMAN e^^ HALL, LIMITED. 



ELUS [CAPTAIN A, B.)— 

THE LAND OF FETISH. DemjrSvo. 12s. 

MNGEL iCAPL)^ 

A DESCRIPTIVE and ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE 

OF THE MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS in the SOUTH KENSINGTON 
MUSEUM, preceded by an Essay on the History of Musical Instruments. Second 
Edition. Royal 8vo, half -morocco, 12s. 

MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. With numerous Woodcuts. 

Large crown 8vo, cloth, as. 6d. 
ESCOTT (T. H. S,y- 

PILLARS OF THE EMPIRE: Short Biographical 

Sketches. Demy 8vo, los. 6d. 
EWALD {ALEXANDER CHARLES), F.S.A.-^ 

REPRESENTATIVE STATESMEN: Political Studies. 

2 Tols, Large crown Svo, £^ 4s. 

SIR ROBERT WALPOLE. A Political Biography, 

1676-1745. Demy Syo, i8s. 
FANE [VIOLET]— 

QUEEN OF THE FAIRIES (A ViUage Story), and other 

Poems. Crown 8vo, 6s. 

ANTHONY BABINGTON : a Drama. Crown Svo, 6s. 

FEARNLEY [W.)— 

LESSONS IN HORSE JUDGING, AND THE SUM- 

MERING OF HUNTERS. With lUustrations. Crown Svo, 4s. 
FITZ'PATRICK [W, J.)— 

LIFE OF CHARLES LEVER. 2 vols. Demy Svo, 30s. 

FLEMING [GEORGE), FR.C.S.— 

ANIMAL- PLAGUES: THEIR HISTORY, NATURE, 

AND PREVENTION. 8vo, cloth, 15s. 

PRACTICAL HORSE-SHOEING. With 37 Illustrations. 

Second Edition, enlarged. Svo, sewed, 2S. 

RABIES AND HYDROPHOBIA: THEIR HISTORY, 

NATURE, CAUSES, SYMPTOMS, AND PREVENTION. With 8 lUustm- 
tions. 8vo, cloth, 15s. 

A MANUAL OF VETERINARY SANITARY SCIENCE 

AND POLICE. With 33 Illustrations. 2 vols. Demy 8vo, 36s. 
FORSTER [JOHN), M.P, for Berwick— 

THE CHRONICLE of JAMES I., KING of ARAGON, 

SURNAMED THE CONQUEROR. Written by Himself. Translated from 
the Catalan by the late John Forstee, M.P. for Berwick. With an Historical 
Introduction by Don Pascual de Gayangos. 2 vols. Royal Svo, 28s. 

FORSTER [JOHNf— 

THE LIFE OF CHARLES DICKENS. With Portraits 

and other Illustrations, isth Thousand. 3 vols. 8vo, cloth, £2 2s. 

THE LIFE OF CHARLES DICKENS. Uniform with 

the Illustrated Library Edition of Dickens's Works. 2 vols. Demy Svo, £x 8s. 

THE LIFE OF CHARLES DICKENS. Uniform with 

the Library Edition. Post Svo, los. 6d. 

THE LIFE OF CHARLES DICKENS. Uniform with 

the "C. D." Edition. With Numerous Illustrations. 2 vols. 7s. 

THE LIFE OF CHARLES DICKENS. Uniform with 

the Household Edition. With Illustrations by F. Barnard. Crown 410, cloth, 5s. 

WALTER SAVAGE LANDOR: a Biography, 1775-1864. 

With Portrait. A New and Revised Edition. Demy Svo, 12s. 



BOOKS PUBLISHED BY 



tOR TNIGHTL Y RE VIE W— 

FORTNIGHTLY REVIEW.— First Series, May, 1865, to 

Dec. 1866. 6 vols. Cloth, 13s. each. 

New Series, 1867 to 1872. In Half-yearly Volumes. Cloth, 

13s. each. 

From January, 1873, to the present time, in Half-yearly 

Volumes. Cloth, i6s. each. 

CONTENTS OF FORTNIGHTLY REVIEW. From 

the commencement to end of 1878. Sewed, as. 
FORTNUM {C, D. E.)— 

A DESCRIPTIVE and ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE 

OF THE BRONZES OF EUROPEAN ORIGIN in the SOUTH KEN- 
SINGTON MUSEUM, with an Introductory Notice. Royal 8vo, half-morocco, 

;^I lOS. 

A DESCRIPTIVE and ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE 

OF MAIOLICA, HISPANO-MORESCO, PERSIAN, DAMASCUS, AND 
RHODIAN WARES in the SOUTH KENSINGTON MUSEUM. Royal 
8vo, half-morocco, £1, 

MAIOLICA. With numerous Woodcuts. Large crown 

8vo, cloth, 2S. 6d. 

BRONZES. With numerous Woodcuts. Large crown 

8yo, cloth, 2S. 6d. 
FRANCATELLI [C. E.)— 

ROYAL CONFECTIONER : English and Foreign. A 

Practical Treatise. New and Cheap Edition. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo, 5s. 
FRANKS [A. W.)— 

JAPANESE POTTERY. Being a Native Report. Nume- 

rous Illustrations and Marks. Large crown 8vo, cloth, 2s. 6d. 
GALLENGA [ANTONIO]— 

IBERIAN REMINISCENCES. Fifteen Years' Travelling 

Impressions of Spain and Portugal. With a Map. 2 vols. Demy 8vo, 32s. 

A SUMMER TOUR IN RUSSIA. With a Map. 

Demy 8vo, 14s. 

DEMOCRACY ACROSS THE CHANNEL. Crown 

8vo, 3s. 
GORST [J. E.), Q.C., M.P.— 

An ELECTION MANUAL. Containing the Parliamentary 

Elections (Corrupt and Illegal Practices) Act, 1883, with Notes. Crown 8vo, 2s. 6d. 
GRIFFITHS [MAJOR ARTHUR), H.M. Inspector of Prisons— 

CHRONICLES OF NEWGATE. Illustrated. New 

Edition in i vol. Demy Bvo. ' [In March. 

HALL [SIDNEY]— 

A TRAVELLING ATLAS OF THE ENGLISH COUN- 

TIES. Fifty Maps, coloured. New Edition, including the Railways, corrected 
up to the present date. Demy 8vo, in roan tuck, los. 6d. 
HARDY [LADY DUFFUS]— 

DOWN SOUTH, Demy 8vo. 14s. 

THROUGH CITIES and PRAIRIE LANDS. Sketches 

of an American Tour. Demy 8vo, 14s. 
HATTON [JOSEPH] and HARVEY [REV. M .]— 

NEWFOUNDLAND. The Oldest British Colony. Its 

History, Past and Present, and its Prospects in the Future. Illustrated from 
Photographs and Sketches specially made for this work. Demy 8vo, 18s. 

TO-DAY IN AMERICA. Studies for the Old World and 

the New. 2 vols. Crown 8vo, i8s, 
HEAPHY [MUSGRAVE]— 

GLIMPSES AND GLEAMS. Crown 8vo, 5s. 



CHAPMAN 6- HALL, LIMITED. 9 

HILDEBRAND {HANS)— 

INDUSTRIAL ARTS OF SCANDINAVIA IN THE 

PAGAN TIME. Illustrated. Large crown 8vo, as. 6d. 
HILL {MISS a)— 

THE PLEASURES AND PROFITS OF OUR LITTLE 

POULTRY FARM. Small crown 8vo, 3s. 
HITCHMAN {FRANCIS)— 

THE PUBLIC LIFE OF THE EARL OF BEACONS- 

FIEILD. 2 vols. Demy 8vo, £1 12s. 
HOLBEIN— 

TWELVE HEADS AFTER HOLBEIN. Selected from 

Drawings in Her Majesty's Collection at Windsor. Reproduced in Autotype, in 
portfolio. £x 1 6s. 
HOLLINGSHEAD {JOHN)— 

FOOTLIGHTS. Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d. 

HOVELACQUE {ABEL)— 

THE SCIENCE OF LANGUAGE: LINGUISTICS, 

PHILOLOGY, AND ETYMOLOGY. With Maps. Large crown 8vo, cloth, 5s. 
HOW I BECAME A SPORTSMAN. By "Avon." Illustrated. Crown 

8vo. 6s. 
HUMPHRIS {H.D.)^ 

PRINCIPLES OF PERSPECTIVE. Illustrated in a 

Series of Examples. Oblong folio, half- bound, and Text 8vo, cloth, £\ is. 
IRON {RALPH)— 

THE STORY OF AN AFRICAN FARM. New Edition. 

Crown 8vo, 55. 

JAMES L, KING OF ARAGON (THE CHRONICLE OF), 

SURNAMED THE CONQUEROR, Written by Himself. Translated from 
the Catalan by the late John Forsteji, M.P. for Berwick. With an Historical 
Introduction by Don Pascual de Gayangos. 2 vols. Royal Bvo. 28s. 

JARRY {GENERAL)— 

OUTPOST DUTY. Translated, with TREATISES ON 

MILITARY RECONNAISSANCE AND ON ROAD-MAKING. By Major- 
Gen. W. C. E. Napier. Third Edition. Crown 8vo, 5s. 

JEANS {W. T.)— 

CREATORS OF THE AGE OF STEEL. Memoirs of 

Sir W. Siemens, Sir H. Bessemer, Sir J. Whitworth, Sir J. Brown, and other 
Inventors. Crown 8vo, 7s. 6d. 

JOHNSON {DR, SAMUEL)— 

LIFE AND CONVERSATIONS. By A. Main. Crown 

8vo, los. 6d. 
JONES {CAPTAIN DOUGLAS), R.A,— 

NOTES ON MILITARY LAW. Crown 8vo, 4s. 

TONES COLLECTION (HANDBOOK OF THE) IN THE SOUTH 
KENSINGTON MUSEUM. Illustrated. Large crown 8vo, 2S. 6d. 

KEMPIS {THOMAS A)— 

OF THE IMITATION OF CHRIST. Four Books. 

Beautifully Illustrated Edition. Demy 8vo, i6s. 
KENT {CHARLES)— 

HUMOUR AND PATHOS OF CHARLES DICKENS, 

WITH ILLUSTRATIONS OF HIS MASTERY OF THE TERRIBLE 
AND PICTURESQUE. Portrait. Crown 8vo. 6s. 

KLACZKO {M. JULIAN)-- 

TWO CHANCELLORS : PRINCE GORTCHAKOF and 

PRINCE BISMARCK. Translated by Mrs. Tait. New and cheaper Edition, 6s. 



10 BOOKS PUBLISHED BY 

LACORDAIRE'S CONFERENCES. JESUS CHRIST, GOD, 

AND GOD AND MAN. New Edition in i vol. Crown 8vo, 6s. 
LA VELE YE {EMILE DE)— 

THE ELEMENTS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY. 

Translated by W. Pollard, B.A., St. John's College, Oxford. Crown 8vo, 6s. 
LEFEVRE {ANDRi:)— 

PHILOSOPHY, Historical and Critical. Translated, with 

an Introduction, by A, W. Keane, B.A. Large crown 8vo, 7s. 6d. 
LETOURNEAU {DR. CHARLES)— 

SOCIOLOGY. 'Based upon Ethnology. Translated by 

Henry M. Trollope. Large crown Svo, 10s. 

BIOLOGY. Translated by William MacCall. With Illus« 

trations. Large crown Bvo, 6s. 
ULLY{W. 5.)— 

ANCIENT RELIGION AND MODERN THOUGHT. 

One vol. demy Svo. [/« tke Pms. 

LOW (C R.)— 

SOLDIERS OF THE VICTORIAN AGE. 2 vols. Demy 

Svo, £z los. 
LUCAS [CAPTAIN]— 

THE ZULUS AND THE BRITISH FRONTIER. 

Demy Svo, i6s. 

CAMP LIFE AND SPORT IN SOUTH AFRICA. 

With Episodes in Kaffir Warfare. With Illustrations. Demy Svo. 12s. 
LYTTON [ROBERT, EARL)— 

POETICAL WORKS- 
FABLES IN SONG. 2 vols. Fcap. Svo, 12s. 
THE WANDERER. Fcap. Svo, 6s. 
POEMS, HISTORICAL AND CHARACTERISTIC. Fcap. 6s. 

MA CE WEN ( CONS TANCE)— 

ROUGH DIAMONDS] OR, SKETCHES FROM REAL 

LIFE. Crown Svo, 3s. 6d. 
MALLET [DR. J. W.)— 

COTTON : THE CHEMICAL, &c, CONDITIONS OF 

ITS SUCCESSFUL CULTIVATION. Post Svo, cloth, 7s. 6d. 
MALLET [ROBERT)^ 

PRACTICAL MANUAL OF CHEMICAL ASSAYING, 

as applied to the Manufacture of Iron. By L. L. De Koninck and E. Dietz. 
Edited, with notes, by Robert Mallet. Post Svo, cloth, 6s. 

GREAT NEAPOLITAN EARTHQUAKE OF 1857. 

First Principles of Observational Seismology, as developed in the Report to the 
Royal Society of London. Maps and numerous Illustrations. 2 vols. Royal Bvo^ 
cloth, £^ 3s. 

MASKELL [ WILLIAM)-^ 

A DESCRIPTION OF THE IVORIES, ANCIENT AND 

MEDIAEVAL, in the SOUTH KENSINGTON MUSEUM, with a Preface. 
With numerous Photographs and Woodcuts. Royal Svo, half-morocco, £\ is. 

IVORIES : ANCIENT AND MEDI.^EVAL. With nume- 

rous Woodcuts. Large crown Svo, cloth, 2s. 6d. 

HANDBOOK TO THE DYCE AND FORSTER Col- 
lections. With Illustrations. I^rge crown Svo, cloth, 2s. 6d. 
McCOAN [J. CARLILE)— 

OUR NEW PROTECTORATE. Turkey in Asia: Its 

Geography, Races, Resources, and Government. With Map. 2 vols. 
Large crown Svo, ;^i 4s, 



CHAPMAN &* HALL, LIMITED, m 

MEREDITH [GEORGE)— 

MODERN LOVE AND POEMS OF THE ENGLISH 

ROADSIDE, WITH POEMS AND BALLADS. Fcap. cloth, 6s. 
MERIVALE {HERMAN CHARLES)— 

BINKO'S BLUES. A Tale for Children of all Growths. 

Illustrated by Edgar Gibernk. Small crown 8vo. [/« iha Press* 

THE WHITE PILGRIM, and other Poems. Crown 8vo, 9s. 
FAUCIT OF BALLIOL. Crown 8vo, 6s. 

MOLES WORTH ( W. NASSA U)— 

HISTORY OF ENGLAND FROM THE YEAR 1830 

TO THE RESIGNATION OF THE GLADSTONE MINISTRY, 1874. 3 vols. 
Crown 8vo, 18s. 

ABRIDGED EDITION. Large crown, 7s. 6d, 

MORLEY [HENRY)— 

ENGLISH WRITERS. Vol. L Part L THE CELTS 

AND ANGLO-SAXONS. With an Introductory Sketch of the Four Periods of 
English Literature. Part II. FROM THE CONQUEST TO CHAUCER. 
(Making 2 vols.) 8vo, cloth, £x 2s. 

Vol II. Part I. FROM CHAUCER TO DUNBAR. 

8vo, cloth, 12s. 

TABLES OF ENGLISH LITERATURE. Containing 

20 Charts. Second Edition, with Index. Royal 4to, cloth, 12s. 

In Three Parts. Parts I. and II., containing Three Charts, each is. 6d. 
Part III., containing 14 Charts, 7s. Part III. also kept in Sections, i, 2, and S» 
IS. 6d. each ; 3 and 4 together, 3s. **"* The Charts sold separately. 

MORLEY [JOHN]— 

LIFE OF RICHARD COBDEN. With Portrait. Popular 

Edition. 4to, sewed, is. Bound in cloth, 2s. 

LIFE AND CORRESPONDENCE OF RICHARD 

COBDEN. Fourth Thousand, 2 vols. Demy 8vo, £x 12s. 

DIDEROT AND THE ENCYCLOPEDISTS. 2 vols. 

Demy 8vo, £x 6s. 

NK^W UNIFORM EDITION. 
LIFE OF RICHARD COBDEN. With Portrait. Large 

crown 8vo, 7s. 6d. 

VOLTAIRE. Large crown 8vo, 6s. 
ROUSSEAU. Large crown 8vo, 9s. 
DIDEROT AND THE ENCYCLOPEDISTS. Large 

crown 8vo, 12s. 

CRITICAL MISCELLANIES. First Series. Large crown 

8vo, 6s. 

CRITICAL MISCELLANIES. Second Series, umhe Press. 
ON COMPROMISE. New Edition. Large crown 8vo, 3s. 6d. 
STRUGGLE FOR NATIONAL EDUCATION. Third 

Edition, Demy 8vo, cloth, 3s. 
MUNTZ [EUGENE), From the French of— 

RAPHAEL: HIS LIFE, WORKS, AND TIMES. 

Edited by W: Armstrong. Illustrated.with. 155 Wood Engravings and 41 Full- 
page Plates. Imperial 8vo, 36s. 



12 BOOKS PUBLISHED BY 

MURPHY [J. M.)^ 

RAMBLES IN NORTH-WEST AMERICA. With 

Frontispiece and Map. 8yo, i6s, 
MURRAY [ANDREW), F.L.S.— 

ECONOMIC ENTOMOLOGY. Aptera. With nume- 

rous Illustrations. Large crown 8vo, 7s. 6d. 
NAPIER [MAJ.-GEN. W. C. E.)— 

TRANSLATION OF GEN. JARRY'S OUTPOST DUTY. 

With TREATISES ON MILITARY RECONNAISSANCE AND ON 
ROAD-MAKING. Third Edition. Crown 8vo, 5s. 
NECKER [MADAME]— 

THE SALON OF MADAME NECKER. By Vicomte 

d'Haussonville. Translated by H. M. Trollope. 2 vols. Crown Svo, i8s. 
NESBITT [ALEXANDER]— 

GLASS. Illustrated. Large crown Svo, cloth, 2s. 6d. 

NEVINSON [HENRY]— 

A SKETCH OF HERDER AND HIS TIMES. With 

a Portrait. Demy Svo, 14s. 
NEWTON [E. TULLEY), F.G.S.— 

THE TYPICAL PARTS IN THE SKELETONS OF 

A CAT, DUCK, AND CODFISH, being a Catalogue with Comparative 
Description arranged in a Tabular form. Demy 8vo, cloth, 3s. 
NORMAN [C. B.), late of the goth Light Infantry and Bengal Staff Corps— 

TONKIN ; or, FRANCE IN THE FAR EAST. Demy 

8vo, with Maps, 14s. 
OLIVER [PROFESSOR], RR.S., b'c— 

ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE PRINCIPAL NATURAL 

ORDERS OF THE VEGETABLE KINGDOM, PREPARED FOR THE 
SCIENCE AND ART DEPARTMENT, SOUTH KENSINGTON. With 
109 Plates. Oblong Svo, plain, i6s. ; coloured, £x 6s. 
PERROT [GEORGES] and CHIPIEZ [CHARLES]— 

CHALD^A AND ASSYRIA, A HISTORY OF ART IN. 

Translated by Walter Armstrong, B.A. Oxon. With 452 Illustrations. 2 vols. 
Demy Svo. Uniform with "Ancient Egyptian Art." 42s. 

ANCIENT EGYPT, A HISTORY OF ART IN. Trans- 

lated from the French by W. Armstrong. With over 600 Illustrations, a vols. 
Imperial Svo, 42s. 
POLLEN [J. H]— 

ANCIENT AND MODERN FURNITURE AND 

WOODWORK IN THE SOUTH KENSINGTON MUSEUM. With an 
Introduction, and Illustrated with numerous Coloured Photographs and Woodcuts. 
Royal Svo, half-morocco, ;^i is. 

GOLD AND SILVER SMITH'S WORK. With nume- 

rous Woodcuts. Large crown Svo, cloth, 2s. 6d. 

ANCIENT AND MODERN FURNITURE AND 

WOODWORK. With numerous Woodcuts. Large crown Svo, cloth, 2s. 6d. 
POLLOK [LIEUT.-COLONEL]— 

SPORT IN BRITISH BURMAH, ASSAM, AND THE 

CASSYAH AND JYNTIAH HILLS. With Notes of Sport in the Hilly Dis- 
tricts of the Northern Division, Madras Presidency. With Illustrations and 2 
Maps. 2 vols. Demy Svo, ;^i 4s. 
POYNTER [E. J.], R.A.— 

TEN LECTURES ON ART. Second Edition. Large 

crown Svo, 9s. 
PR A ED [MRS. CAMPBELL]— 

AN AUSTRALIAN HEROINE. Cheap Edition. Crown 

Svo, 6s. 

NADINE. Cheap Edition. Crown Svo, 5s. 

MOLOCH. Cheap Edition. [inthePrtss, 



CHAPMAN ^ HALL, LIMITED. 15 

PRINSEP ( VAL), A.R.A.— 

IMPERIAL INDIA. Containing numerous Illustrations 

and Maps made during a Tour to the Courts of the Principal Rajahs and Princes 
of India. Second Edition. Demy 8vo, £1 is. 

PUCKETT{R. CAMPBELL), Ph.D., Bonn University— 

SCIOGRAPHY; or, Radial Projection of Shadows. Third 

Edition. Crown 8vo, cloth, 6s. 
RAMSDEN {LADY GWENDOLEN)— 

A BIRTHDAY BOOK. Illustrated. Containing 46 Illustra- 

tions from Original Drawings, and numerous other Illustrations. Royal 8vo, 21s. 
REDGRAVE [GILBERT)- 

PRE-CHRISTIAN ORNAMENTATION. Translated 

from the German and edited. With numerous Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 

r/« the Press. 
REDGRAVE {GILBERT R.)— 

MANUAL OF DESIGN, compiled from the Writings and 

Addresses of Richard Redgrave, R. A. With Woodcuts. Large crown 8vo, cloth, 
2s. 6d. 

REDGRAVE {RICHARD)- 

MANUAL AND CATECHISM ON COLOUR. 24mo, 

cloth, gd. 
REDGRA VE {SAMUEL)^ 

A DESCRIPTIVE CATALOGUE OF THE His- 
torical COLLECTION OF WATER-COLOUR PAINTINGS IN THE 
SOUTH KENSINGTON MUSEUM. With numerous Chromo-lithographs and 
other Illustrations. Royal 8vo, £x is. 

REN AN {ERNEST)— 

RECOLLECTIONS OF MY YOUTH. Translated from 

the original French by C. B. Pitman, and revised by Madame Renan. Crown 
8vo, 8s. 

RIANO {JUAN F.)— 

THE INDUSTRIAL ARTS IN SPAIN. Illustrated. Large 

crown 8vo, cloth, 4s. 
ROBINSON {JAMES F.)— 

BRITISH BEE FARMING. Its Profits and Pleasures. 

Large crown 8vo, 53. 
ROBINSON {J. C.)— 

ITALIAN SCULPTURE OF THE MIDDLE AGES 

AND PERIOD OF THE REVIVAL OF ART. With 20 Engravings. Royal 
8vo, cloth, 7s. 6d. 

ROBSON {GEORGE)— 

ELEMENTARY BUILDING CONSTRUCTION. Illus- 

trated by a Design for an Entrance Lodge and Gate. 15 Plates. Oblong folio 
sewed, 8s. ' 

ROBSON {REV. J. H), M.A., LLM.— 

AN ELEMENTARY TREATISE ON ALGEBRA. 

Post 8vo, 6s. 
ROCK{THE VERY REV. CANON), D.D.— 

ON TEXTILE FABRICS. A Descriptive and Illustrated 

Catalogue of the Collection of Church Vestments, Dresses, Silk Stuffs, Needlework 
and Tapestries in the South Kensington Museum. Royal 8vo, half-morocco' 
£i IIS. 6d. * 

TEXTILE FABRICS. With numerous Woodcuts. Large 

crown Svo, cloth, zs. 6d. 



14 BOOKS PUBLISHED BY 

ROLAND {ARTHUR)— 

PARMING FOR PLEASURE AND PROFIT. Edited 

by William Ablett. 8 vols. Large crown 8vo, 5s. each. 
DAIRY-FARMING, MANAGEMENT OF COWS, &c. 
POULTRY-KEEPING. 

TREE-PLANTING, FOR ORNAMENTATION OR PROFIT. 
STOCK-KEEPING AND CATTLE-REARING. 
DRAINAGE OF LAND, IRRIGATION, MANURES, &c. 
ROOT-GROWING, HOPS, &c. 
MANAGEMENT OF GRASS LANDS. 
MARKET GARDENING. 
RUSDEN (G. W,), for many years Clerk of the Parliament in Victoria — 

A HISTORY OF AUSTRALIA. With a Coloured Map. 

3 Vols, Demy Bvo, 50s. 

A HISTORY OF NEW ZEALAND. 3 vols. Demy Zwo. 

with Maps, 50s. 
SAL USB UR Y {PHILIP H. B. )— 

TWO MONTHS WITH TCHERNAIEFF IN SERVIA. 

Large crown 8vo, 9s. 
SCOTT-STEVENSON {MRS.)— 

ON SUMMER SEAS. Including the Mediterranean, the 

yEgean, the Ionian, and the Euxine, and a voyage down the Danube. With a 
Map. Demy 8vo, i6s. 

OUR HOME IN CYPRUS. With a Map and lUustra- 

tions. Third Edition. Demy 8vo, 14s. 

OUR RIDE THROUGH ASIA MINOR. With Map. 

Demy 8vo, iBs. 
SIMMON DS {T. L.)— 

ANIMAL PRODUCTS: their Preparation, Commercial 

Uses, and Value. With numerous Illustrations. Large crown 8vo, 7s. 6d. 
SMART {HA WLEY)— 

SALVAGE. A Collection of Stories. Crown 8vo, los. 6d. 
HARD LINES, i vol. Crown 8vo, 6s. 
SMITH {MAJOR R. MURDOCH), R.E.— 

PERSIAN ART. Second Edition, with additional Illustra- 
tions. Large crown Bvo, 2S. 
ST. CLAIR {S.G. B.)- 

TWELVE YEARS' RESIDENCE IN BULGARIA. 

Revised Edition. Crown 8vo, gs. 
STORY {W. W.)— 

ROBA DI ROMA. Seventh Edition, with Additions and 

Portrait. Crown 8vo, cloth, ics. 6d. 

CASTLE ST. ANGELO. With Illustrations. Crown 

8vo, los. 6d. 
SUTCLIFFE {JOHN)— 

THE SCULPTOR AND ART STUDENT'S GUIDE 

to the Proportions of the Human Form, with Measurements in feet and inches of 
Full-Grown Figures of Both Sexes and of Various Ages. By Dr. G. Schadow, 
Member of the Academies, Stockholm, Dresden, Rome, &c. &c. Translated by 
J. J. Wright. Plates reproduced by J. Sutcliffe. Oblong folio, 31s. 6d. 
TANNER {PROFESSOR), PCS.— 

HOLT CASTLE ; or, Threefold Interest in Land. Crown 

8vo, 4s. 6d. 

JACK'S EDUCATION; OR, HOW HE LEARNT 

FARMING. Second Edition. Crown 8vo, 3s. 6d. 
TOPINARD [DR. PA UL)— 

ANTHROPOLOGY. With a Preface by Professor Paul 

Broca. With numerous Illustrations. Large crown 8vo, 7s, 6d. 



CHAPMAN 6- HALL, LIMITED, rs 

TRAILL [H. D.)— 

THE NEW LUCIAN. Being a Series of Dialogues of the 

Dead. Demy 8vo, 12s, 
TROLLOPB [ANTHONY)— 

AYALA'S ANGEL. Crown 8vo. 6s. 

LIFE OF CICERO. 2 vols. 8vo. £1 4s. 

THE CHRONICLES OF BARSETSHIRE. A Uniform 

Edition, in 8 vols., large crown Bvo, handsomely printed, each vol. containltlg 
Frontispiece. 6s. each. 

THE SMALL HOUSE AT 



THE WARDEN and BAR- 
CHESTER TOWERS. 2 vols. 
DR. THORNE. 
FRAMLEY PARSONAGE. 



ALLINGTON. 2 vols. 
LAST CHRONICLE OF 
BARSET. 2 vols. 



TROLLOPB {MR. and MRS, THOMAS ADOLPHUS)— 

HOMES AND HAUNTS OF ITALIAN POETS. 2 vols. 

Crown Bvo, i8s. 
UNIVERSAL— 

UNIVERSAL CATALOGUE OF BOOKS ON ART. 

Compiled for the use of the National Art Library, and the Schools of Art in the 
United Kingdom. In 2 vols. Crown 4to, half-morocco, ;^2 2s. 

Supplemental Volume to Ditto. 

VERON [EUGENE]— 

ESTHETICS. Translated by W. H. Armstrong. Large 

crown 8vo, 7s. 6d. 
WALE [REV. HENRY JOHN), M.A.— 

MY GRANDFATHER'S POCKET BOOK, from 1701 to 

1796. Author of " Sword and Surplice." Demy 8vo, 12s. 
WATSON {ALFRED E. T) 

SKETCHES IN THE HUNTING FIELD. lUustrated 

by John Sturgess. Cheap Edition. Crown 8vo, 6s. 
WESTWOOD [J. O.), M.A., F.L.S., b^c— 

CATALOGUE OF THE FICTILE IVORIES IN THE 

SOUTH KENSINGTON MUSEUM. With an Account of the Continental 
Collections of Classical and Mediaeval Ivories. Royal 8vo, half-morocco, £i 4s. 
WHEELER [G. P.)— 

VISIT OF THE PRINCE OF WALES. A Chronicle of 

H.R.H/s Journeyings in India, Ceylon, Spain, and Portugal. Large crown Bvo, 12s. 
WHITE [WALTER]— 

HOLIDAYS IN TYROL: Kufstein, Klobenstein, and 

Paneveggio. Large crown 8vo, 14s. 

A MONTH IN YORKSHIRE. Post 8vo. With a Map. 

Fifth Edition. 4s. 

A LONDONER'S WALK TO THE LAND'S END, AND 

A TRIP TO THE SCILLY ISLES. Post 8vo. With 4 Maps. Third Edition. 4s. 
WILDFOWLER— 

SHOOTING, YACHTING, AND SEA-FISHING TRIPS, 

at Home and on the Continent. Second Series. By " Wildfowler," " Snap- 
shot." 2 vols. Crown 8vo, £1 is. 

SHOOTING AND FISHING TRIPS IN ENGLAND, 

FRANCE, ALSACE, BELGIUM, HOLLAND, AND BAVARIA. New 

Edition, with Illustrations. Large crown 8vo, 8s. 

WILL-O'-THE-WISPS, THE. Translated from the German 

of Marie Petersen by Charlottk J. Hart. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo, 
7s. 6d. 



i6 BOOKS PUBLISHED BY 

.- 1 \ 

WORNUM{R. N.)— 

ANALYSIS OF ORNAMENT: THE CHARACTER- 
ISTICS OF STYLES. An Introduction to the Study of the History of Orna- 
mental Art. With many Illustrations. Ninth Edition. Royal 8vo, cloth, 8s. 

WORSAAE [J. J. A.)— 

INDUSTRIAL ARTS OF DENMARK, FROM THE 

EARLIEST TIMES TO THE DANISH CONQUEST OF ENGLAND. 

With Maps and Illustrations. Crown Svo, 3s. 6d. 

WYLDE {A THERTON)— 

MY CHIEF AND I ; OR, SIX MONTHS IN NATAL 

AFTER THE LANGALIBALELE OUTBREAK. With Portrait of Colonel 
Durnford, and Illustrations. Demy Svo, 14s. 

YEO (DR. 7. BURNEY)— 

HEALTH RESORTS AND THEIR USES: BEING 

Vacation Studies in various Health Resorts. Crown Svo, 8s. 
YOUNGE{C. D.)— 

PARALLEL LIVES OF ANCIENT AND MODERN 

HEROES. New Edition. i2mo, cloth, 4s. 6d. 



SOUTH KENSINGTON MUSEUM DESCRIPTIVE AND 
ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUES. 

Royal Svo, half- bound, 

BRONZES OF EUROPEAN ORIGIN. By C. D. E. Fortnum. 

£z IDS. 

DYCE'S COLLECTION OF PRINTED BOOKS AND 

MANUSCRIPTS. 2 vols. 14s. 

DYCE'S COLLECTION OF PAINTINGS, ENGRAVINGS, 

&c. 6s. 6d. 

FURNITURE AND WOODWORK, ANCIENT AND 

MODERN. By J. H. Pollen. ;^i is. 

GLASS VESSELS. By A. Nesbitt. i8s. 

GOLD AND SILVER SMITH'S WORK. By J. G. Pollen. 

;^I 6S. 

IVORIES, ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL. By W. Maskell. 

2IS. 

IVORIES, FICTILE. By J. O. Westwood. £i 4s. 
MAIOLICA, HISPANO-MORESCO, PERSIAN, DAM AS- 

CUS and RHODIAN WARES. Bv C. D. E. Fortnum. £2. 

MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. By C. Engel. 12s. 
SCULPTURE, ITALIAN SCULPTURE OF THE MIDDLE 

AGES. By J. C. Robinson. Cloth, 7s. 6d. 

SWISS COINS. By R. S. Poole. £2 los. 
TEXTILE FABRICS. By Rev. D. Rock. £1 iis. 6d. 
WATER-COLOUR PAINTING. By S. Redgrave. £1 is. 
UNIVERSAL CATALOGUE OF WORKS OF ART. 2 vols. 

Small 4to, £i is. each. 

UNIVERSAL CATALOGUE OF WORKS OF ART. Supple- 

mentary vol. 



CHAPMAN 6^ HALLy^LIMITED, 17 

SOUTH KKNSINGTON MUSEUM SCIENCE AND ART 
HANDBOOKS. 

Published for the Committee of the Council on Education, 
'ART IN RUSSIA. Forming a New Volume of the South Ken- 

sington Art Handbooks. With numerous Illustrations. Crown 8vo. [/« the Press. 

FRENCH POTTERY. Forming a New Volume of the Soiith 

Kensington Art Handbooks. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo. [In the Press, 

INDUSTRIAL ARTS OF DENMARK. From the Earliest 

Times to the Danish Conquest of England. By J. J. A. Worsaae, Hon. F.S.A., 
M.R.I. A., &c. &c. With Map and Woodcuts. Large crown 8vo, 3s. 6d, 

INDUSTRIAL ARTS OF SCANDINAVIA IN THE PAGAN 

TIME. By Hans Hildebrand, Royal Antiquary of Sweden. Woodcuts. Large 
crown 8vo, 2s. 6d. 

PRECIOUS STONES. By Professor Church. With Illus- 

trations. Large crown 8vo, 2s. 6d. 

INDUSTRIAL ARTS OF INDIA. By Sir George C. M. 

Bird WOOD, C.S.I. With Map and 174 Illustrations. Demy Svo, 14s. 

HANDBOOK TO THE DYCE AND FORSTER COLLEC- 

TIONS. By W. Maskell. With Illustrations. Large crown Svo, 2s. 6d. 

INDUSTRIAL ARTS IN SPAIN. By Juan F. Riano. 

Illustrated. Large crown Svo, 4s. 

GLASS. By Alexander Nesbitt. Illustrated. Large crown 

Svo, 2s, 6d. 

GOLD AND SILVER SMITH'S WORK. By John Hunger- 

FORD Pollen. With numerous Woodcuts. Large crown Svo, 2s. 6d.. 

TAPESTRY. By Alfred Champeaux. With Woodcuts. 2s. 6d. 
BRONZES. By C. Drury E. Fortnum, F.S.A. With numerous 

Woodcuts. Large crown Svo, 2s. 6d. 

PLAIN WORDS ABOUT WATER. By A. H. Church, M.A, 

Oxon. Illustrated. Large crown Svo, sewed, 6d. 

ANIMAL PRODUCTS : their Preparation, Commercial Uses, 

and Value. By T. L. Simmonds. With numerous Illustrations. Large crown 
Svo, 7s. 6d. 

FOOD : A Short Account of the Sources, Constituents, and Uses 

of Food ; intended chiefly as a Guide to the Food Collection in the Bethnal Green 
Museum. By A. H. Church, M.A., Oxon. Large crown Svo, 3s. 

SCIENCE CONFERENCES. Delivered at the South Ken- 

sington Museum. 2 vols. Crown Svo, 6s. each. 
Vol. L — Physics and Mechanics. 

Vol. II. — Chemistry, Biology, Physical Geography, Geology, Mineralogy, and 
Meteorology. 

ECONOMIC ENTOMOLOGY. By Andrew Murray, F.L.S. 

Aptera. With numerous Illustrations. Large crown Svo, 7s. 6d. 

JAPANESE POTTERY. Being a Native Report. Edited by 

A. W. Franks. Numerous Illustrations and Marks. Large crown Svo, 2s. 6d. 

HANDBOOK TO THE SPECIAL LOAN COLLECTION 

of Scientific Apparatus. Large crown Svo, 3s. 

INDUSTRIAL ARTS: Historical Sketches. With 242 

Illustrations. Large crown Svo, 3s. 

TEXTILE FABRICS. By the Very Rev. Daniel Rock, D.D. 

With numerous Woodcuts. Large crown Svo, 2s. 6d. 

JONES COLLECTION IN THE SOUTH KENSINGTON 

MUSEUM. With Portrait and Illustrations. Large crown Svo, 2s, 6d. 

B 



iS BOOKS PUBLISHED BY 



SOUTH KENSINGTON MUSEUM SCIENCE & ART HANDBOOKS— C^;^//«2^^^. 

COLLEGE AND CORPORATION PLATE. By Wilfred 

Cripps. With numerous Illustrations. Large crown 8vo, cloth, 2S. 6d. 

IVORIES: ANCIENT AND MEDIEVAL. By William 

Maskell. With numerous Woodcuts. Large crown 8vo, 2s. 6d. 

ANCIENT AND MODERN FURNITURE AND WOOD- 

WORK. By John Hungerfokd Pollen. With numerous Woodcuts. Large- 
crown 8vo, 2S. 6d. 

MAIOLICA. ByC. DruryE. FoRTNUM, F.S.A. With numerous 

Woodcuts. Large crown 8vo, 2S. 6d. 

THE CHEMISTRY OF FOODS. With Microscopic Illus- 

trations. By James Bell, Principal of the Somerset House Laboratory. 

Part I. — Tea, Coffee, Cocoa, Sugar, &c. Large crown 8vo, 2S. 6d. 

Part IL — Milk, Butter, Cereals, Prepared Starches, &c. Large crown Bvo, 2S. 6d. 

MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. ByCARLENOEL. With numerous 

Woodcuts. Large crown 8vo, 2s. 6d. 

MANUAL OF DESIGN, compiled from the Writings and 

Addresses of Richard Redgrave, R.A. By Gilbert R. Redgrave. With 
Woodcuts. Large crown 8vo, 2S. 6d. 

PERSIAN ART. By Major R. Murdock Smith, R.E. Second 

Edition, with additional Illustrations. Large crown 8vo, 2S. 

FREE EVENING LECTURES. Dehvered in connection with 

the Special Loan Collection of Scientific Apparatus, 1876. Large crown 8vo, 8s. 



CARLYLE^S (THOMAS) WORKS. 

CHEAP AND UNIFORM EDITION. 

In 2^ vols.. Crown 8vo, cloth, £1 ^s. 

LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS. 

I vol., 6s. 

CHARTISM AND PAST AND 

PRESENT. I vol., 6s. 
TRANSLATIONS FROM THE 
GERMAN OF MUS.EUS, TIECK. 
AND RICHTER. i vol., 6s. 

WILHELM MEISTER, by Gothe. 

A Translation 2 vols., 12s. 

HISTORY OF FRIEDRICH THE 

SECOND, called Frederick the Great. 
7 vols., £7. gs. 



THE FRENCH REVOLUTION : 

A History. 2 vols., 12s. 

OLIVER CROMWELL'S LET- 
TERS AND SPEECHES, with Eluci- 
dations, &c. 3 vols., i8s. 

LIVES OF SCHILLER AND 

JOHN STERLING, i vol., 6s. 

CRITICAL AND MISCELLA- 
NEOUS ESSAYS. 4 vols., £i 4s. 

SARTOR RESARTUS AND 

LECTURES ON HEROES, i vol., 6s. 



LIBRARY EDITION COMPLETE. 

Handsomely printed in 34 vols., demy 8vo, cloth, £15. 



SARTOR RESARTUS. The Life and Opinions of Herr 

Teufelsdrockh. With a Portrait, 7s. 6d. 

THE FRENCH REVOLUTION. A History. 3 vols., each 9s, 



CHAPMAN 6- HALL, LIMITED, 



19 



CARLYLE'S (THOMAS) WORKS— C^«//««^^. 

LIFE OF FREDERICK SCHILLER AND EXAMINATION 

OF HIS WORKS. With Supplement of 1872. Portrait and Plates, gs. 

CRITICAL AND MISCELLANEOUS ESSAYS. With Portrait. 

6 vols., each 9s. 

ON HEROES, HERO WORSHIP, AND THE HEROIC 

IN HISTORY. 7s. 6d. 

PAST AND PRESENT. 9s. 

OLIVER CROMWELL'S LETTERS AND SPEECHES. With 

Pgrtraits. 5 vols., each gs. 

LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS. 9s. 

LIFE OF JOHN STERLING. With Portrait, 9s. 

HISTORY OF FREDERICK THE SECOND. 10 vols., 

each 9s. 

TRANSLATIONS FROM THE GERMAN. 3 vols., each 9s. 

EARLY KINGS OF NORWAY; ESSAY ON THE POR- 
TRAITS OF JOHN KNOX; AND GENERAL INDEX. With Portrait 
Illustrations. 8vo, cloth, gs. 



EARLY KINGS OF NORWAY : 

PORTRAITS OF JOHN KNOX. 

7S. tAj. 



also AN ESSAY ON THE 

Crown 8vo, with Portrait Illustrations, 



PEOPLE'S EDITION. 

In S7 vols,, small Crown 8vo, Price 2s. each vol., bound in cloth ; or in sets of 
57 vols, in jg, cloth gilt, for £j 14s, 



SARTOR RESARTUS. 
FRENCH REVOLUTION. 3 vols. 
LIFE OF JOHN STERLING. 

OLIVER CROMWELL'S LET- 
TERS AND SPEECHES. 5 vols. 

ON HEROES AND HERO 
WORSHIP. 

PAST AND PRESENT. 

CRITICAL AND MISCELLA- 
NEOUS ESSAYS. 7 vols. 



LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS. 
LIFE OF SCHILLER. 

FREDERICK THE GREAT. 

10 vols. 
WILHELM MEISTER. 3 vols. 

TRANSLATIONS FROM MU- 
S^US, TIECK, AND RICHTER. 

2 vols. 

THE EARLY KINGS OF NOR- 
WAY ; Essay on the Portraits of Knox ; 
and General Index. 



SIXPENNY EDITION. 

4^^, sewed, 

SARTOR RESARTUS. Eightieth Thousand. 

HEROES AND HERO WORSHIP. 

ESSAYS : Burns, Johnson, Scott, The Diamond 

Necklace. 
The above are also to be heed in I vol,, 2s, 6d, 

B 2 



BOOKS PUBLISHED BY 



DICKENS'S (CHARLES) WORKS. 

ORIGINAL EDITIONS. 

In Demy 8vo, 
THE MYSTERY OF EDWIN DROOD. With Illustrations 

by S. L. Fildes, and a Portrait engraved by Baker. Cloth, 7s. 6d. 

OUR MUTUAL FRIEND. With Forty Illustrations by Marcus 

Stone. Cloth, ;^ I is. 

THE PICKWICK PAPERS. With Forty-three Illustrations 

by Seymour and Phiz. Cloth, £x is. 

NICHOLAS NICKLEBY. With Forty Illustrations by Phiz. 

Cloth, £t is. 

SKETCHES BY " BOZ.» With Forty Illustrations by George 

Cruikshank. Cloth, £x is. 

MARTIN CHUZZLEWIT. With Forty Illustrations by Phiz. 

Cloth, £\ IS. 

DOMBEY AND SON. With Forty Illustrations by Phiz. 

Cloth, £t is. 

DAVID COPPERFIELD. With Forty Illustrations by Phiz. 

Cloth, £i IS. 

BLEAK HOUSE. With Forty Illustrations by Phiz. Cloth, 

£x is. 

LITTLE DORRIT. With Forty Illustrations by Phiz. Cloth, 

£i IS. 

THE OLD CURIOSITY SHOP. With Seventy-five Illus- 

trations by George Cattermole and H. K. Browne. A New Edition. Uniform with 
the other volumes, £x is. 

BARNABY RUDGE : a Tale of the Riots of 'Eighty. With 

Seventy-eight Illustrations by George Cattermole and H. K. Browne. Uniform with 
the other volumes, £1 is. 

CHRISTMAS BOOKS: Containing— The Christmas Carol; 

The Cricket on the Hearth ; The Chimes ; The Battle of Life ; The Haunted House. 
With all the original Illustrations. Cloth, 12s. 

OLIVER TWIST and TALE OF TWO CITIES. In one 

volume. Cloth, £x is. 

OLIVER TWIST. Separately. With Twenty-four Illustrations 

by George Cruikshank. Cloth, iis. 

A TALE OF TWO CITIES. Separately. With Sixteen Illus- 
trations by Phiz. Cloth, 9s. 

*»* The remainder of Dickens* s Works were not originally printed in Demy 8vo% 



CHAPMAN &» HALL, LIMITED. 



, cloth ^ £^2, 



DICKENS'S (CHARLES) WORKS- Continued, 

LIBRARY KDITION. 

In Post 8vo, With the Original Illustrations, ^o vols, 

PICKWICK PAPERS 43 Illustrns. , 2 vols. 

NICHOLAS NICKLEBY 39 „ 2 vols. 

MARTIN CHUZZLEWIT 40 „ 2 vols. 

OLD CURIOSITY SHOP & REPRINTED PIECES 36 

BARNABY RUDGE and HARD TIMES 36 

BLEAK HOUSE 40 

LITTLE DORRIT 40 

DOMBEY AND SON 38 

DAVID COPPERFIELD 38 

OUR MUTUAL FRIEND 40 

SKETCHES BY "BOZ" 39 

OLIVER TWIST 24 

CHRISTMAS BOOKS 17 

A TALE OF TWO CITIES 16 

GREAT EXPECTATIONS 8 

PICTURES FROM ITALY & AMERICAN NOTES 8 

UNCOMMERCIAL TRAVELLER 8 

CHILD'S HISTORY OF ENGLAND 8 

EDWIN DROOD and MISCELLANIES .:. ... 12 
CHRISTMAS STORIES from " Household Words," &c. 14 
THE LIFE OF CHARLES DICKENS. ByJOHN Forster. With Illustrations 
Uniform with this Edition, i vol. los. 6d. 



2 vols. 
2 vols. 
2 vols. 
2 vols. 
2 vols. 
2 vols. 
2 vols. 
I vol. 
I vol. 
I vol. 
I vol. 
I vol. 
I vol. 
I vol. 
I vol. 
I vol. 
I vol. 



16 
16 
16 
16 
16 
16 
16 
16 
16 
16 

8 
8 
8 
8 
8 



THE "CHARLES DICKENS" EDITION. 

In Crown 8vo, In 21 vols, , cloth, with Illustrations, £^ ids. 



8 Illustrations 
8 



8 



PICKWICK PAPERS 

MARTIN CHUZZLEWIT 

DOMBEY AND SON 

NICHOLAS NICKLEBY 

DAVID COPPERFIELD 

BLEAK HOUSE 

LITTLE DORRIT ... 

OUR MUTUAL FRIEND, 

BARNABY RUDGE... 

OLD CURIOSITY SHOP 

A CHILD'S HISTORY OF ENGLAND 

EDWIN DROOD and OTHER STORIES ... 

CHRISTMAS STORIES, from " Household Words " 

SKETCHES BY "BOZ" 

AMERICAN NOTES and REPRINTED PIECES 

CHRISTMAS BOOKS 

OLIVER TWIST 

GREAT EXPECTATIONS 

TALE OF TWO CITIES 

HARD TIMES and PICTURES FROM ITALY 

UNCOMMERCIAL TRAVELLER 

THE LIFE OF CHARLES DICKENS. Numerous Illustrations. 2 vols, 
THE LETTERS OF CHARLES DICKENS..V 2 vols, 



s, d, 
4 o 



22 BOOKS PUBLISHED BY 



DICKENS'S (CHARLES) ^Q'^Yi^— Continued, 

THE ILLUSTRATED LIBRARY EDITION- 

Complete in jo Volumes, Demy 8vo, los. ^ck ; or set, £1^. 

This Edition is printed on a finer paper and in a larger type than lias been 
employed in any previous edition. The type has been cast especially for it, and 
the page is of a size to admit of the introduction of all the original illustrations. 

No such attractive issue has been made of the writings of Mr. Dickens, which, 
various as have been the forms of publication adapted to the demands of an ever 
widely-increasing popularity, have never yet been w^orthily presented in a really 
handsome library form. 

The collection comprises all the minor writings it was Mr. Dickens's wish to 
preserve. 

SKETCHES BY " BOZ." With 40 Illustrations by George Cruikshank. 

PICKWICK PAPERS. 2 vols. With 42 Illustrations by Phiz. 

OLIVER TWIST. With 24 Illustrations by Cruikshank. 

NICHOLAS NICKLEBY. 2 vols. With 40 Illustrations by Phiz. 

OLD CURIOSITY SHOP and REPRINTED PIECES. 2 vols. With Illus- 
trations by Cattermole, &c. 

BARNABY RUDGE and HARD TIMES. 2 vols. With Illustrations by 
Cattermole, &c. 

MARTIN CHUZZLEWIT. 2 vols. With 4 Illustrations by Phiz. 

AMERICAN NOTES and PICTURES FROM ITALY, i vol. With 8 
Illustrations. 

DOMBEY AND SON. 2 vols. With 40 Illustrations by Phiz. 

DAVID COPPERFIELD. 2 vols. With 40 Illustrations by Phiz. 

BLEAK HOUSE. 2 vols. With 40 Illustrations by Phiz. 

LITTLE DORRIT. 2 vols. With 40 Illustrations by Phiz. 

A TALE OF TWO CITIES. With 16 Illustrations by Phiz. 

THE UNCOMMERCIAL TRAVELLER. With 8 Illustrations by Marcus Stcaie. 

GREAT EXPECTATIONS. With 8 Illustrations by Marcus Stone. 

OUR MUTUAL FRIEND. 2 vols. With 40 Illustrations by Marcus Stone. 

CHRISTMAS BOOKS. With 17 Illustrations by Sir Edwin Landseer, R.A., 
Maclise, R.A., &c. &c. 

HISTORY OF ENGLAND. With 8 Illustrations by Marcus Stone. 

CHRISTMAS STORIES. (From "Household Words" and "All the Year 
Round.") With 14 Illustrations. 

EDWIN DROOD AND OTHER STORIES. With 12 Illustrations by S. L. 
Fildes. 



CHAPMAN &- HALL, LIMITED, 



23 



DICKENS'S (CHARLES) ^O'^Yi^— Continued. 

HOUSEHOLD EDITION. 

Complete in 22 Volumes, Crown 4/^, clothe £^ 2>s. 6d. 

MARTIN CHUZZLEWIT, with 59 lUustrations. cloth, 5s. 

DAVID COPPERFIELD, with 60 Illustrations and a Portrait, cloth. 5s. 

JBLEAK HOUSE, with 61 Illustrations, cloth, 5s. 

LITTLE DORRIT, with 58 Illustrations, cloth, 5s. 

PICKWICK PAPERS, with 56 Illustrations, cloth, 5s. 

OUR MUTUAL FRIEND, with 58 Illustrations, cloth, 5s. 

NICHOLAS NICKLEBY, with 59 Illustrations, cloth, 5s. 

DOMBEY AND SON, with 61 Illustrations, cloth, 5s. 

JED WIN DROOD ; REPRINTED PIECES ; and other Stories, with 30 Illustra- 
tions, cloth, 5s. 

THE LIFE OF DICKENS. By John Forster. With 40 Illustrations. Cloth, 5s. 

BARNABY RUDGE, with 46 Illustrations, clo-th, 4s. 

OLD CURIOSITY SHOP, with 32 Illustrations, cloth, 4s. 

CHRISTMAS STORIES, with 23 Illustrations, cloth, 4s. 

OLIVER TWIST, with 28 Illustrations, cloth, 3s. 

-CREAT EXPECTATIONS, with 26 Illustrations, cloth, 3s. 

SKETCHES BY "BOZ," with 36 Illustrations, cloth, 3s. 

UNCOMMERCIAL TRAVELLER, with 26 Illustrations, cloth, 3s. 

CHRISTMAS BOOKS, with 28 Illustrations, cloth, 3s. 

THE HISTORY OF ENGLAND, with 15 Illustrations, cloth, 3s. 

AMERICAN NOTES and PICTURES FROM ITALY, with 18 Illustrations, 
cloth, 3s. 

A TALE OF TWO CITIES, with 25 Illustrations, cloth, 3s. 

HARD TIMES, with 20 Illustrations, cloth, 2s. 6d. 



MR. DICKENS'S READINGS. 

Fcap, ZvOi sewed. 



CHRISTMAS CAROL IN PROSE. 

IS. 

CRICKET ON THE HEARTH, is. 
•CHIMES : A GOBLIN STORY, is. 



STORY OF LITTLE DOMBEY. is. 
POOR TRAVELLER, BOOTS AT 

THE HOLLY-TREE INN, and 

MRS. GAMP. IS. 



A CHRISTMAS CAROL, with the Original Coloured Plates, 

being a reprint of the Original Edition. Small 8vo, red cloth, gilt edges, 5s, 



24 BOOKS PUBLISHED BY 

DICKENS'S (CHARLES) ^^O^-^^-Continued, 

THE POPULAR LIBRARY EDITION 

OF THE WORKS OF 

CHARLES DICKENS, 

In 30 Vols. , large crown 8w, pr^ce £6 ; separate Vols. 4^. each. 
An Edition printed on good paper, containing Illustrations selected from 
the Household Edition, on Plate Paper. Each Volume has about 450 pages 
and 16 full-page Illustrations. 



SKETCHES BY "BOZ." 
PICKWICK. 2 vols. 
OLIVER TWIST. 
NICHOLAS NICKLEBY. 2 vols. 
MARTIN CHUZZLEWIT. 2 vols. 
DOMBEY AND SON. 2 vols. 
DAVID COPPERFIELD. 2 vols. 
CHRISTMAS BOOKS. 
OUR MUTUAL FRIEND. 2 vols. 
CHRISTMAS STORIES. 
BLEAK HOUSE. 2 vols. 
LITTLE DORRIT. 2 vols. 



OLD CURIOSITY SHOP and 

REPRINTED PIECES. 2 vols. 

BARNABY RUDGE. 2 vols. 

UNCOMMERCIAL TRAVEL- 
LER. 

GREAT EXPECTATIONS. 

TALE OF TWO CITIES. 

CHILD'S HISTORY OF ENG- 
LAND. 

EDWIN DROOD AND MISCEL- 
LANIES. 

PICTURES FROM ITALY AND 
AMERICAN NOTES. 



The Cheapest and Handiest Edition of 

THE WORKS OF CHARLES DICKENS. 

The Pocket-Volume Edition of Charles Dickens's Works. 
In 30 Vols, small f cap. Svo, £2 5s. 

New and Cheap Issue of 

THE WORKS OF CHARLES DICKENS. 

In pocket volumes. 
PICKWICK PAPERS, with 8 Illustrations, cloth, 2s. 
NICHOLAS NICKLEBY, with 8 Illustrations, cloth, 2s. 
OLIVER TWIST, with 8 Illustrations, cloth, is. 
SKETCHES BY " BOZ," with 8 Illustrations, cloth, is. 
OLD CURIOSITY SHOP, with 8 Illustrations, cloth, 2s. 
BARNABY RUDGE, with 16 Illustrations, cloth, 2s. 

AMERICAN NOTES AND PICTUI^ES FROM ITALY, with 8 Illustrations, cloth, "is.ed. 
CHRISTMAS BOOKS, with 8 Illustaations, cloth, is. 6d. 

SIXPENNY REPRINTS. 

A CHRISTMAS CAROL and THE 
HAUNTED MAN. 

By Charles Dickens. Illustrated. 

READINGS FROm'"tHE WORKS OF 
CHARLES DICKENS. 

As selected and read by himself and now published for the first time. Illustrated. 

(III.) 

THE CHIMES: A Goblin Story, and THE 
CRICKET ON THE HEARTH. 

Illustrated. 



CHAPMAN 6» HALL, LIMITED, ^5 

List of Books, Drawing Examples, Diagrams, Models, 
Instruments, etc., 



INCLUDING 



THOSE ISSUED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE SCIENCE 
AND ART DEPARTMENT, SOUTH KENSINGTON, FOR THE 
USE OF SCHOOLS AND ART AND SCIENCE CLASSES. 



CATALOGUE OF MODERN WORKS ON SCIENCE 

AND TECHNOLOGY. 8vo, sewed, is. 
BENSON [W.)— 

PRINCIPLES OF THE SCIENCE OF COLOUR. 

Small 4to, cloth, 15s. 

MANUAL OF THE SCIENCE OF COLOUR. Coloured 

Frontispiece and Illustrations. i2mo, cloth, 2s. 6d. 
BRADLEY {THOMAS), of the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich— 

ELEMENTS OF GEOMETRICAL DRAWING. In Two 

Parts, with 60 Plates. Oblong folio, half-bound, each part i6s. 

Selections (from the above) of 20 Plates, for the use of the Royal Military 
Academy, Woolwich. Oblong folio, half-bound, i6s. 

BURCHETT— 

LINEx\R PERSPECTIVE. With Illustrations. Post8vo,7s. 
PRACTICAL GEOMETRY. Post 8vo, 5s. 
DEFINITIONS OF GEOMETRY. Third Edition. 24mo, 

sewed, sd. 
CARROLL {JOHN)— 

FREEHAND DRAWING LESSONS FOR THE BLACK 

BOARD. 6s. 
CUBLEY {W. H)— 

A SYSTEM OF ELEMENTARY DRAWING. With 

Illustrations and Examples. Imperial 4to, sewed, 8s. 
DAVISON {ELLIS A.)— 

DRAWING FOR ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS. Post 

8vo, 3S. 

MODEL DRAWING. i2mo, 3s. 

THE AMATEUR HOUSE CARPENTER : A Guide in 

Building, Making, and Repairing. With numerous Illustrations, drawn on Wood 
by the Author. Demy Svo, los. 6d. 



26 BOOKS PUBLISHED BY 

DELAMOTTE [P. H.)— 

PROGRESSIVE DRAWING-BOOK FOR BEGINNERS. 

lamo, 3S. 6d. 
DYCE— 

DRAWING-BOOK OF THE GOVERNMENT SCHOOL 

OF DESIGN : ELEMENTARY OUTLINES OF ORNAMENT. 50 Plates. 
Small folio, sewed, 5s. ; mounted, i8s. 

INTRODUCTION TO DITTO. Fcap. 8vo, 6d. 

FOSTER [VERE]— 

DRAWING-BOOKS : 

(a) Forty-two Numbers, at id, each. 

{b) Forty-six Numbers, at d. each. The set b includes the subjects in a, 

DRAWING-CARDS : 

Freehand Drawing: First Grade, Sets L, II., III., price is. each. 
Second Grade^ Set I., price 2s. 

HENSLOW [PROFESSOR)— 

ILLUSTRATIONS TO BE EMPLOYED IN THE 

PRACTICAL LESSONS ON BOTANY. Prepared for South Kensington 
Museum. Post 8vo, sewed, 6d. 

JACOBSTHAL (E.)— 

GRAMMATIK DER ORNAMENTE, in 7 Parts of 20 

Plates each. Price, unmounted, £2 13s. 6d. ; mounted on cardboard, ;^ii 4s. 
The Parts can be had separately. 

JE WITT— 

HANDBOOK OF PRACTICAL PERSPECTIVE. i8mo, 

cloth, IS. 6d. 
KENNEDY [JOHN)— 

FIRST GRADE PRACTICAL GEOMETRY. i2mo, 6d. 
FREEHAND DRAWING-BOOK. i6mo, is. 

LINDLEY {JOHN)— 

SYMMETRY OF VEGETATION : Principles to be 

Observed in the Delineation of Plants. i2mo, sewed, is. 
MARSHALL— 

HUMAN BODY. Text and Plates reduced from the large 

Diagrams. 2 vols., £x is. 
NEWTON [E. TULLEY), F.G.S.— 

THE TYPICAL PARTS IN THE SKELETONS OF A 

CAT, DUCK, AND CODFISH, being a Catalogue with Comparative De- 
scriptions arranged in a Tabular Form. Demy Svo, 3s. 

OLIVER [PROFESSOR)— 

ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE VEGETABLE KINGDOM. 

109 Plates. Oblong Svo, cloth. Plain, i6s.; coloured, £t. 6s. 
POYNTER {E. y.), R.A., issued under the superintendence of— 

ELEMENTARY, FREEHAND, ORNAMENT: 

Book I. Simple Geometrical Forms, 6d. 
„ II. Conventionalised Floral Forms, &c., 6d, 



CHAPMAN 6* HALL, LIMITED. if 

POYNTER [E. J.), R. A. —Continued, 

FREEHAND— FIRST GRADE: 

Book I. Simple Objects and Ornament, 6d. 

,, II. Various Objects, 6d. 

„ III. Objects and Architectural Ornaments, 6d. 

,, IV. Architectural Ornament, 6d. 

,, V. Objects of Glass and Pottery, 6d. 

„ VI. Common Objects, 6d. 

FREEHAND— SECOND GRADE : 

Book I. Various Forms of Anthermion, &c., is. 

„ II. Greek, Roman, and Venetian, is. 

,, III. Italian Renaissance, is. 

,, IV. Roman, Italian, Japanese, &c. is. 

THE SOUTH KENSINGTON DRAWING CARDS, 

Containing the same examples as the books : 
Elementary Freehand Cards. Four packets, gd. each. 
First Grade Freehand Cards. Six packets, is. each. 
Second Grade Freehand Cards. Four packets, is. 6d. each 

REDGRAVE— 

MANUAL AND CATECHISM ON COLOUR. Fifth 

Edition. 24mo, sewed, gd. 
ROBSON [GEORGE)— 

ELEMENTARY BUILDING CONSTRUCTION. Oblong 

folio, sewed, 8s. 
WALLIS [GEORGE]- 

DRAWING-BOOK. Oblong, sewed, 3s. 6d.; mounted, 8s. 

WORNUM [R. N.)— 

THE CHARACTERISTICS OF STYLES: An Intro- 

duction to the Study of the History of Ornamental Art. Royal 8vo, Bs. 

DRAWING FOR YOUNG CHILDREN. Containing 150 

Copies. i6mo, cloth, 3s. 6d. 

EDUCATIONAL DIVISION OF SOUTH KENSINGTON 

MUSEUM : CLASSIFIED CATALOGUE OF. Ninth Edition. Svo, 7s. 

ELEMENTARY DRAWING COPY-BOOKS, for the Use of 

Children from four years old and upwards, in Schools and Families. Compiled by 
a Student certificated by the Science and Art Department as an Art Teacher. 
Seven Books in 4to, sewed : 



Book I' 


Letters, 8d. 


Book IV. 


Objects, 8d. 


„ IL 


Ditto, 8d. 


» V. 


Leaves, 8d. 


„ IIL 


Geometrical and Ornamental 


„ VI. 


Birds, Animals, See, 8d. 




Forms, 8d. 


„ VII. 


Leaves, Flowers, and Sprays, Bd. 



*^* Or in Sets of Seven Books, 4s. 6d. 

ENGINEER AND MACHINIST DRAWING-BOOK, i6 Parts, 

71 Plates. Folio, £1 12s. ; mounted, £2 4s. 

PRINCIPLES OF DECORATIVE ART. Folio, sewed, is. 
DIAGRAM OF THE COLOURS OF THE SPECTRUM, 

with Explanatory Letterpress, on roller, los. 6d. 



28 BOOKS PUBLISHED BY 



COPIES FOR OUTLINE DRAWING: 

DYCE'S ELEMENTARY OUTLINES OF ORNAMENT, 50 Selected Plates, 

mounted back and front, 18s. ; unmounted, sewed, 55. 
WEITBRICHT'S OUTLINES OF ORNAMENT, reproduced by Herman, 

12 Plates, mounted back and front, 8s. 6d. ; unmounted, 2s. 
MORGHEN'S OUTLINES OF THE HUMAN FIGURE, reproduced by Herman, 

20 Plates, mounted back and front, 15s. ; unmounted, 3s. 4d. 

OUTLINES OF TARSIA, from Gruner, Four Plates, mounted, 3s. 6d., tm- 
mounted, yd. 

ALBERTOLLI'S FOLIAGE, Four Plates, mounted, 3s. 6d. ; unmounted, sd. 
OUTLINE OF TRAJAN FRIEZE, mounted, is. 
WALLIS'S DRAWING-BOOK, mounted, 8s., unmounted, 3s. 6d. 
OUTLINE DRAWINGS OF FLOWERS, Eight Plates, mounted, ^is. 6d. ; 
unmounted, 8d. 

COPIES FOR SHADED DRAWING: 

COURSE OF DESIGN. By Ch. Bargue (French), 20 Selected Sheets, 11 at 2s. 

and 9 at 3s. each. £7. 9s. 
ARCHITECTURAL STUDIES. By J. B. Tripon. 10 Plates, £x. 
MECHANICAL STUDIES. By J. B. Tripon. 15s. per dozen. 
FOLIATED SCROLL FROM THE VATICAN, unmounted, sd.; mounted, is. 3d. 
TWELVE HEADS after Holbein, selected from his Drawings in Her Majesty's 

Collection at Windsor. Reproduced in Autotype. Half imperial, £\ i6s. 

LESSONS IN SEPIA, 9s. per dozen, or is. each. 

COLOURED EXAMPLES: 

A SMALL DIAGRAM OF COLOUR, mounted, is. 6d. ; unmounted, gd. 

CAMELLIA, mounted, 3s. gd. 

COTMAN'S PENCIL LANDSCAPES (set of 9), mounted, 15s. 

, , SEPIA DRAWINGS (set of 5), mounted, £x. 

ALLONGE'S LANDSCAPES IN CHARCOAL (Six), at 4s. each, or the set, £^ 4s. 

SOLID MODELS, &c. : 

*Box of Models, £x 4s. 
A Stand with a universal joint, to show the solid nrcdels, &c., £x i8s. 
*One Wire Quadrangle, with a circle and cross within it, and one straight wire. One 
solid cube. One Skeleton Wire Cube. One Sphere. One Cone. One Cylinder. 
One Hexagonal Prism. £2 2s. 
Skeleton Cube in wood, 3s. 6d. 
18-inch Skeleton Cube in wood, 12s. 
*Three objects of form in Pottery : 
Indian Jar, \ 
Celadon Jar, > i8s. 6d. 
Bottle, ) 

*Five selected Vases in Majolica Ware, £2 iis. 
*Three selected Vases in Earthenware, i8s. 

Imperial Deal Frames, glazed, without sunk rings, los. each. 
^Davidson's Smaller Solid Models, in Box, £-2, containing- 



2 Square Slabs. 

9 Oblong Blocks (steps). 

2 Cubes. 

Square Blocks. 



Octagon Prism. 
Cylinder. 
Cone. 
Jointed Cross. 



Triangular Prism 
Pyramid, Equilateral. 
Pyramid, Isoscel«s. 
Square Block. 



Models, &c., entered as sets, can only be supplied in sets. 



CHAPMAN ^ HALL, LIMITED, 29 



SOLID MODELS, ^c,—Co?ittnued, 

* DavIdson*s Advanced Drawing Models, £g. — ^The following is a brief description 
of the Models : — An Obelisk — composed of 2 Octagonal Slabs, 26 and 20 inches 
across, and each 3 inches high ; i Cube, 12 inches edge ; i Monolith (forming 
the body of the obelisk) 3 feet high ; i Pyramid, 6 inches base ; the complete 
object is thus nearly 5 feet high, A Market Cross— composed of 3 Slabs, 24, 18, 
and 12 inches across, and each 3 inches high ; i Upright, 3 fecft high ; 2 Cross Arms, 
united by mortise and tenon joints ; complete height, 3 feet 9 inches. A Step- 
Ladder, 23 inches high. A Kitchen Table, 14K inches high. A Chair to corre- 
spond. A Four-legged Stool, with projecting top and cross rails, height 14 inches. 
A Tub, with handles and projecting hoops, and the divisions between the staves 
plainly marked. A strong Trestle, 18 inches high. A Hollow Cylinder, 9 inches 
in diameter, and 12 inches long, divided lengthwise. A Hollow Sphere, 9 inches 
in diameter, divided into semi-spheres, one of which is again divided into quarters ; 
the semi-sphere, when placed on the cylinder, gives the form and principles of 
shading a dome, whilst one of the quarters placed on half the cylinder forms a 
niche. 

*Davidson's Apparatus for Teaching Practical Geometry (22 models), £$• 

*Binn's Models for Illustrating the Elementary Principles of Orthographic Projectloa as 
applied to Mechanical Drawing, in box, ^^i los. 

Miller's Class Drawing Models.— These Models are particularly adapted for teaching 
large classes; the stand is very strong, and the universal joint will hold the 
Models in any position. Wood Models : Square Prism, 12 inches side, 18 inches 
high; Hexagonal Prism, 14 inches side, 18 inches high; Cube, 14 inches side: 
Cylinder, 13 inches diameter, id inches high ; Hexagon Pyramid, 14 inches 
diameter, 22^^ inches side ; Square Pyramid, 14 inches side, 22>^ inches side ; 
Cone, 13 inches diameter, 22^ inches side ; Skeleton Cube, 19 inches solid wood 
x% inch square ; Intersecting Circles, 19 inches solid wood 2% by ij^ inches. 
IVire Models : Triangular Prism, 17 inches side, 22 inches high ; Square Prism, 
14 inches side, 20 inches high ; Hexagonal Prism, 16 inches diameter, 21 inches 
high; Cylinder, 14 inches diameter, 21 inches high ; Hexagon Pyramid, 18 inches 
diameter, 24 inches high ; Square Pyramid, 17 inches side, 24 inches high ; Cone, 
17 inches side, 24 inches high ; Skeleton Cube, ig inches side; Intersecting Circles 
19 inches side ; Plain Circle, 19 inches side ; Plain Square, 19 inches side. Table, 
27 inches by 21% inches. Stand. The set complete, £1^ 13s. 

Vulcanite Set Square, 5s. 

Large Compasses, with chalk-holder, ss. 

*Slip, two set squares and T square, 55. 

*Parkes's Case of Instruments, containing 6-inch compasses with pen and pencil leg, 5s. 

^Prize Instrument Case, with 6-inch compasses pen and pencil l^g^ 2 small compasses, 
pen and scale, i8s. 
6-inch Compasses, with shifting pen and point, 4s. 6d. 



LARGE DIAGRAMS. 

ASTRONOMICAL : 

TWELVE SHEETS. By John Drew, Ph. Dr., F.R.S.A. Prepared for the Com- 
mittee of Council on Education. Sheets, £2 8s.; on rollers and varnished, ^4 4s. 

BOTANICAL : 

NINE SHEETS. Illustrating a Practical Method of Teaching Botany. By Professor 
Henslow. F.L.S. £'2\ on rollers and varnished, ;^3 3s. 

SECTION. 



/Thalamifloral 



\ A«„;^..^..n,r.«« J Calydfloral 



Dicotyledon „ ^ J Angiospermous . • K CoroUifloral 
/ \ Incomplete 
( Gymnospennous 

(Petaloid . . . . f Superior 
(Inferior .. 
Glumaceous ... 



2 & 3 

4 

i 

7 

8 



* Models, &c., entered as sets, can only be supplied in sets. 



3Q BQOKS PUBLISHED BY 

BUILDING CONSTRUCTION: 

TEN SHEETS. By William J. Glenny, Professor of Drawing, King's College. 

In sets, £t. is. 
LAXTON'S EXAMPLES OF BUILDING CONSTRUCTION IN TWO 

DIVISIONS, containing 32 Imperial Plates, £x. 
BUSBRIDGE'S DRAWINGS OF BUILDING CONSTRUCTION. 11 Sheets. 

2S. gd. "Mounted, 5s. 6d. 

GEOLOGICAL : 

DIAGRAM OF BRITISH STRATA. By H. W. Bristow, F.R.S., F.G.S. 
A Sheet, 4s. ; on roller and varnished, 7s. 6d. 

MECHANICAL : 

DIAGRAMS OF THE MECHANICAL POWERS, AND THEIR 
APPLICATIONS IN MACHINERY AND THE ARTS 
GENERALLY. By Dr. John Anderson. 

8 Diagrams, highly coloured on stout paper, 3 feet 6 inches by 2 
feet 6 inches. Sheets £\ per set ; mounted on rollers, £2. • 
DIAGRAMS OF THE STEAM-ENGINE. By Professor Goodeve 
and Professor Shelley, Stout paper, 40 inches by 27 inches, 
highly coloured. 

Sets of 41 Diagrams {^1% Sheets), £6 6s. ; varnished and 
mounted on rollers, ^l I lis. 

MACHINE DETAILS. By Professor Unwin. 16 Coloured Diagrams. Sheets, 

£1 25. ; mounted on rollers and varnished, £-2, 14s. 
SELECTED EXAMPLES OF MACHINES, OF IRON AND WOOD (French). 

By Stanislas Pettit. 60 Sheets, £■>, 5s. ; 13s. per dozen. 
BUSBRIDGE'S DRAWINGS OF MACHINE CONSTRUCTION. 50 Sheets, 

i2s. 6d. Mounted, £x 5s. 

PHYSIOLOGICAL : 

ELEVEN SHEETS. Illustrating Human Physiology, Life Size and Coloured from 
Nature. Prepared under the direction of John Marshall, F.R.S., F.R.C.S., &c. 
Each Sheet, 12s. 6d. On canvas and rollers, varnished, ;^i is. 

1. THE SKELETON AND LIGAMENTS. 

2. THE MUSCLES, JOINTS, AND ANIMAL MECHANICS. 

3. THE VISCERA IN POSITION.— THE STRUCTURE OF THE LUNGS. 

4. THE ORGANS OF CIRCULATION. 

5. THE LYMPHATICS OR ABSORBENTS. 

6. THE ORGANS OF DIGESTION. 

7. THE BRAIN AND NERVES.— THE ORGANS OF THE VOICE. 

8. THE ORGANS OF THE SENSES. 

9. THE ORGANS OF THE SENSES. 

10. THE MICROSCOPIC STRUCTURE OF THE TEXTURES AND ORGANS. 

11. THE MICROSCOPIC STRUCTURE OF THE TEXTURES AND ORGANS, 



HUMAN BODY, LIFE SIZE. By John Marshall, F.R.S., F.R.C.S. Each 
Sheet, i2S. 6d. ; on canvas and rollers, varnished, ;^i is. Explanatory Key, is. 



5. THE SKELETON, Side View. 

6. THE MUSCLES, Side View. 

7. THE FEMALE SKELETON, 

Front View. 



1. THE SKELETON, Front View. 

2. THE MUSCLES, Front View. 

3. THE SKELETON, Back View. 

4. THE MUSCLES, Back View 

ZOOLOGICAL : 

TEN SHEETS. Illustrating the Classification of Animals. By Robert Patterson. 
£1 ; on canvas and rollers, varnished, £2,^ los. 
The same, reduced in size on Royal paper, in 9 Sheets, uncoloured, 12s. 

PHYSIOLOGY AND ANATOMY OF THE HONEY BEE. 

Two Diagrams. 7s. 6d. 



CHAPMAN ^ HALL, LIMITED, 3i 

By GEORGES PERROT and CHARLES CHIPIEZ. 

Translated by Walter Armstrong, B. A., Oxon. "With 452 Illustrations. 
2 vols, royal 8vo, £2 2s. 



" It is profusely illustrated, not merely with representations of the actual remains preserved 
in the British Museum, the Louvre, and elsewhere, but also with ingenious conjectural repre- 
sentations of the principal buildings from which those remains have been taken. ^ To English- 
men familiar with the magnificent collection of Assyrian antiquities preserved in the British 
Museum the volume should be especially welcome. We may further mention that an English 
translation by Mr. Walter Armstrong, with the numerous illustrations of the original, has 
just been published by Messrs. Chapman and Hall." — Times. 

"The only dissatisfaction that we can feel in turning over the two beautiful volumes in 
illustration of Chaldaean and Assyrian Art, by MM. Perrot and Chipiez, is in the reflection, 
.that in this, as in so many other publications of a similar scope and nature, it is a foreign name 
that we see on the title page, and a translation only which we can lay to our national credit. 
The predominance of really important -ftrorks on Archaeology which have^ to be translated for the 
larger reading public of England, and the comparative scarcity of original English works of a 
similar calibre, is a reproach to us which we would fain see removed ... it is most frequently 
to French and German writers that we are indebted for the best light and the most interesting 
criticisms on the arts of antiquity. Mr. Armstrong s translation is very well done. ' — Builder. 

"The work is a valuable addition to archaeological literature, and the thanks of the whole 
civilised world are due to the authors who have so carefully compiled thehistory of the arts of two 
peoples, often forgotten, but who were in reality the founders of Western civilisation." — Graphic. 



By GEORGES PERROT and CHARLES CHIPIEZ. 

Translated from the French by W. Armstrong. Containing 616 En- 
gravings, drawn after the Original, or from Authentic Documents, 
2 vols, imperial 8vo, £2. 2s. 

" The study of Egyptology is one which grows from day to day, and which has now reached 
such proportions as to demand arrangement and selection almost more than increased collec- 
tion of material. The well-known volumes of MM. Perrot and Chipiez supply this require- 
ment to an extent which had never hitherto been attempted, and which, before the latest 
researches of Mariette and Maspero, would have been impossible. Without watting for the 
illustrious authors to complete their great undertaking, Mr. W. Armstrong has very properly 
seized their first Instalment, and has presented to the English public all that has yet appeared 
of a most useful and fascinating work. To translate such a book, however, is a task that 
needs the revision of a specialist, and this Mr. Armstrong has felt, for he has not sent out his 
version to the world without the sanction of Dr. Birch and Mr. Reginald Stuart Poole. The 
result is in everj- way satisfactory to his readers. Mr. Armstrong adds, in an appendix, a 
description of that startling discovery which occurred just after the French original of these 
volumes left the press — namely, the finding of 38 royal mummies, with their sepulchral furniture, 
in a subterranean chamber at Thebes. It forms a brilliant ending to a work of great value' 
and beauty." — Pall Mall Gazette. 

The Saturday Review, speaking of the French edition, says : " To say that this magni- 
ficent work is the best history of Egyptian art that we possess, is to state one of the least 
of its titles to the admiration of all lovers of antiquity, Egyptian or other. No previous 

work can be compared with it for method or completeness Not only are the best 

engravings from the older authorities utilised, but numerous unpublished designs have been 
inserted. M. Chipiez has added greatly to the value of a work, in which the trained eye of 
the architect is everywhere visible, by his restorations of various buildings and modes of con- 
struction ; and the engravings in colours of the wall paintings are a noticeable feature in a 
work which is in every way remarkable. This history of Egyptian art is an invaluable 
treasure-hotise for the student ; and, we may add, there are few more delightful volumes 
for the cultivated idle who live at ease to turn over— every page is full of artistic interest." 



THE UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN 



32 BOOKS PUBLISHED BY CHAPMAN &» HALL, LIMITED, 



THE FORTNIGHTLY REVIEW. 

Edited by T. H. S. ESCOTT, 
HTHE FORTNIGHTLY REVIEW is published on the ist of 

•^ every month, and a Volume is completed every Six Months. 
The following are among the ContHbutors : — 

T. E. CLIFFE LESLIE 

SIR JOHN LUBBOCK, M.P. 

THE EARL LYTTON. 

SIR H. S. MAINE. 

DR. MAUDSLEY. 

PROFESSOR MAX MULLER. 

G. OSBORNE MORGAN, Q.C., M.P. 

PROFESSOR HENRY MORLEY. 

WILLIAM MORRIS. 

PROFESSOR H. N. MOSELEY. 

F. W. H. MYERS. 

F. W. NEWMAN. 

PROFESSOR JOHN NICHOL. 

W. G. PALGRAVE. 

WALTER H. PATER. 

RT. HON. LYON PLAYFAIR, M.P. 

DANTE GABRIEL ROSSETTI, 

LORD SHERBROOKE. 

HERBERT SPENCER. 

HON. E. L. STANLEY. 

SIR J. FITZJAMES STEPHEN, Q.C. 

LESLIE STEPHEN. 

J. HUTCHISON STIRLING. 

A. C. SWINBURNE. 

DR. VON SYBEL. 

J. A. SYMONDS. 

THE REV. EDWARD F. TALBOT 

(Warden of Keble College). 
SIR RICHARD TEMPLE, Bart. 
W. T. THORNTON. 
HON. LIONEL A. TOLLEMACHE. 
H. D. TRAILL. 
ANTHONY TROLLOPE. 
PROFESSOR TYNDALL. 
A. J. WILSON. 
THE EDITOR. 



SIR RUTHERFORD ALCOCK. 

MATHEW ARNOLD. 

PROFESSOR BAIN. 

SIR SAMUEL BAKER. 

PROFESSOR BEESLY. 

PAUL BERT. 

BARON GEORGETON BUNSEN. 

DR. BRIDGES. 

HON. GEORGE C. BRODRICK. 

JAMES BRYCE, M.P. 

THOMAS BURT, M.P. 

SIR GEORGE CAMPBELL, M.P. 

THE EARL OF CARNARVON. 

EMILIO CASTELAR. 

RT. HON. J. CHAMBERLAIN, M.P. 

PROFESSOR SIDNEY COLVIN. 

MONTAGUE COOKSON, Q.C. 

L. H. COURTNEY, M.P. 

G. H. DARWIN. 

SIR GEORGE W. DASENT. 

PROFESSOR A. V. DICEY. 

RIGHT HON. H. FAWCETT, M.P. 

EDWARD A. FREEMAN. 

SIR BARTLE FRERE, Bart. 

J, A. FROUDE. 

MRS. GARRET-ANDERSON. 

J. W. L. GLAISHER, F.R.S. 

M. E. GRANT DUFF, M.P. 

THOMAS HARE. 

F. HARRISON. 

LORD HOUGHTON. 

PROFESSOR HUXLEY. 

PROFESSOR R. C. JEBB. 

PROFESSOR JEVONS. 

ANDREW LANG. 

EMILE DE LAVELEYE. 



&c. &c. &c. 

The Fortnightly Review is published at 2s, 6d, 



CHAPMAN & HALL, LIMITED, 11, HENRIETTA STREET, 
COVENT GARDEN, W.C. 



CHARLES DICKENS AND £Vi\NS,] 



[crystal palacb press. 



UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN 



3 9015 00827 0194 



Commerda} Replacement 
On Order. Preservalioii 



ik'-'^" >j 



J9 




DO NOT REMOVE 

OR 
MUTILATE CARD 



