Cornell  University  Library 
DC  213.B61 
v.3 
A  selection  from  the  letters  and  despatc 


3   1924  024  332  250 


DATE  DUE 

m  1* 

OIM&2 

18 

•  "■T    * 

w  -<*'— 

iAAH^ 

-^lTN3i 

1" 

JUf-r 

f'nii 

^^ 

* 

Due 

3ack  upon 

Recal 

or  Leavint 
i  iniversitv 

8 

ine 

CAYLORD 

PRINTED  INU.S. A. 

The  original  of  this  book  is  in 
the  Cornell  University  Library. 

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in 
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text. 


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924024332250 


A  SELECTION   FROM 
THE   LETTERS    AND   DESPATCHES 

OF  THE 

FIRST    NAPOLEON. 


VOL.  III. 


A  SELECTION  FROM 

THE  LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES 

OF  THE 

FIRST    NAPOLEON. 

WLify  lExplanatotg  Notes. 


BY 


CAPTAIN    THE    HON.    D.    A.    BINGHAM, 

AUTHOR    OF    "MARRIAGES  OF  THE   BONAPARTES." 


IN  THREE    VOLUMES. 
VOL.    III. 


LONDON:    CHAPMAN    AND    HALL, 
Limited. 

1884. 


^mi5s 


LONDON : 

R.  Clay,  Sons,  and  Taylor, 

BREAD   STREET    HILL. 


A; 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  I. 

J'AGE 

The  Year  1810 1 


CHAPTER   II. 
The  Year  iSii     77 

CHAPTER  III. 
The  Year  1812 134 

CHAPTER  IV. 
The  Year  1813 201 

CHAPTER  V. 
The  Year  1814 290 

CHAPTER  VI. 
The  Year  1815 357 

INDEX 433 


A    SELECTION    FROM 
THE    LETTERS    AND    DESPATCHES 

OF  THE 

FIRST    NAPOLEON. 


THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF 
NAPOLEON. 


CHAPTER  I. 

THE     YEAR     1810. 

The  principal  event  of  18 10  was  undoubtedly  the  mar- 
riage of  Napoleon  with  the  Archduchess  Marie  Louise,  and 
it  is  a  curious  fact  that  nearly  all  the  documents  connected 
with  this  brilliant  matrimonial  alliance  have  disappeared 
from  the  national  archives.  While  reading  the  few  letters 
bearing  upon  this  remarkable  event  it  will  be  well  to  bear 
in  mind  the  following  facts.  Napoleon  had  long  contem- 
plated putting  Josephine  away  :  she  had  borne  him  no 
children,  and  he  wished  to  found  a  dynasty.  He  would 
have  been  contented  to  leave  the  throne  to  the  eldest  son 
of  Louis,  but  the  "  little  Napoleon  "  died  while  the  Emperor 
was  campaigning  in  Poland.  Shortly  afterwards,  at  Er- 
furth,  Napoleon  sounded  the  Czar  with  regard  to  his  sister 
the  Grand  Duchess  Catherine.  Alexander,  while  showing 
himself  favourable  to  an  alliance,  said  that  his  father  Paul 
had  left  the  Empress  Mother  absolute  control  in  such 
matters,  and  that  in  all  probability  it  would  be  difficult  to 
vanquish  her  resistance.  The  Czar  expressed  himself 
highly  nattered,  and  hoped  that  one  day  it  might  be 
possible  to  arrange  this  union.     As  for  the  Empress,  she 

VOL.  Ill,  B 


u*° 


2       THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

declared  that  she  would  sooner  see  her  daughter  at  the 
bottom  of  the  Neva  than  the  wife  of  Napoleon  ;  and  for 
fear  the  French  Emperor  might  again  press  his  suit  she 
lost  no  time  in  wedding  the  Grand  Duchess  to  the  Duke 
of  Oldenburg. 

It  was  not  until  after  the  battle  of  Wagram  that  the 
question  of  a  matrimonial  alliance  with  Russia  was  again 
mooted.  On  the  28th  December,  1809,  Caulaincourt 
broached  the  subject  of  a  marriage  between  the  Grand 
Duchess  Anne,  the  sister  of  the  Grand  Duchess  Catherine, 
and  Napoleon.  Alexander  was  much  surprised  at  this 
demand  :  his  mind  was  entirely  filled  at  that  moment  with 
apprehensions  concerning  the  re-establishment  of  Poland 
and  the  execution  of  the  Treaty  of  Tilsit.  The  draft  of  a 
convention  had  just  been  drawn  up  between  France  and 
Russia  upon  the  following  bases  : — 1st.  Reciprocal  engage- 
ment never  to  permit  the  re-establishment  of  Poland  ;  2nd. 
The  suppression  of  the  words  "  Poland  "  and  "Poles"  in 
all  public  acts,  &c.  When  the  matrimonial  demand  was 
made  Alexander  perceived  the  price  which  he  was  expected 
to  pay  for  the  convention.  The  Czar  was  highly  irritated, 
but  still  he  disguised  his  wrath  and  promised  to  use  his 
influence  with  his  mother  to  obtain  her  consent,  well 
knowing,  .after  what  had  occurred,  that  that  consent  would 
never  be  given.  On  the  4th  January,  18 10,  Alexander 
having  expressed  his  ability  to  remove  the  opposition  of 
his  mother,  Caulaincourt  at  once  signed  the  convention, 
being  convinced  that  this  important  concession  would 
decide  matters.  On  his  side  the  Czar  dragged  on  nego- 
tiations with  the  Empress  in  hopes  that  Napoleon  would 
ratify  the  convention  before  receiving  a  definite  reply.  On 
the  10th  January  Caulaincourt  received  orders  to  demand 
a  positive  reply  within  ten  days.  The  effect  of  this 
ultimatum  may  be  easily  imagined.  It  took  couriers  from 
fifteen  to  twenty  days  to  accomplish  the  distance  between 
St.  Petersburg  and  Paris.  It  was  on  the  28th  December 
only  that  the  first  demand  had  been  made,  and  Napoleon 


GRAND  DUCHESS  AND  ARCHDUCHESS.       3 

had  not  had  time  to  receive  a  despatch  from  Caulaincourt 
on  the  subject.  Then  why  this  ultimatum,  which  was 
equivalent  to  a  rupture  ?  The  fact  is  that  the  perspective 
of  another  alliance  more  flattering  in  a  dynastic  point  of 
view  had  presented  itself,  and  that  the  Emperor  had 
received  assurances  from  several  quarters  that  a  demand 
addressed  to  Vienna  would  meet  with  a  favourable  reply. 
His  vanity  was  intensely  gratified,  and  he  at  once  deter- 
mined to  break  off  negotiations  with  St.  Petersburg. 

On  the  2 1st  January,  that  is  to  say,  a  fortnight  before 
the  time  had  expired  for  receiving  a  reply  from  Russia, 
Napoleon  assembled  a  privy  council  at  the  Tuileries  to 
deliberate  on  the  choice  of  an  alliance.  Five  privy  coun- 
cillors voted  in  favour  of  an  Austrian,  two  in  favour  of  a 
Russian,  and  two  in  favour  of  a  Saxon  princess.  Talley- 
rand was  for  an  Archduchess,  and  Cambaceres  for  a  Grand 
Duchess  ;  because,  as  he  said  afterwards — "  The  Emperor 
is  sure  to  make  war  against  the  Power  to  which  he  is 
not  allied,  and  I  dread  a  march  to  St.  Petersburg  more 
than  a  march  to  Vienna." 

On  the  6th  February  despatches  from  Caulaincourt 
arrived  announcing  that  the  Court  of  St.  Petersburg  had 
not  come  to  a  decision.  The  fact  is  that  the  Empress  had 
declared  that  •&  Russian  princess  was  not  to  be  wooed  and 
won  in  a  week,  and  that  her  daughter,  who  was  only  six- 
teen, was  too  young  to  be  married  before  three  years.  She 
had  lost  two  daughters  by  marrying  them  at  too  early  an 
age,  and  she  would  not  sacrifice  a  third.  Then,  according 
to  the  Greek  rite,  the  Grand  Duchess  could  not  marry  a 
man  who  had  divorced  his  first  wife.  The  Czar  did  not 
absolutely  reject  the  alliance,  but  he  insisted  that,  in  the 
event  of  a  marriage,  his  sister  should  be  allowed  the  free 
exercise  of  her  religion.  On  the  reception  of  this  despatch 
Napoleon  at  once  wrote  to  Caulaincourt  saying  that  he 
considered  himself  disengaged.  The  very  same  day  he 
had  his  marriage  contract  with  Marie  Louise  drawn  out 
on  the  model    of  that  between  Louis    XVI.  and  Marie 

B  2 


4       THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Antoinette,  and  this  contract  was  immediately  signed  by 
the  Austrian  ambassador,  Prince  Schwartzenberg,  who  a 
few  months  before  had  been  sent  to  St.  Petersburg  to 
demand  the  hand  of  a  Russian  Grand  Duchess  for  an 
Austrian  Archduke.  The  rapidity  with  which  this  contract 
was  concluded  naturally  proved  that  negotiations  had  been 
going  on  with  Austria  and  with  Russia  at  the  same  time, 
although  Napoleon  afterwards  denied  this.  Prince  Metter- 
nich  says  in  his  Memoirs  that  he  was  puzzled  in  which 
negotiations  to  put  faith ;  in  those  openly  carried  on  with 
Russia,  or  in  those  secretly  carried  on  with  Austria.  With 
any  one  else  but  Napoleon  he  would  not  have  hesitated 
about  believing  in  the  secret  negotiation. 

The  diplomatists  who  were  opposed  to  the  Austrian 
marriage  urged  that  no  alliance  with  the  Court  of  Austria 
could  be  sincere.  That  Austria  had  suffered  too  much  at  the 
hands  of  France  for  the  wounds  to  be  healed  by  a  matri- 
monial arrangement ;  that  she  would  never  be  able  to 
forget  and  forgive  the  loss  of  Lombardy,  Venice,  the  Tyrol, 
Suabia,  Dalmatia,  Illyria,  Galicia,  and  Belgium,  and  the  Im- 
perial Crown  of  Germany,  while  Tuscany  had  been  taken 
from  one  of  the  Archdukes  and  finally  handed  over  to 
Napoleon's  sister  Eliza.  However,  the  Court  of  Vienna 
accepted  the  proffered  alliance  without  hesitation.  The  fact 
is  that  it  had  learned  with  terror  that  negotiations  had  been 
opened  with  St.  Petersburg,  whereas  its  policy,  before  and 
after  Wagram,  had  been  to  sow  dissension  between  the  two 
Powers  which  threatened  the  existence  of  Austria.  It  was 
for  this  reason  that  she  had  offered  Galicia  to  Napoleon, 
foreseeing  the  irritation  which  Russia  would  feel  upon 
finding  France  at  her  frontier  and  a  co-partner  of  Poland. 
She  caught  eagerly  at  the  suggestion  of  a  matrimonial  alli- 
ance, which  would  save  her  from  the  perils  with  which  she 
was  menaced  ;  and  the  overtures  once  commenced  ran 
smoothly,  especially  as  Austria  nobly  declared  that  this 
marriage  was  not  to  form  the  subject  of  any  bargaining. 
The  alliance  was  accepted  unconditionally,  but  at  the  same 


NAPOLEONS    FIRST   MARRIAGE.  5 

time  it  was  hoped  that  it  would  give  Austria  time  to 
recover  from  her  reverses,  and  that  it  would  prevent  a 
schism  in  the  Church  by  healing  the  breach  between  the 
Emperor  and  the  Pope.  It  was  to  further  the  latter  object 
that  Josephine  exerted  her  influence  in  favour  of  the 
Austrian  alliance. 

On  the  day  that  Napoleon  received  Caulaincourt's  de- 
spatch (6th  February)  he  refused  to  ratify  the  convention 
with  regard  Lto  Poland.  As  soon  as  the  marriage  with 
Marie  Louise  was  arranged  the  Emperor  set  to  work  to 
procure  the  dissolution  of  the  religious  tie  which  either 
bound  him,  or  was  supposed  to  bind  him,  to  Josephine. 
There  had  been  no  difficulty  in  having  the  civil  marriage 
annulled.  Mutual  consent  was  sufficient  for  that.  But 
before  wedding  the  daughter  of  his  most  apostolical 
majesty  of  Austria  it  was  necessary  for  his  most  Christian 
majesty  the  eldest  son  of  the  Church  to  procure  a  divorce. 

Strange  to  say,  it  is  still  a  matter  of  doubt  whether 
Napoleon  and  Josephine  were  ever  married  at  the  altar. 
There  is  not  a  scrap  of  documentary  evidence  to  prove  it. 
The  official  account  relates  that  on  the  eve  of  the  corona- 
tion the  Pope  refused  to  officiate  unless  the  Emperor  made 
Josephine  his  wife,  the  Church  not  recognising  the  civil 
marriage.  To  avoid  a  scandal  Napoleon  consented,  and 
the  religious  ceremony  was  secretly  performed  at  the 
Tuileries  by  Cardinal  Fesch,  with  the  consent  of  the  Pope, 
and  in  presence  of  Duroc,  Berthier,  and  Talleyrand,  on 
the  night  of  the  1st  December,  1804.  M.  Thiers,  in  his 
History,  says  that  no  one  heard  a  word  about  this  religious 
ceremony  until  the  divorce  was  applied  for.  Is  it  possible 
that  so  important  a  matter  could  have  been  kept  secret  for 
more  than  five  years  ?  M.  Thiers  says  that  the  Pope  and 
Cardinal  Consalvi  were  bound  to  secrecy  by  the  seal  of 
confession.  But  this  was  not  the  case  with  Cardinal  Fesch, 
nor  with  the  witnesses,  nor  with  Madame  de  R^musat,  who 
says  that  Josephine  told  all  about  the  wedding  the  day 
after  it  was  performed  ;  nor  with  Prince  Eugene,  to  whom 


6  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF   NAPOLEON. 

Josephine  said  that  she  sent  the  marriage  certificate  lest 
Napoleon  should  take  it  from  her  and  destroy  it  —  a 
certificate  which  has  never  been  brought  into  court. 

Prince  Metternich,  in  his  Memoirs,  says  that  Consalvi, 
shortly  after  he  left  the  ministry,  confided  this  tale  to 
him : — "  The  Pope  made  up  his  mind  not  to  appear  at 
the  coronation  unless  first  satisfied  of  the  validity  of  the 
marriage  between  Napoleon  and  Josephine.  Upon  this,  two 
or  three  bishops  whom  Cardinal  Consalvi  named  to  me, 
paid  the  Holy  Father  a  visit,  removed  his  doubts,  and  gave 
him  full  details  of  the  sacramental  tie  which  united  the 
Emperor  and  the  Empress.  The  Holy  Father  deceived, 
crowned  them  the  next  morning,  and  it  was  not  until 
several  days  after  the  coronation  that  he  learned  he  had 
been  imposed  upon."  The  Pope  was  tempted  at  first  to 
make  a  scandal,  but  for  various  reasons  he  changed  his 
mind.  "This  circumstance,"  continues  Prince  Metternich, 
"was  known  to  only  three  cardinals,  who  were  horror- 
struck  at  the  perfidy  of  the  bishops,  but  they  also  taxed 
the  Pope  with  too  much  credulity  on  this  occasion." 

In  considering  the  above  statement  it  is  right  to  re- 
member that  Prince  Metternich  was  interested  in  showing 
that  no  sacred  tie  united  Napoleon  and  Josephine.  The 
court  of  Vienna  always  declared  that  the  existence  of 
such  a  tie  would  stand  in  the  way  of  an  alliance  with 
Austria. 

The  only  way  out  of  this  dilemma  was  to  prove  that  the 
secret  marriage  had  not  been  performed  in  accordance 
with  canon  law,  and  that  the  Church  could  therefore 
declare  that  it  had  never  taken  place,  that  it  was  null 
and  void.  It  had  always  been  the  custom  for  popes  to 
decide  upon  such  matters  when  they  affected  crowned 
heads ;  but  how  could  Napoleon  appeal  to  Pius  VII., 
whom  he  held  a  close  prisoner  at  Savona,  and  who  had 
so  obstinately  refused  a  divorce  in  the  case  of  Prince 
Jerome?  Cambaceres  helped  his  Majesty  out  of  this 
difficulty  by  telling  him  that  the  intervention  of  the  Pope 


NAPOLEON  S   DIVORCE.  7 

would  be  necessary  to  dissolve  a  regular  marriage,  but 
that  it  was  not  required  in  the  case  of  a  marriage  in  which 
no  rules  had  been  observed,  and  that  the  matter  concerned 
only  the  officiality  of  Paris,  an  ecclesiastical  tribunal  of 
three  degrees  —  the  diocesan,  the  metropolitan,  and  the 
primatial  officialities. 

It  was  to  this  court  that  the  case  was  referred.  It  was 
argued  on  the  part  of  the  Emperor  that  the  secret  marriage 
was  null  for  three  reasons — 1st,  because  the  parish  priest 
was  not  present,  as  required  by  canon  law  ;  2nd,  owing  to 
the  absence  of  proper  witnesses;  3rd,  owing  to  want  of 
consent !  As  regards  the  first  plea,  the  permission  which 
Cardinal  Fesch  obtained  from  the  Pope  to  celebrate  the 
marriage  did  away  with  the  necessity  of  the  presence  of 
the  parish  priest.  As  regards  plea  two,  the  Council  of 
Trent  lays  down  that  there  should  be  two  witnesses,  and 
there  were  three.  With  respect  to  the  last  plea,  no  wonder 
that  a  member  of  the  court  found  it  absurd,  as  he  said, 
"  on  the  part  of  a  man  before  whom  we  all  trembled,  this 
plea  never  being  invoked  except  in  the  case  of  a  minor, 
the  victim  of  surprise  or  of  violence." 

The  diocesan  officiality  declared  the  marriage  null 
because  it  had  been  contracted  in  the  absence  of  the 
parish  priest  and  of  proper  witnesses.  Their  majesties 
were  therefore  declared  free  to  form  ether  alliances,  were 
forbidden  to  hold  any  further  communion  with  each 
other,  and  were  condemned  to  pay  a  certain  sum  to  the 
poor  of  Paris  for  having  sinned  against  the  Church  by 
indulging  in  a  false  marriage. 

From  the  diocesan  the  case  was  taken  up  to  the  metro- 
politan officiality,  which  also  pronounced  the  marriage  null, 
but  based  its  decision  on  the  non-consent  of  the  Emperor, 
who  pleaded  that  he  had  been  forced  into  it.  The  upper 
court,  too,  struck  out  the  fine,  which  it  considered 
degrading. 

The  position  of  Cardinal  Fesch  was  curious  enough  in 
this  affair ;  the  secret  marriage  which  he  declared  to  have 


8  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

been  regular  was  condemned  as  irregular,  but  this  did  not 
prevent  him  from  consenting  to  officiate  at  the  marriage  of 
Marie  Louise.  Now  Abbe  Lyonnet,  in  his  life  of  the 
Cardinal,  says  that  at  this  very  period  he  was  asked  to 
obtain  a  divorce  for  a  lady.  The  Cardinal  replied  : — "  The 
Catholic  religion  forbids  divorce,  and  the  ecclesiastical 
authorities  have  no  right  to  dissolve  a  tie  the  nature  of 
which  is  divine." 

Thus  wrote  the  prelate  who  declared  that  the  secret 
marriage  with  Josephine  was  valid,  and  who  nevertheless 
consented  to  join  together  Napoleon  and  Marie  Louise  in 
holy  wedlock.  It  was  also  curious  to  find  the  Pontiff  in 
1804  declaring  that  he  would  not  crown  a  woman  who  was 
living,  in  the  eye  of  the  Church,  in  a  state  of  concubinage ; 
and  the  court  of  Vienna,  so  punctilious  in  matters  of 
religion,  declaring  that  had  Josephine  been  anything  else 
but  a  concubine  it  would  have  rejected  the  proffered 
alliance.  The  Pope  asked  for  proof  that  a  state  of  sin  had 
ceased  to  exist,  and  Austria  demanded  proofs  to  the  con- 
trary. The  court  of  Vienna  objected  to  a  prince  who  had 
been  previously  married,  and  yet  gave  the  hand  of  the 
Archduchess  Marie  Louise  to  a  prince  who  was  labouring 
under  a  sentence  of  excommunication,  and  had  constituted 
himself  the  jailer  of  the  vicar  of  Christ  upon  earth. 

A  good  many  letters  touching  upon  the  strained  rela- 
tions between  Church  and  State  in  1810  are  published  in 
The  Correspondence,  but  a  good  many  also  have  been 
omitted,  as  we  shall  see.  The  irritation  displayed  by 
Napoleon  at  this  period  was  intensified  by  the  opposition 
of  some  of  the  prelates  to  his  wishes.  Twenty-seven 
cardinals  had  been  summoned  from  Rome  to  form  an 
ecclesiastical  committee  intended  to  act  as  a  council  and 
to  supersede  the  Pope,  who  obstinately  refused  to  con- 
secrate the  bishops  appointed  by  Napoleon  or  to 
acquiesce  in  the  loss  of  his  temporal  power.  Out  of  these 
twenty-seven  cardinals  thirteen,  headed  by  Consalvi,  the 
papal  legate,  refused  to  attend    the  second   marriage,   in 


RECALCITRANT   CARDINALS.  9 

spite  of  the  threats  of  Fouche,  considering  that  none  but 
the  Pope  could  annul  the  first  marriage. 

Marie  Louise  was  first  married  by  proxy  at  Vienna, 
then  the  civil  marriage  was  performed  at  St.  Cloud,  and 
finally  the  religious  marriage  at  the  Tuileries.  It  was 
from  this  last  ceremony  that  Consalvi  and  his  brother 
cardinals  absented  themselves,  to  the  great  wrath  of 
Napoleon,  who  felt  that  a  slur  was  thus  cast  on  the  legiti- 
macy of  his  second  marriage.  The  cardinals  paid  dearly 
for  their  boldness,  Consalvi  says  that  the  Emperor  gave 
orders  for  Cardinals  di  Pietro,  Oppizoni,  and  himself  to  be 
shot,  but  that  they  were  saved  by  the  intervention  of 
Fouche.  They  were  all,  however,  stripped  of  their  ex- 
ternal attributes,  were  deprived  of  the  scarlet,  and  were 
afterwards  known  as  the  "  black  cardinals  "  ;  they  were 
deprived  even  of  the  means  of  existence,  had  to  subsist  on 
charity,  and  were  exiled  to  various  towns  in  France,  and 
remained  under  the  supervision  of  the  police  until  the 
concordat  of  Fontainebleau  was  signed.  It  was  certainly 
trying  to  Napoleon's  temper  to  find,  after  having  wittingly 
indulged  in  two  false  marriages,  the  validity  of  one  in 
which  he  was  deeply  concerned  indirectly  denounced  by 
thirteen  cardinals. 

During  the  year  181Q  the  Pope  remained  inflexible;  he 
refused  to  listen  to  the  offers  made  by  Comte  Salmatoris 
on  the  part  of  Napoleon,  to  the  entreaties  of  Cardinals 
Fesch,  Maury,  Caprera,  Spina,  and  Caselli,  or  to  the 
political  reasons  advanced  by  the  Austrian  diplomatist 
Lebzeltern.  He  had  been  accustomed  to  the  austerities  of 
a  monastic  life,  and  he  could  support  the  severity  of  his 
captivity  at  Savona. 

In  1809  Napoleon  wished  to  exchange  the  Hanse  towns 
with  Louis  for  Brabant.  In  18 10  his  Majesty,  having 
driven  Louis  from  his  throne  by  his  vexatious  policy,  in 
regard  to  the  continental  blockade,  annexed  both  the 
Hanse  towns  and  Holland,  not  to  speak  of  Valais,  the 
Duchy  of  Oldenburg,  a  portion  of  Hanover,  and  the  whole 


IO      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

coast  from  the  Ems  to  the  Elbe.  With  Russia  Napoleon 
was  already  on  bad  terms,  and  he  appeared  determined  to 
goad  Sweden  to  desperation. 

In  1810  King  Charles  XIII.,  finding  himself  without  a 
successor,  consulted  Napoleon  on  the  advisability  of 
choosing  the  brother  of  the  Duke  of  Augustenburg  as  his 
heir.  The  Emperor  gave  it  to  be  understood  that  he 
would  prefer  another  candidate,  and  secretly  urged  the 
King  of  Denmark  to  come  forward.  The  king  took  the 
advice  of  Napoleon,  and  wrote  to  Charles  XIII.  on  the 
subject.  Now  the  Kingp-of  Denmark  was  so  unpopular  in 
Sweden  that  the  very  announcement  of  his  candidature 
caused  a  popular  rising.  The  Emperor  left  his  ambassador 
without  instructions,  and  Charles  XIII.,'  embarrassed  at 
having  to  choose  between  a  candidate  hateful  to  the 
nation  and  one  disagreeable  to  Napoleon,  adopted  a  third 
course,  and  offered'the  succession  to  Bernadotte,  who  had 
made  himself  exceedingly  popular  with  all  classes  when  in 
command  of  a  French  force  in  Pomerania.  This  choice 
was  highly  approved  of  by  the  chambers  and  by  the 
people.  Bernadotte  was  elected  Prince  Royal  of  Sweden 
under  the  idea  that  a  marshal  allied  to  the  imperial  family 
would  be  grateful  to  the  Emperor,  and  that  all  the  diffi- 
culties with  France  would  be  removed.  When  Napoleon 
heard  of  this  election  he  overwhelmed  the  Swedish 
ambassador  with  invectives,  accused  Sweden  of  not 
observing  the  continental  blockade,  and  told  poor 
Lagerbielke  to  choose  between  the  cannon-balls  of  the 
English  and  war  with  France. 

Prince  Metternich  says  that  the  dilatoriness  of  Napoleon 
in  this  affair  arose  from  the  fact  of  his  desire  to  place  a 
member  of  his  own  family  on  the  throne,  and  that  when 
Josephine  heard  that  Bernadotte  had  been  elected  she 
exclaimed — "  The  wretch  !  to  desert  his  God  for  a  throne  ; 
none  of  mine  would  do  that."  And  in  fact  Napoleon 
appears  to  have  offered  the  Swedish  succession  to  Prince 
Eugene,  whose  eldest  daughter,  by   the   way,  afterwards 


BERNADOTTE.  I  I 

became  Queen  of  Sweden,  having  married  in  1823  Berna- 
dotte's  eldest  son,  who  reigned  as  Oscar  I.  Two  matters 
somewhat  consoled  Napoleon  for  this  little  accident.  He 
argued  that  if  Sweden  elected  a  French  marshal  it  was 
with  the  idea  of  recovering  Finland,  and  that  she  would 
therefore  aid  him  in  a  war  with  Russia.  Again  he  con- 
sidered that  placing  a  French  marshal  on  the  throne  of 
Gustavus  Adolphus  was  playing  England  a  nice  trick. 
He  did  not  foresee  the  triple  alliance  between  Russia, 
England,  and  Sweden,  when  France  shortly  afterwards 
declared  war  against  Alexander. 

Another  important  event  which  occurred  in  18 10  was 
the  sudden  fall  of  the  ex-oratorian  and  ex-Jacobin 
minister  of  police,  Fouche,  who  was  driven  from  office  for 
indulging  in  a  little  private  diplomacy.  No  greater  com- 
pliment could  have  been  paid  to  Fouche  than  the  universal 
terror  which  reigned  in  Paris  when  it  was  known  that  he 
had  been  succeeded  by  Savary. 

In  Spain  we  shall  find  Massena,  after  losing  Busaco, 
afterwards,  obliged  to  beat  a  retreat  from  before  the  lines 
of  Torres  Vedras.  There  were  to  be  no  more  laurels  for 
the  Duke  of  Rivoli,  Prince  of  Essling,  the  "darling  child 
of  victory." 

On  the  3rd  January  Napoleon  addressed  a  letter  to 
General  Clarke  in  which  he  said :  "  Since  the  English 
have  had  the  kindness  to  leave  the  fortifications  of  Flush- 
ing intact  no  time  must  be  lost  in  repairing  them.  .  .  . 
This  will  save  us  several  millions." 

To  M.  FOUCHE,  Due  d'Otrante. 

"Paris,  5M  January,  18 10. 
"■  A  man  called  Bruguieres  has  written  a  bad  work 
entitled  Napolhn  en  Prusse,  which  people  believe  to  be 
acknowledged  by  the  Government.  All  the  sovereigns 
have  sent  him  presents.  Have  this  work  criticised  as  it 
deserves,  for  I  have  only  thrown  my  eye  over  it. 

'«  Napoleon." 


12  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  M.  DE  CHAMPAGNY,  Due  de  Cadore. 

"Paris,  6M  January,  1810. 
"  My  affairs  are  not  progressing.  That  of  Holland  has 
not  advanced  a  step ;  present  a  note  to  the  Minister  of 
Foreign  Affairs  in  conformity  with  my  letter  to  the  King. 
Tell  him  that  I  cannot  allow  that  nation  to  be  the 
auxiliary  of  England ;  attack  the  evil  advisers  of  the 
king,  and  insist  upon  the  necessity  of  my  employing  all 
the  power  which  God  has  given  me  to  damage  England 
and  to  ruin  her  commerce.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  8th  January  his  Majesty  wrote  a  letter  to  his 
Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs  in  reply  to  a  communication 
from  his  brother  Jerome.  He  said  :  "  I  cannot  give  the 
sovereignty  of  Hanover  to  the  King  of  Westphalia  because 
I  do  not  possess  that  sovereignty,  but  I  can  cede  him 
Hanover  and  all  my  rights  to  that  province ;  that  is  all 
I  can  do." 

From  this  extraordinary  letter  one  gathers  that  the 
revenue  of  the  domains  in  Hanover  produced  a  revenue  of 
5,200,000  francs,  and  that  Napoleon  had  disposed  of 
domains  to  the  value  of  4,559,000  francs.  King  Jerome 
was  at  liberty  to  keep  what  remained. 

To  COMTE  BIGOT,  Minister  of 'Worship. 

"PARIS,,  10th  January,  1810. 
"  Order  General  Miollis  to  pack  up  the  archives  of  the 
Holy  See  and  to  send  them  to  France  in  charge  of  a  good 
escort. 

"  Napoleon.  '* 

The  next  day  his  Majesty  submitted  the  following 
questions  to  a  committee  of  bishops : — 


SPIRITUAL    AFFAIRS.  1 3 

FIRST  SERIES. 
"  1st.  Is  the  government  of  the  Church  arbitrary  ? 
"  2nd.  Can  the  Pope,  owing  to  temporal  affairs,  refuse  to 
interfere  in  spiritual  affairs  ? " 

The  bishops  were  then  asked  if  it  would  not  be  suitable 
to  convoke  a  council  composed  of  prelates  of  all  nations. 

SECOND  SERIES. 

"  1st.  Has  the  Emperor  or  have  his  ministers  infringed 
the  Concordat  ? 

"  2nd.  Has  the  condition  of  the  clergy  been  improved 
since  the  Concordat  came  into  operation  ? 

"  3rd.  If  the  French  Government  has  not  violated  the 
Concordat  can  the  Pope  refuse  to  install  archbishops  and 
bishops  ?  .  .  .  " 

THIRD  SERIES. 

"  1st.  His  Majesty,  who  has  a  right  to  consider  him- 
self the  most  powerful  Christian  in  the  lofty  rank  to 
which  Providence  has  elevated  him,  would  be  troubled  in 
conscience  were  he  to  pay  no  attention  to  the  complaints 
of  the  German  churches  forsaken  by  the  Pope  for  the 
last  ten  years.  .  .  ." 

As  the  heir  of  Charlemagne,  as  the  real  Emperor  of  the 
the  west,  as  the  eldest  son  of  the  Church,  Napoleon 
wished  to  know  what  he  should  do  if  the  Pope  remained 
obstinate. 

"  3rd.  The  bull  of  excommunication  of  the  10th  June, 
1809,  being  contrary  to  Christian  charity  as  well  as  to  the 
independence  and  the  honour  of  the  throne,  what  must  be 
done  to  prevent  popes  in  time  of  trouble  and  calamity 
from  resorting  to  such'  excesses  ? " 

The  replies  of  the  committee,  presided  over  by  Cardinal 
Fesch,  were  for  the  most  part  ambiguous,  but  the  bull  of 


14     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

excommunication  was    pronounced   to   be   an   excess  of 
power  not  likely  to  be  indulged  in  again. 

Having  obtained  a  report  on  the  replies  of  the  bishops, 
Napoleon  wrote  to  Champagny  to  make  out  that — "The 
Pope  declared  war  against  me  ;  that  he  refused  to  close  his 
ports  to  the  English,  and  to  enter  into  the  league  for  the 
defence  of  Italy ;  that  he  recalled  Cardinal  Caprera  from 
Paris,  and  broke  off  relations ;  that  the  result  of  this 
conduct  was  war ;  the  result  of  war  the  conquest  of  his 
states ;  and  the  result  of  this  conquest  is  that  I  am  at 
liberty  to  change  the  government.  .  .   ." 

To  KING  JOSEPH,  at  Madrid. 

"Paris,  14M  January,  1810. 

"  I  thank  you  for  your  compliments  on  the  occasion  of 

the  new  year.     The  Due   de  Dalmatie   should   have  the 

title  of  chief  of  the  staff  of  the  army  of  Spain.     This  I 

think  was   the  title  of  Marshal  Jourdan  when  I  was  in 

Spain. 

"Napoleon." 

Jourdan,  who  was  a  great  favourite  of  King  Joseph,  had 
been  replaced  by  Soult,  who  was  not  destined  to  manage 
affairs  much  better  than  his  predecessor. 

To  COMTE  BIGOT. 

"Paris,  \6,lh  January,  1810. 
"  Write  to  Rome  for  the  fisherman's  ring,1  the  seals  of 
the  pontiff,  the  ornaments  of  the   tiara,  and   everything 

1  Prince  Borghese  to  Napoleon. 

"Paris,  x\th  March,  181 1. 

"  At  the  time  of  the  seizure  of  the  papers  of  the  Pope  and  those  of 
his  household  a  packet  of  golden  pieces  was  found  in  the  portfolio 
of  the  prelate  Doria,  which  was  returned  to  him  without  its  being 
remarked  that  the  seal  of  the  Pope,  called  the  'Fisherman's  ring,' 
was  among  the  pieces.    Having  been  informed  of  this  I  gave  orders 


KING   AND    QUEEN    OF    HOLLAND.  1 5 

used  by  the  Pope  in  ceremonies.  Every  time  a  person 
announces  himself  as  holding  powers  from  the  Pope  to 
manage  his  spiritual  affairs,  he  must  be  sent  to  Paris. 

"  Napoleon." 

TO  THE   EMPRESS,  AT  THE  MALMAISON. 

"  Trianon,  \7tJ1  January,  1810. 

"  My  Friend, — D'Audenarde,  whom  I  sent  to  you  this 
morning,  tells  me  that  you  have  no  courage  since  you  went 
to  the  Malmaison.  That  place,  however,  must  bring  back 
feelings  which  cannot  and  never  ought  to  change,  at  least 
on  my  side.  I  long  to  see  you,  but  I  must  know  that 
you  are  strong  and  not  weak  :  I  am  a  little  so,  and  this 
afflicts  me  terribly. 

"  Adieu,  Josephine !  good  night.  Should  you  doubt  me 
you  will  be  very  ungrateful.  «  NAPOLEON." 

In  a  postscript  to  a  letter  written  to  Champagny  on  the 
19th  the  Emperor  said  : — 

"  Inform  the  King  of  Holland  that  he  cannot  leave  ;  that 
that  would  interfere  with  the  course  of  affairs ;  that  people 
would  suppose  the  crisis  past ;  that  if  he  leaves  I  shall 
annex  the  country,  .  .  ." 

To  HORTENSE,  Queen  of  Holland. 

"  Paris,  22«rf  January,  1810. 
"  MY  DAUGHTER, — I  have  directed  St.  Leu  to  be  handed 
over  to  you.     Order  your  man  of  business  to  take  posses- 
sion of  it  in  your  name,  and  to  repair  it.  .  .  .  You  require 
a  country  seat,  and  you  cannot  have  a  more  agreeable  one. 

"  Napoleon." 

for  the  seal  to  be  procured,  -without,  however,  any  violence  being 
employed  if  it  were  in  the  hands  of  the  Pope.  A  long  time  having 
elapsed  without  finding  it,  the  captain  of  Gendarmery  Lagorse,  a  few 
days  ago,  decided  upon  asking  the  Pope  for  the  ring,  who  handed  it 
to  him  in  a  very  bad  temper,  after  having  broken  it.  It  is  therefore  in 
this  condition  that  I  have  the  honour  to  send  it  to  your  Majesty." 


1 6  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  M.  DE   CHAMPAGNY. 

"  Paris,  27M  January,  1810. 

"Write  to  M.  Laforest  at  Madrid,  telling  him  to  present 
notes  on  the  impossibility  of  meeting  the  enormous  ex- 
penses of  Spain  ;  that  I  have  already  sent  300,000,000 
francs  there  ;  that  the  despatch  of  such  considerable  sums 
of  money  exhausts  France.  .  .  .  M.  Laforest  must  add 
that  the  war  with  Austria  cost  me  a  great  deal  of  money. 
.  .  .  There  is  a  great  deal  of  money  in  the  provinces.  If 
the  soldiers  are  not  paid  they  will  plunder,  and  then  I 
shall  not  know  what  to  do.1 

"  Napoleon." 

And  the  same  day  the  War  Minister  was  ordered  to 
write  to  Marmont,  who  was  operating  in  Illyria,  not  to 
expect  any  supplies  from  France,  and  that  the  country 
must  nourish  his  army. 

On  the  29th  January  was  commenced  a  correspondence 
with  the  Court  of  St.  Petersburg  on  the  subject  of  Poland, 
the  Czar  wishing  to  extort  from  the  French  Emperor  a 
declaration  that  "Poland  shall  never  be  re-established," 
whereas  Napoleon  was  not  inclined  to  go  further  than  to 
promise  not  to  favour  any  attempt  to  re-establish  Poland. 
A  long  and  angry  controversy  ensued,  which  ended  in 
Napoleon  saying  —  "What  does  Russia  mean  by  such 
language  ?  Does  she  wish  for  war  ?  Why  these  continual 
complaints  ?  Why  this  insulting  suspicion  ?  If  I  had 
wished  to  re-establish  Poland  I  should  not  have  withdrawn 
my  troops  from  Germany.  .  .  ." 

Napoleon,  who  was  fond  of  declaring  that  this  and  that 
house  had  ceased  to  reign,  refused,  as  he  said,  to  render 

1  In  consequence  of  this  state  of  affairs  Spain  was  divided  into 
separate  military  governments  formed  in  each  province,  in  Biscay, 
Navarre,  Aragon,  Catalonia,  Old  Castille,  and  Leon,  whose  duty  it 
was  to  collect  customs  and  to  see  that  the  army  was  provided  for. 
This  system  soon  exhausted  the  country  and  destroyed  trade.  As  for 
King  Joseph,  he  found  himself  reduced  to  the  greatest  straits. 


LETTER    TO    THE    POPE.  1 7 

himself  ridiculous  by  employing  the  language  of  the 
Divinity,  and  to  sully  his.  memory  by  affixing  his  seal 
to  an  act  of  Machiavelic  policy  ;  for'  to  declare  that  Poland 
should  never  be  re-established  would  be  doing  more  than 
to  acknowledge  the  partition  of  that  country.  He  added — 
"If  ever  I  were  to  sign  that  the  kingdom  of  Poland  shall 
never  be  re-established,  it  would  be  because  I  had  the 
intention  of  re-establishing  it.  It  would  be  a  trap  set  for 
Russia,  and  the  infamy  of  such  a  declaration  would  be 
effaced  by  the  fact  which  denied  it."  After  this  explosion 
of  virtuous  indignation  the  subject  in  question  was  dropped 
by  mutual  consent  for  a  season. 

Napoleon,  on  the  31st  January,  wrote  to  the  Minister  of 
the  Interior  to  know  if  it  were  true,  as  Senator  Monbadon 
declared,  that  no  more  wine  was  exported  from  Bordeaux, 
as  the  English  would  not  receive  it !  The  Minister  was 
also  informed  that  on  the  same  day  that  a  statue  was  to 
be  set  up  to  Desaix,  the  foundation  stones  of  four  new 
slaughter-houses  were  to  be  laid. 

Napoleon  then  addressed  a  series  of  military  instructions 
to  King  Joseph,  which  he  concluded  by  stating  that  "  there 
is  nothing  dangerous  in  Spain  but  the  English  ;  the  rest 
cannot  keep  the  field." 

The  Emperor,  once  more  intent  upon  speedily  settling 
affairs  with  Rome,  addressed  a  long  letter  to  the  captive 
Pope,  in  which  he  said  : — 

"  MOST  Holy  Father, — I  send  you  the  Bishops  of 


to  inform  you  of  my  desire  to  see  concord  re-established 
between  your  Holiness  and  myself.  I  do  not  wish  your 
Holiness  to  entertain  any  doubt  with  regard  to  my  prin- 
ciples or  my  intentions.  Your  Holiness  forgot  the  principles 
of  justice  and  charity  when  you  fulminated  your  bull  of 
excommunication  ;  it  was  to  bless  and  strengthen  thrones 
that  Jesus  Christ  laid  down  His  life.  But  this  excommuni- 
cation must  have  been  obtained  from  your  Holiness  by 
surprise  and  by  wicked  men.  I  appeal  to  the  Church  and 
VOL.  III.  C 


1 8  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

to  your  Holiness,  who  is  now  better  informed.     I  despise 
this  excommunication,  and  only*  consider  it  as  the  work  of 
evil-doers  and  the  enemies  of  religion.     It  is  based,  too, 
upon  false  assertions.     Not  only  have  I  not  neglected  to 
execute  the  Concordat,  but,  far  from  that,  I  have  ameliorated 
more  and  more  the  situation  of  the  Catholic  religion,  and 
every  day  I  bless  the  God  of  our  fathers  for  having  selected 
me  to  restore  His  worship  and  His  altars,  and  to  cause 
Him  to  be  honoured  in  France,  Italy,  Germany  and  Poland. 
Your  Holiness  also  bases  your  excommunication  on  tem- 
poral reasons ;  and  here  I  must  acquaint   you  with  all  I 
think  on  this  subject.    In  re-establishing  worship  in  France 
I  desired  to  restore  to  my  people  true  religion  and  the 
salutary    influence   of  its    spiritual  chief,  and   not  to  re- 
establish the  intolerable  pretensions  of  Gregory  VII.    I 
intended  to  give  my  people  a  chief  pastor,  and  not  to 
subject  them  to  a  foreign  sovereign.     My  throne  is  from 
God,  and  I  am  accountable  only  to  Him.     I  recognise  the 
spiritual  power  of  your  Holiness,  but  I  will  not,  and  cannot, 
recognise  any  temporal  influence.     The  triple  tiara  is  a 
monstrous  production  of  pride  and  ambition,  entirely  con- 
trary to  the  humility  of  the  Vicar  of  Christ.     The  irascible 
passions  of  the  persons  who  surround  your  Holiness  would 
have  done  great  harm  if  God  had  not  granted  me  calmness 
and  the  true  knowledge  of  the  sublime  principles  of  our 
religion.     Neither  France  nor  Italy  will  ever  recognise  the 
influence   of  a   foreign   sovereign,   but   they  will  always 
recognise  the   salutary   authority  of  the   Vicar  of  Jesus 
Christ,  the  chief  pastor,  having  charge  of  souls,  like  St. 
Peter  and  the  first  Pontiffs.     I  execrate  the  principles  of 
Julius,  of  Boniface,  and  Gregory,  which  caused  half  the 
Christian  world  to  separate  itself  from  the  Catholic  religion, 
and  they  are  now  rendering  account  to  God  for  all  the 
souls  which  were  damned  in   consequence  of  their  mad 
ambition.     It  is  for  your  Holiness  to  choose ;  France  and 
I  have  chosen.     We  desire  the  religion  of  St.  Peter,  of 
St.  Paul,  and  of  St.  Bernard,  founded  on  the  principles  of 


LETTER    TO    THE    POPE.  1 9 

the  Gallican  Church.  We  recognise  the  principles  and 
utility  of  the  unity  and  influence  of  the  Chair  of  St.  Peter, 
the  rock  upon  which  Jesus  Christ  permitted  His  Church  to 
be  built,  but  we  are  determined  not  to  submit  to  a  sove- 
reign who  governs  territory,  men,  and  temporal  matters. 
If  your  Holiness  desires  to  preserve  this  temporal  in- 
fluence and  to  meddle  with  the  affairs  of  the  world  ;  if 
you  consider  yourself  the  king  of  kings,  we  shall  oppose 
you  with  the  Scriptures,  and  shall  look  upon  you  as  the 
enemy  of  religion ;  we  shall  appeal  to  a  general  council. 
If,  on  the  contrary,  your  Holiness  desires  only  the  in- 
heritance of  Jesus  Christ  and  of  St.  Peter ;  if  you  are 
satisfied  with  the  care  of  souls  ;  if  you  are  animated  with 
the  true  spirit  of  the  Gospel ;  if  you  preach  union  and  the 
principles  of  morality  and  charity,  we  are  ready  to  be 
reconciled  to  you.  If,  like  Jesus  Christ,  your  Holiness 
considers  that  your  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world ;  if  you 
have  no  other  thoughts  but  those  concerning  another  life, 
we  shall  recognise  your  spiritual  authority,  and  support  it 
with  all  the  force  of  our  sceptre,  for  we  shall  look  upon  it 
as  the  firmest  support  of  our  throne  and  of  the  prosperity 
of  our  people. 

"  We  do  not  address  your  Holiness  in  dubious  or  insidious 
language.  Religion  is  clear  ;  Jesus  Christ  and  His  apostles 
preached  it  on  the  house-tops  so  that  it  might  be  known 
to  all.  Do  you  desire  to  be  Pope,  the  Vicar  of  Jesus  Christ, 
the  successor  of  St.  Peter  ?  We  shall  receive  you  in 
triumph,  and  fold  you  in  our  arms.  But  if  you  are  domi- 
nated by  the  pride  and  ostentation  of  the  world,  think  you 
our  throne  ought  to  serve  you  as  a  footstool,  and  that  we 
shall  place  our  crown  under  the  dust  of  your  feet  ?  We 
shall  consider  you  only  as  the  work  of  the  demon ;  as 
spoiled  by  pride  and  worldly  interest,  and  as  the  enemy  of 
religion,  of  our  throne,  and  of  our  people.  Your  influence 
is  powerful  and  your  empire  is  great,  when  you  remain 
within  the  limits  traced  by  Jesus  Christ ;  but  your  power 
becomes    ridiculous    and    despicable   when    you   wish   to 

c  2 


20  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF   NAPOLEON. 

march  with  the  potentates  of  the  earth,  surrounded  by 
pride,  menaces,  and  force.  You  are  nothing  when  your 
empire  is  of  this  world  ;  you  are  everything  when  your 
empire  is  not  of  this  world.  But  now  Rome  irrevocably 
forms  part  of  my  Empire.  You  have  enough  to  do  when 
confining  yourself  to  spiritual  affairs  and  the  care  of  souls. 
My  mission  is  to  govern  the  west ;  do  not  meddle  with 
me  ;  and  if  your  Holiness  had  been  occupied  with  nothing 
else-  but  the  salvation  of  souls,  the  Church  of  Germany 
would  not  be  in  its  present  state  of  disorganisation.  For 
a  long  time  the  Roman  Pontiffs  have  meddled  with 
matters  which  do  not  concern  them,  neglecting  the  true 
interests  of  the  Church.  I  recognise  you  for  my  spiritual 
chief,  but  I  am  your  Emperor." 

"  The  principal  aim  of  the  negotiation  is  to  decide  the 
Pope  to  consent  to  reside  in  France.  I  alone  have  the 
power  and  the  wealth  necessary  to  meet  the  wants  of  the 
Church.  It  is  my  intention,  in  case  he  can  be  persuaded 
to  come  to  France,  to  establish  him  at  Rheims." 

We  now  come .  to  the  matrimonial  alliance.  The  first 
letter  upon  this  subject,  published  in  the  Correspondence, 
runs  thus : — 

To  M.  DE  CHAMPAGNY. 

"  Paris,  6th  February,  1810. 
"  Send  a  courier  this  evening  to  Caulaincourt,  to  inform 
him  that  a  council  was  held  a  few  days  ago,  and  that 
opinion  was  divided  between  a  Russian  and  an  Austrian 
princess ;  that  opinion  is  divided  also  in  France,  especially 
owing  to  religion,  and  that  people  who  attach  the  least 
importance  to  religion  cannot  accustom  themselves  to  the 
idea  of  not  seeing  the  Empress  observe  the  ceremonies  of 
the  Church  alongside  of  the  Emperor  ;  that  the  presence 
of  a  Pope  J  presents  a  greater  inconvenience  still.  You 
must  add  that  these  lines  were  written  when  the  courier  of 
1  Of  the  Greek  church. 


A    RUSSIAN    PRINCESS.  2  1 

the  2 1 st  arrived,  and  that  you  interrupted  your  letter  in 
order  to  decipher  the  despatches  he  brought;  that  the 
Emperor  remarks  that  the  Princess  Anne  is  not  yet 
formed,  and  that  sometimes  girls  remain  for  two  years 
between  the  first  signs  of  nubility  and  maturity ;  that  to 
remain  three  years  without  the  hope  of  children  would  not 
answer  the  intentions  of  his  Majesty ;  that,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  delay  of  ten  days  expired  on  the  16th,  and  that 
there  was  no  reply  on  the-2ist ;  that  the  Emperor  cannot 
conceive  how,  when  the  Empress  mother  has  given  her 
consent,  when  the  opinion  of  the  Princess  Anne  is  favour- 
able, no  positive  answer  is  returned ;  that  these  delays 
contrast  with  the  devotion  and  readiness  of  Austria ; 
that  his  Majesty  intends  holding  a  council  to-morrow 
to  settle  this  uncertainty,  having  no  time  to  lose ;  that 
at  Erfurth  there  was  a  question  of  the  Princess  Catherine, 
but  that- his  Majesty  considers  himself  sufficiently  free,  not 
from  any  engagement,  for  there  never  was  one,  but  from 
any  tacit  obligation  imposed  by  honesty,  and  his  friend- 
ship for  the  Emperor  Alexander,  owing  to  the  delay  of  a 
month  which  he  has  taken  to  reply  to  a  simple  question. 

"  Napoleon." 

In  a  second  letter  of  the  same  date,  Napoleon  wrote  thus 
to  his  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  : — 

"  Send  off  the  courier  to  Russia  before  you  go  to  bed. 
Do  not  mention  the  '  sitting '  for  this  evening.  To- 
morrow evening,  after  having  signed  with  Schwartzenberg, 
you  can  despatch  another  courier,  stating  that  I  have  de- 
cided in  favour  of  the  Austrian.  Being  me  the  marriage 
contract  of  Louis  XVI.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

In  a  third  letter  of  the  same  date  to  Champagny,  his 
Majesty  said  : — "  The  engagements  of  kings  are  sacred, 
and  the  Prussian  debt  is  the  same  as  if  it  had  been  paid 


2  2      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

into  the  French  treasury.  Since  the  opening  of  the  war 
with  Austria  nothing  has  been  paid,  and  it  is  evident  that 
by  setting  aside  half  her  revenue  Prussia  might  have  paid 
60,000,000  francs.  The  22,000,000  francs  in  letters  of 
change  were  protested  as  soon  as  Prussia  knew  that 
France  was  engaged  in  a  war  with  Austria.  .  .  ."  And 
the  French  Minister  at  Berlin  was  to  declare  that  if  Prussia 
did  not  pay  160,000/.  a  month,  the  Emperor  would  march 
60,000  men  against  Magdeburg.  Prussia,  however,  might 
indemnify  France  by  handing  over  to  kher  Glogau  and  a 
portion  of  Silesia. 

The  next  day  came  another  letter  to  Champagny,  on 
the  subject  of  the  marriage,  in  which  the  Emperor  said  : — 

"  The  Prince  of  Neuchatel  (Berthier)  having  been  ap- 
pointed extraordinary  ambassador,  in  order  to  demand 
the  princess  in  marriage,  will  arrive  at  Vienna  on  the 
29th,  and  will  make  his  demand  the  next  day.  M.  Otto 
will  have  arranged  all  the  ceremonial.  This  marriage  can 
take  place  on  the  2nd  March.  The  princess  can  finish  the 
carnival  at  Vienna,  and  start  on  Ash  Wednesday.  Matters 
can  be  arranged  so  that  she  may  arrive  in  Paris  about  the 
26th.  The  handing  over  of  the  princess  will  take  place  at 
Braunau,  where  she  will  find  her  household.  .  .  .  M.  Otto 
must  let  it  be  well  understood  that  the  princess  must  bring 
no  one  with  her ;  if,  however,  she  has  a  lady's  maid  to 
whom  she  is  attached,  she  can  bring  her  to  remain  with 
her  for  a  month.  You  must  inform  M.  Otto  that  the 
dowry  fixed  for  the  Empress  appears  to  me  ridiculous ;  but 
in  that  it  was  wished  to  follow  what  was  done  at  the 
marriage  of  Louis  XVI.  The  dowry  of  French  empresses 
is-fixed  at  160,000/.  .  .  ." 

To  COMTE  DE  REMUSAT. 

"  Paris,  Zth  February,  1810. 
"  You  furnish   me  with  no  report  respecting  the  admi- 
nistration of  the  theatres,  and  you  have  new  pieces  re- 
hearsed without    informing    me.      I  learn  that  the  Mort 


HAM    AND    SEDAN.  23 

d'Abel  and  a  ballet  are  being  rehearsed.  You  should 
not  have  any  new  piece  rehearsed  without  my  consent. 
Let  me  have  a  report  on  this. 

"Napoleon." 


On  the  same  day  Berthier  was  ordered  to  write  to  the 
King  of  Spain  to  say  that  his  Majesty  could  no  longer 
meet  the  enormous  expenses  of  his  army  of  Spain,  and 
that  henceforth  he  could  send  only  80,000/.  a  month  for 
the  pay  of  the  troops  round  Madrid.  All  the  resources  of 
the  conquered  country  were  to  be  applied  to  the  army. 

To  M.  DE  CHAMPAGNY. 

"  Paris,  12th  February,  1810. 

"  I  beg  that  you  will  send  for  the  Dutch  Minister.  You 
will  tell  him  that  the  Minister  of  Police  has  had  several 
interviews  with  the  King  of  Holland,  who  desires  to  con- 
ciliate the  independence  of  his  country  with  my  views,  and 
he  consequently  proposes — 1st.  To  cede  to  France  the  left 
bank  of  the  Rhine.  2nd.  To  put  a  stop  to  all  communica- 
tion with  England.  .  .  . 

"Napoleon." 

Writing  to  General  Clarke,  on  the  18th  February, 
Napoleon  said : — "  I  am  of  opinion  that  two  or  three 
castles,  like  Ham,  which  serve  as  state  prisons,  should  be 
handed  over  to  the  police.  ...  In  having  Sedan  de- 
molished I  directed  that  the  citadel  should  be  preserved, 
but  I  do  not  wish  to  spend  any  money  on  it."  These  two 
places,  Ham  and  Sedan,  were  destined,  the  first  to  be  the 
prison  of  Napoleon's  successor,  the  second  to  witness  his 
downfall. 

The  first  almoner,  an  archbishop  of  the  great  de  Rohan 
family,  having  written  a  most  fulsome  letter  congratulating 
his  Majesty  on  his  approaching  marriage — 


24  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

DECISION. 

"Paris,  i$th  February,  1810. 
"  The  Due  de  Frioul  (Duroc)  will  pay  12,000  francs  to 
the  first  almoner  out  of  the  theatrical  fund. 

"  Napoleon." 

Ferdinand  Comte  de  Rohan  certainly  gave  the  Emperor 
something  for  his  money.  After  saying  that  he  could  now 
repeat,  with  joyful  heart,  the  words  of  Simeon,  Nunc 
dimittis.  ...  he  added — "  Yes,  sire,  my  existence  is  dear 
to  me  only  in  order  that  I  may  sacrifice  it  to  the  great 
Napoleon  ;  he  is  my  tutelary  deity,  and  it  would  cause  me 
the  most  lively  grief  should  your  Majesty  doubt  it ;  but 
no,  my  probity  is  well  known,  and  at  my  age  one  does  not 
change.  As  long  as  I  breathe  the  breath  of  life,  it  shall  be 
devoted  to  you.  Besides,  favours  are  bonds,  motives  of 
indissoluble  attachment,  and  I  await  them  with  respect. 
The  greatest  of  Emperors  will  not  forget  one  of  his  oldest 
servants — the  only  one  of  his  name  who  from  the  first 
moment  adhered  to  him." 

On  the  17th  February  his  Majesty  addressed  some 
remarks  to  the  Senate  on  the  Senatus-Consultum  by 
which  the  Papal  States  were  united  to  France,  and  which 
he  said  was  one  of  the  greatest  political  events  of  the 
period.     He  added — 

"  It  unites  the  Papal  States  to  France. 

"  It  draws  a  deep  line  between  political  interests  and 
those  of  religion. 

"  It  insures  the  temporal,  honourable,  and  independent 
existence  of  the  head  of  the  Church." 

Napoleon  then  gave  a  long  list  of  the  crimes  of  the  Papal 
Court  which  had  welcomed  hostile  fleets  : — "  An  English 
minister,  the  disgrace  of  his  country,  found  an  asylum  at 
Rome ;  there  he  hatched  plots,  hired  brigands,  concocted 
perfidies,  paid  assassins,  and  Rome  protected  the  traitor 
and  his   agents ;   and   Rome   allowed   its  cabinet  to  be 


THE    KING   OF    ROME.  25 

poisoned  with  his  corrupting  breath  ;  and  Rome  became 
the  theatre  of  defamation,  the  workshop  of  libels,  the 
asylum  of  brigands.  .  .  .  The  time  of  justice  arrived.  The 
imperial  eagles  took  possession  once  more  of  their  ancient 
territory  ;  the  domain  of  Charlemagne  returned  to  his 
most  worthy  heir.  Rome  belongs  to  the  Emperor,  who 
will  reign  over  the  Tiber  as  over  the  Seine." 

Among  other  things,  it  was  decided  that  the  heir  to  be 
born  to  the  French  crown  should  be  called  the  King  of 
Rome  ;  that  future  French  emperors,  after  being  crowned 
at  Notre  Dame,  should  be  crowned  at  St.  Peter's  ;  that  the 
Popes  on  their  election  should  swear  never  to  do  anything 
against  the  four  propositions  of  the  Gallican  Church ;  that 
the  Pope  was  to  have  palaces  in  different  parts  of  the 
empire,  and  a  revenue  of  80,000/.,  &c. 

The  English  minister  above  referred  to  was  no  doubt 
Acton,  who  was  in  the  service  of  the  Court  of  Naples. 

To  JULIE  NAPOLEON,  Queen  of  Spain. 

"  Rambouillet,  22nd  February,  1810. 
"Affairs  in  Spain  are  quieting  down.     I  therefore  think 
that  it  will  be  suitable  for  you  to  start  for  Madrid  with 
your  children,  in  order  to  rejoin  the  King. 

"Napoleon." 

King  Joseph's  wife  received  several  orders  to  this  effect, 
but  they  were  always  countermanded,  and  her  Majesty 
never  saw  Madrid. 

To  MADAME  MERE. 

"Paris,  23rd February,  18 10. 
"  I  hasten  to  inform  you  that  the  marriage  contract  be- 
tween myself  and  the  Archduchess  Marie  Louise,  daughter 
of  the  Emperor  of  Austria,  was  ratified  on  the  16th  at 
Vienna.  "  NAPOLEON." 

Similar  letters  were  addressed  to  all  the  members  of  the 
imperial  family. 


26  THE    CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  the  EMPEROR  OF  AUSTRIA. 

"  Rambouillet,  23rd  February,  1810. 
"  Sir,  my  Brother, — My  cousin  the  vice-constable, 
Prince  of  Neuchatel,  will  leave  to-morrow  in  order  to 
demand  from  your  Majesty  the  Archduchess  Marie,  your 
daughter,  in  marriage.  The  high  qualities  which  so 
eminently  distinguish  that  princess,  and  the  precious 
advantage  she  enjoys  of  belonging  to  you,  make  me  greatly 
desire  this  union.  I  am  allowed  to  hope  that  your  Majesty 
will  give  your  consent.  I  therefore  do  not  delay  a  moment, 
and  send  Comte  Lauriston,  my  aide-de-camp,  who  is  known 
to  your  Majesty,  to  bear  you  this  letter.  I  have  charged 
him  to  inform  you  of  the  price  I  attach  to  this  alliance ;  I 
expect  from  it,  for  myself  and  for  my  people,  great 
happiness. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  the  ARCHDUCHESS  MARIE  LOUISE. 

"Rambouillet,  23rd February,  1810. 

"  My  COUSIN, — The  brilliant  qualities  which  distinguish 
your  person  have  inspired  us  with  the  desire  to  serve  and 
to  honour  you.  In  addressing  the  Emperor,  your  father, 
begging  him  to  confide  to  us  the  happiness  of  your  imperial 
highness,  may  we  hope  that  you  will  take  a  favourable  view 
of  the  feelings  which  lead  us  to  take  this  step  ?  Can  we 
flatter  ourself  that  you  will  not  be  solely  determined  by  duty 
and  obedience  to  your  parents  ?  To  whatever  extent  the 
feelings  of  your  imperial  highness  may  be  partial  to  us, . 
we  shall  cultivate  them  with  such  care,  and  we  shall  so 
constantly  endeavour  to  please  you  in  all  things,  that  we 
flatter  ourself  that  we  shall  one  day  succeed  in  making 
ourself  agreeable  ;  this  is  the  object  which  we  desire  to 
attain,  and  for  which  we  beg  your  Highness  to  be  favour- 
able to  us. 

"  Napoleon." 


THEATRICAL    AFFAIRS.  2  7 

There  was  considerable  difference  between  this  imperial 
wooing  and  the  passionate  ardour  with  which  the  young 
general  stormed  and  won  the  heart  of  Josephine  de 
Beauharnais. 

The  following  letter  was  addressed  to  Josephine's  son, 
the  Viceroy  of  Italy : — " .  .  .  Having  determined  to  cele- 
brate my  marriage  with  the  Archduchess  Marie  Louise  of 
Austria  on  the  29th  March,  at  Paris,  I  desire  that  you 
will  convoke  the  grand  officers,  officers,  and  ladies  of  my 
household  of  Italy,  retaining  only  those  who  are  necessary 
for  your  service  and  that  of  your  wife." 

On  the  1st  March  Napoleon  announced  to  the  Senate 
that  having  separated  temporal  from  spiritual  affairs  he 
had  cancelled  the  nomination  of  Cardinal  Fesch  as  suc- 
cessor to  the  Primate  of  the  Confederation.  The  ex-army 
contractor  was  spoken  of  as  a  prelate  distinguished  alike 
for  his  piety  and  his  virtues,  who  had  made  known  the 
repugnance  he  would  feel  at  being  called  away  from  the 
administration  of  his  diocese  ! 

To  M.  DE  CHAMPAGNY. 

"PARIS,  ind March,  1810. 
"  I  send  you  the  draft  of  a  treaty  with   Holland.     You 
must  try  and   finish  with   this   affair.     Let  the   minister 
negotiate  with  you  and  not  send  me  any  more  notes. 

"  Napoleon." 

By  the  treaty  above  referred  to,  Holland  was  to  cede 
South  Brabant  to  France,  was  to  bind  herself  to  furnish  a 
fleet  of  nine  ships  of  the  line  and  six  frigates,  and  was  to 
observe  the  obligations  of  the  continental  blockade. 

To  COMTE  DE  REMUSAT. 

"Paris,  2nd  March,  1810. 
"La  Mort  dAbel  should   be   performed  on   the   20th 
March ;  the   ballet    of   Persie  et  Andromide    on   Easter 


28  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF   NAPOLEON. 

Monday ;  Les  Bayaderes,  a  fortnight  afterwards ;  Sophoch 
and-  Armede  during  the  summer;  Les  ^Danaides  in  the 
autumn ;  Les  Sabines  at  the  end  of  May.  As  a  general 
rule  I  wish  to  have  as  many  new  pieces  as  possible  in  the 
month  of  Easter,  as  there  are  a  great  many  foreigners  in 
Paris  for  the  fetes. 

"  Napoleon." 

to  the  archduchess  marie  louise. 

"  Madam,  my  Sister, — The  success  of  the  demand 
which  I  addressed  to  your  father  to  unite  myself  to  you  in 
marriage  is  a  precious  mark  of  esteem  and  consideration 
which  he  accords  to  me.  I  am  extremely  flattered  by  the 
consent  that  you  yourself  have  given  to  a  union  which 
overwhelms  me  with  real  joy,  and  which  is  calculated  to 
embellish  my  life.  I  await  with  impatience  the  moment 
which  is  to  accelerate  its  conclusion.  I  appreciate  above 
everything  else  in  this  alliance  the  care  which  I  shall  take 
to  render  you  happy.  My  wishes  in  this  respect  are  all 
the  more  sincere  because  my  own  happiness  will  be  essen- 
tially linked  with  yours.  I  have  charged  the  Prince  of 
Neuchatel  to  hand  you  my  portrait.  I  beg  of  you  to 
receive  it  as  a  pledge  of  those  sentiments  which  are 
engraved  upon  my  heart  and  which  will  be  unchangeable. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"  Paris,  \$ih  March,  1810. 
"  I  attach  great  importance  to  the  Congreve  rockets. 
As  soon  as  the  success  of  this  fabrication  has  been  estab- 
lished, and  that  some  can  be  sent  to  Spain  to  serve  against 
Cadiz,  Ciudad-Rodrigo,  and  Badajoz,  forward  them  to  the 
commanders  of  the  7th  and  3rd  Army  Corps  in  Catalonia 
and  Arragon.  Give  notice  that  as  soon  as  the  artillery 
officer  is  sure  to  succeed  that  I  shall  be  present  at  the 
trials  of  these  rockets. 

"  Napoleon." 


EMPEROR    AND    CZAR.  29 

To  M.  DE  CHAMPAGNY, 

"Paris,  \6th  March,  1810. 
"Prepare  a  despatch  for  St.  Petersburg  in  which  you 
must  inform  Caulaincourt  that  I  find  the  complaints  made 
by  Russia  ridiculous.  He  must  reply  in  a  firm  tone  to 
the  Czar  and  to  Romanzof,  and  say  that  the  Czar  is  mis- 
taken if  he  thinks  that  there  was  a  double  negotiation ; 
that  I  know  nothing  of  eventual  treaties  ;  that  I  am  too 
powerful  for  that ;  that  they  four  times  asked  for  ten  days 
to  give  a  reply ;  that  it  was  only  when  it  became  clear 
that  the  Czar  was  not  master  in  his  family,  and  that  he 
did  not  keep  to  his  promises  of  Erfurth  that  negotiations 
were  opened  with  Austria — negotiations  which  were  begun 
and  terminated  in  twenty-four  hours,  because  Austria  had 
taken  all  necessary  precautions,  and  had  sent  the  necessary 
authorisations  to  her  minister;  that  as  for  religion,  it  was 
not  religion  itself  which  caused  alarm,  but  the  obligation 
of  having  a  pope  at  the  Tuileries ;  that  as  far  as  the  con- 
vention is  concerned  [convention  relative  to  Poland],  I  was 
unable  to  ratify  that  act.  .  .   . 

"  Napoleon." 

The  ratification  depended  in  fact  upon  the  matrimonial 
affair ;  had  that  succeeded  Poland  would  have  been 
sacrificed. 

To  the  EMPEROR  OF  AUSTRIA. 

"Paris,  17th  March,  1810. 
"Sir,  my  Brother  and  Father-in-Law,—  The 
Count  of  Schcenbriinn  has  handed  me  the  letter  of  your 
Imperial  Majesty  of  the  6th  March.  I  am  extremely 
flattered  by  the  feelings  which  it  expresses.  Your 
Majesty  will  have  only  to  praise  yourself  for  having 
confided  to  me  your  daughter.  She  will  be  a  source  of 
happiness  to  myself  and  to  France.  If  her  own  happiness 
depends  on  the  sincerity  of  my  affection  no  one  will  be 


30  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF   NAPOLEON. 

more  happy  than  Marie  Louise.  She  will  everywhere 
perceive,  while  passing  through  France,  the  necessity 
which  my  people  experience  to  love  her  and  to  tell  her  so. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  the  QUEEN  LOUISE  DE  BOURBON  OF  SPAIN. 

"  Paris,  17th  March,  1810. 
"  I  have  received  your  Majesty's  letter  of  the   10th.    I 
thank  you  for  all  the  amiable  things  which  it  contains,  and 
the  good  wishes  which  your  Majesty  has  addressed  to  me 
on  the  occasion  of  my  marriage.  .  .  . 

"Napoleon." 

A  similar  letter  was  addressed  to  Charles  IV.,  but  no 
notice  seems  to  have  been  taken  of  Ferdinand. 

To  M.  DE  CHAMPAGNY. 

"  Compiegne,  22nd  March,  1810. 
"  I  have  read  with  interest  the  details  of  the  ceremonies 
which  took  place  at  Vienna.  I  desire  you  to  appoint  a 
committee  to  examine  if  the  ceremonial  was  in  conformity 
with  that  followed  on  previous  occasions,  and  to  make  sure 
that  nothing  was  done  contrary  to  the  rights  of  my  extra- 
ordinary ambassador,  especially  as  concerns  his  relations 

with  the  archdukes.1 

"  Napoleon." 

1  Berthier's  own  account  of  the  affair  runs  thus  : — 
"  On  reaching  the  hall  where  the  Emperor  was  waiting,  the  grand 
master  of  the  ceremonies  stepped  forward  and  announced  me.  His 
Majesty  was  standing  at  the  extreme  end  of  the  hall,  under  a  dais. 
At  my  second  reverence  all  the  ministers  of  the  Emperor  and  the 
ladies  and  gentlemen  of  the  court  stopped  short  in  the  middle  of  the 
hall,  and  I  advanced  alone  over  the  long  space  which  separated  me 
from  his  Majesty.  When  I  reached  the  end  of  the  carpet  which 
covered  the  estrade  I  put  on  my  hat.  On  delivering  -my  credentials 
I  addressed  a  few  words  to  the  Emperor,  taking  care  to  remove  my 
hat,  and  to  put  it  on  every  time  that  I  pronounced  the  name  of  your 
Majesty  or  that   of  the   Emperor  of  Austria.     I   uncovered  at  the 


THE   EMPEROR   AND    THE   ARCHDUKE    CHARLES.       3 1 

To  the  EMPEROR  OF  AUSTRIA. 

"COMPIEGNE,  29th  March,  1810. 

"Sir,  my  Brother  and  Father-in-Law, — Your 
Majesty's  daughter  arrived  here  two  days  ago.  She 
fulfils  all  my  hopes,  and,  for  two  days  I  have  not  ceased 
to  give  her  and  to  receive  proofs  of  the  tender  feeling 
which  unites  us.  We  agree  together  perfectly.  I  shall 
make  her  happy,  and  I  shall  owe  your  Majesty  my  happi- 
ness. Allow  me  to  thank  you  for  the  splendid  present 
which  you  have  made  me,  and  let  your  paternal  heart 
rejoice  in  the  assurances  of  the  happiness  of  your  darling 
child. 

"  We  leave  to-morrow  for  St.  Cloud,  and  on  the  2nd 
April  our  marriage  ceremony  will  be  celebrated  at  the 
Tuileries.  ... 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  31st  March  Napoleon  sent  several  decorations 
of  the  Legion  of  Honour  to  his  father-in-law,  and  wrote 
as  follows  to  his  old  adversary  the  Archduke  Charles : — 

"My  COUSIN, — I  owe  your  Imperial  Highness  many 
thanks  for  having  been  so  good  as  to  represent  me  at  my 
marriage  with  the  Archduchess  Marie  Louise.  She  has 
been  here  for  the  last  two  days,  and  I  have  renewed,  from 
the  bottom  of  my  heart,  the  promises  which  you  made 
in  my  name. 

"  Your  highness  knows  that  the  esteem  which  I  bear  you 
is  of  old  datej  and  founded  upon  your  great  qualities  and 

moment  I  handed  him  my  letters.  The  Emperor  having  begun  to 
speak,  I  covered  myself.  When  he  had  ceased  speaking  I  uncovered 
once  more.  His  Majesty  then  assumed  a  conversational  tone,  and  I 
presented  my  secretary,  my  aide-de-camp,  and  the  gentlemen  of  the 
embassy  to  him.  I  then  retired  with  the  same  ceremony  as  on 
entering,  and  paid  a  visit  to  the  Empress." 

As  no  more  was  heard  of  any  slight  or  irregularity,  it  is  probable 
that  none  occurred. 


32      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

actions.  I  am  very  desirous  of  giving  you  an  authentic 
mark  of  this,  and  I  beg  that  you  will  accept  the  Grand 
Eagle  of  the  Legion  of  Honour.  I  also  beg  you  to  receive 
the  cross  of  the  Legion  which  I  wear,  and  which  is  worn  by 
20,000  soldiers  who  have  been  mutilated,  or  who  have  dis- 
tinguished themselves  on  the  field  of  honour.  The  one  is 
a  homage  paid  to  your  genius  as  a  general,  the  other  to 
your  rare  valour  as  a  soldier. 

"  Napoleon." 


Certainly  the  admiration  which  the  Archduke  felt  for 
the  military  genius  of  the  Emperor  was  now  reciprocated. 


To  KING  LOUIS  OF  HOLLAND. 

"  Paris,  3rd  April,  1810. 

"  I  do  not  consider  it  right  that  you  should  issue  a 
proclamation  to  your  people.  Simply  send  a  message  to 
the  legislative  body,  which  must  not  be  printed,  saying 
that  the  independence  of  Holland  can  exist  only  as  long 
as  it  is  not  incompatible  with  the  interests  of  France; 
that  it  cannot  be  disguised  that  Holland  is  situated  at 
the  outlets  of  France,  and  that  if  care  be  not  taken  to 
avoid  thwarting  the  system  of  France,  Holland  may  lose 
her  independence ;  that  the  Emperor,  believing  himself 
thwarted  as  regards  the  blockade,  has  determined  to  unite 
Holland  to  France. 

"  Napoleon." 


On  the  9th  orders  were  given  for  Suchet  to  be  severely 
reprimanded  for  retiring  from  Valence,  against  which  city 
he  had  marched  with  inadequate  means. 

On  the  16th  General  Clarke  was  instructed  to  write  to 
Marshal  Davoust  to  give  orders  at  Hamburg  to  threaten, 
and  if  possible  to  take,  the  rock  of  Heligoland. 


THE   PERSIAN    AMBASSADOR.  33 

To  M.  DE  CHAMPAGNY. 

"Compiegne,  25A&  April,  1810. 
"...  I  wrote  to  you  to  send  away  the  Persian  ambassador, 
but  without  treating  him  badly.  You  must  tell  him  that 
I  do  not  wish  to  see  him,  and  that  I  am  displeased  to 
learn  that  Persia  has  sold  its  political  interests  to  the 
English  for  a  few  thousand  crowns  ;  that  if  the  Shah  writes 
to  renew  his  relations  with  me  he  must  first  of  all  drive 
out  the  English. 

"  Napoleon." 

to  the  queen  hortense. 

"  Compiegne,  26th  April,  1810. 
"  My  DAUGHTER, — I  have  received  your  letter,  and  I 
am  glad  to  see  that  you  have  arrived  at  Amsterdam  with 
your  children  in  good  health.  I  start  to-morrow  for 
Antwerp  which  I  shall  reach  on  the  1st  May.  I  am 
assured  that  you  are  very  well  pleased  with  the  king  and 
with  Holland,  and  this  affords  me  great  pleasure. 

"  Napoleon." 

During  the  negotiations,  Louis,  with  the  consent  of 
Hortense,  had  asked  for  a  divorce,  and  on  this  relief 
having  been  refused,  he  declined  to  attach  his  signature 
to  the  dissolution  of  the  Emperor's  marriage  with 
Josephine.  He  accepted,  however,  an  invitation  to  go  to 
Compiegne,  whither  Napoleon  had  repaired  to  meet  Marie 
Louise,  but  finding  his  apartment  next  to  that  of  his 
wife,  he  left  the  castle  in  the  middle  of  the  night.  After 
his  return  to  Amsterdam  he  not  only  lived  in  a  separate 
part  of  the  palace  from  his  wife,  but  took  good  care  that 
this  should  be  known. 

To  the  EMPRESS  JOSEPHINE,  at  the  Castle  of  Navarre. 

"Compiegne,  28M  April,  1810. 

"  My  FRIEND, — I  have  received  two  letters  from  you.  I 
have  written  to  Eugene.     I  have  ordered  a  marriage  to 

VOL.  III.  D 


34  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

take    place    between    Tascher   and   the   Princess    de    la 
Leyen. 

"  I  shall  go  to  Antwerp  to-morrow  to  see  my  fleet.  .  .  . 
Eugene  tells  me  that  you  wish  to  go  and  take  the  waters. 
Do  just  as  you  please.  Do  not  listen  to  the  gossip  of 
Paris,  which  is  far  from  knowing  the  real  state  of  affairs. 
My  feeling  towards  you  does  not  change,  and  I  much 
desire  to  know  that  you  are  happy  and  contented. 

"  Napoleon." 

to  the  king  of  saxony. 

"  Antwerp,  t,th  May,  1810. 
"I  have  received  your  Majesty's  letter  of  the  18th.    I 
shall  be  pleased  with  anything  which  you  find  useful  for 
the  Princess  Amelia.     In  the  present  position  of  affairs  I 
cannot  offer  any  political  objection. 

"  Napoleon." 

The  above  letter  refers  to  a  proposed  marriage  between 
the  Princess  Amelia  and  the  Archduke  Charles  of  Austria. 

To  M.  FOUCHF.. 

"Antwerp,  $tk  May,  1810. 
"You  must  deny  the  report  of  the  recall  of  Moreau, 
and  state  that    that    general,  whose    intrigues    with  the 
Bourbons  are    well    known,  is    for    ever  excluded  from 
France.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  7th  Napoleon  sent  orders  to  his  minister  of 
public  worship  that  no  priest  was  in  future  to  be  ordained 
in  the  departments  of  Rome  and  Trasimene  without  his 
permission ;  that  all  the  foreign  priests  were  at  once  to 
leave  Rome  ;  that  all  the  bishops  were  to  take  the  oath  of 
allegiance,  and  that  those  who  refused  were  to  have  their 
property  sequestrated  and  to  be  sent  to  France  ;  that  the 


PRINCE    OF    HATZFELD.  35 

canons  were  to  be  treated  like  the  bishops,  &c.  And  the 
same  day,  being  determined  "to  force  the  priests  to  take 
the  oath,  and  to  put  an  end  to  the  ridiculous  scenes  in 
Rome,"  he  wrote  to  his  war  minister  to  strengthen  the 
force  at  the  disposal  of  General  Miollis. 

To  M.  DE  CHAMPAGNY. 

"  Berg-OP-Zoom,  gtA  May,  18 10. 
"  Present  a  very  lucid  note  to  the  Prussian  ambassador 
on  the  affair  of  the  Prince  of  Hatzfeld,  in  which  you  must 
dwell  upon  the  scandal  of  this  trial,  say  how  it  displeases 
me,  and  that  I  recognise  in  it  the  hand  of  that  cabal  which 
has  drawn  down  so  many  misfortunes  on  the  country. 
You  must  refer  to  the  treaty  of  Tilsit,  to  the  manner  in 
which  M.  de  Hatzfeld  has  conducted  himself,  and  declare 
that  I  take  him  under  my  special  care,  and  that  I  shall 
not  suffer  any  harm  to  be  done  to  him.  .  .  .  You  must 
proclaim  everywhere  that  the  enemies  of  M.  de  Hatzfeld 
are  my  enemies  ;  that  those  who  attack  him  attack  me. 
.-  .  .  You  must  speak  in  the  same  sense  to  Marshal 
Kalkreuth.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

A  note  appended  to  this  letter  states  that — The  Prince 
of  Hatzfeld,  who  was  pardoned  by  Napoleon  in  1806,  was 
living  in  Berlin,  and  remained  on  friendly  terms  with  the 
French  agents  engaged  in  collecting  the  war  contributions 
in  the  hope  of  obtaining  some  mitigation  in  favour  of  his 
countrymen.  These  relations,  no  matter  how  profitable 
to  Prussia,  aroused  the  suspicions  of  the  king,  who  ordered 
the  prince  to  be  tried.  The  intervention  of  the  Emperor 
put  a  stop  to  the  affair. 

On  the  9th  May  Napoleon  wrote  another  letter  to  the 
minister  of  public  worship  in  which  he  said  that  he  had 
ordered  General  Miollis  to  be  reinforced  by  three  columns  ; 
that  he  supposed  by  this  time  all  the  bishops,  vicars, 
curates,  and  canons  had  either  taken  the  oath,  or  were  on 

D  2 


36      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

the  road  to  France,  and  that  their  property  had  been 
seized.  As  for  the  bishops,  he  ordered  the  seizure  not  only 
of  their  ecclesiastical,  but  of  their  patrimonial  property, 
and  he  expressed  his  determination  to  reduce  the  number 
of  sees  in  Rome  and  Trasimene  where  there  were  thirty 
sees  for  700,000  inhabitants,  whereas  in  some  of  the  French 
sees  there  were  over  a  million  inhabitants.  He  declared 
that  he  would  send  100,000  men  to  Rome  if  necessary, 
just  to  show  that  he  could  unmake,  if  he  could  not  make 
bishops. 

To  KING  LOUIS  OF  HOLLAND. 

"  Berg-op-Zoom,  gth  May,  1810. 
"  I  reckon  that  you  will  have  ten  vessels  in  the  roads  by 
the  month  of  June,  and  yet  I  have  heard  of  no  movement 
in  Holland.     Think  how  important  this  is  for  the  common 
cause,  and  keep  your  engagements. 

"  Napoleon." 

The  position  in  which  the  two  brothers  stood  requires 
some  explanation. 

Napoleon  had  hardly  seated  Louis  on  the  throne  of 
Holland  when  he  began  to  quarrel  with  him.  Louis 
wanted  to  be  something  more  than  a  vassal,  while 
Napoleon  wanted  him  to  sacrifice  all  the  interest  of  the 
Dutch  to  France.  Louis  was  to  close  his  ports  to  England, 
and  see  his  commerce  ruined ;  to  lose  his  colonies,  to 
maintain  French  troops,  to  build  ships  for  the  French 
Emperor,  and  to  fight  against  all  the  Emperor's  foes.  In 
1808  Napoleon  offered  Louis  the  throne  of  Spain,  which 
Louis  refused  in  consequence  of  the  stratagems  by  which  the 
drivelling  Charles  IV.  had  been  deprived  of  his  crown.  A 
few  months  later  Napoleon  asked  Louis  to  cede  him 
Brabant  and  Zeeland  in  return  for  the  Hanse  towns,  just  as 
he  afterwards  asked  Joseph  to  cede  him  the  provinces  of  the 
Ebro  in  exchange  for  Portugal,  and  Jerome  a  portion  of  his 
kingdom  in  exchange  for    Hanover.      Louis  indignantly 


NAPOLEON    AND     LOUIS.  37 

refused  to  acquiesce  in  the  dismemberment  of  Holland. 
Angry  remonstrances  were  frequently  addressed  to  him  on 
the  subject  of  the  non-observance  of  the  continental 
blockade,  which  Louis  never  could  or  never  would  enforce 
strictly. 

After  the  peace  of  Vienna  Napoleon  determined  to 
dethrone  Louis,  and  he  accomplished  his  purpose  in  his 
usual  crafty  manner.  Louis  was  invited  to  Paris.  Being 
aware  of  what  was  in  store  for  him  he  wished  to  refuse, 
but  his  scruples  were  overcome  by  his  ministers.  He  had 
hardly  reached  the  French  capital  when  Napoleon  pub- 
lished a  declaration  to  the  effect  that  Holland  was  one  of 
the  chief  arteries  of  France,  and  that  it  was  necessary  for 
the  two  countries  to  be  united.  Upon  this  Louis  wished 
to  return  to  Holland,  but  he  found  himself  a  prisoner. 
The  house  of  his  mother,  where  he  was  staying,  was 
surrounded  by  gendarmes.  He  managed  to  send  an 
equerry  to  Amsterdam  with  an  order  not  to  allow  the 
French  troops- to  occupy  the  forts,  nor  to  enter  the  capital.1 
This  order  was  executed,  but  at  the  same  time  the  king 
was  advised  to  submit  to  the  conditions  imposed  by 
Napoleon,  resistance  being  considered  useless.  So  affected 
was  Louis  by  the  violent  threats  of  his  brother  that  he 
was  attacked  by  a  nervous  fever  from  which,  he  said,  he 
unfortunately  recovered.  Napoleon,  he  declared,  treated 
him  as  Popilius  treated  Antiochus,  and  enforced  submission 
before  granting  him  his  freedom.  The  conditions  upon  which 
Louis  was  finally  released  were  that  he  should  prohibit 

1  When  the  Emperor  heard  of  this  order,  learned  that  his  troops  had 
been  refused  admittance  to  Bergen-op-Zoom  and  Breda,  and  that  the 
war  minister,  Krayenhof,  was  fortifying  Amsterdam,  he  flew  into  a 
violent  passion.  In  a  letter,  dated  3rd  March,  18 10,  and  addressed  to 
Fouche"  (letter  not  mentioned  in  The  Correspondence,  but  quoted  by 
M.  Thiers),  he  said—"  Has  the  King  of  Holland  gone  mad  ?  You  must 
ask  him  if  it  is  by  his  orders  that  his  ministers  have  acted,  or  on  their 
own  authority.  I  shall  have  them  all  arrested,  and  their  heads  cut 
off."  Louis  would  not  have  been  at  all  surprised  had  his  execution 
been  ordered. 


38  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

all  commerce  with  England,  that  he  should  keep  up  a  fleet; 
of  fourteen  ships  of  the  line  and  seven  frigates,  main- 
tain an  army  of  25,000  men,  &c.  On  the  16th  March 
Louis  agreed  to  the  above  conditions,  ceded  to  the 
Emperor  a  slice  of  Dutch  territory,  and  consented  to  seize 
a  number  of  American  ships  lying  in  Dutch  harbours. 
After  this  he  was  released,  and  was  allowed  to  return  to 
Amsterdam. 

On  the  16th  May  Napoleon  addressed  a  letter  to  M.  de 
Champagny,  telling  him  to  inform  his  ambassador  at  Berlin 
•that  he  was  at  liberty  to  allow  M.  de  Hardenberg  to  re- 
enter the  cabinet.  At  the  same  time  the  ambassador  was 
to  lecture  him  and  Russia  in  these  terms  : — "  Engagements 
have  been  entered  into  with  the  Emperor,  who  desires  them 
to  be  kept.  If,  during  the  war  with  Austria,  the  cabinet  of 
Berlin  had  pursued  a  firm  and  loyal  policy,  it  might  have 
freed  itself  from  an  enormous  burden.  If,  when  Austria 
declared  war,  the  Prussian  ambassador  at  Vienna  had  left 
that  capital  saying  that  his  master  had  secret  engagements 
with  the  Emperor;  if  Prussia  had  placed  15,000  men  in 
the  field  to  join  the  Saxons  and  the  Bavarians,"  &c,  &c. 
And  after  recapitulating  a  long  list  of  crimes  of  commission 
and  omission,  the  ambassador  was  to  insist  upon  the  war 
indemnity  being  paid  to  the  uttermost  farthing. 

To  THE  EMPEROR  OF  RUSSIA. 

"  Imperial  Palace  of  Lacken,  16/A  May,  1810. 

"  Caulaincourt  has  informed  me  of  all  the  amiable  things 
which  your  Majesty  has  said  on  the  subject  of  my  marriage. 
I  beg  you  to  accept  my  thanks.  My  feelings  towards  you 
are  as  unchangeable  as  the  political  principles  which  govern 
the  relations  of  my  empire.  Never  will  your  Majesty  have 
to  complain  of  France.  The  declarations  which  I  made 
last  December  form  the  whole  secret  of  my  policy.  I  shall 
reiterate  them  to  you  at  every  opportunity.    .    . 

"  Napoleon." 


NAVAL    AFFAIRS.  39 

In  reality  the  czar  was  deeply  offended.  He  was 
opposed  to  an  alliance,  but  was  incensed  at  the  way  in 
which  the  negotiation  for  the  hand  of  his  sister  had  been 
both  carried  on  and  broken  off. 

A  letter  addressed  to  the  minister  of  finance  on  the 
17th  shows  that  Napoleon  made  i50,ooo,ooof.  by  the  sale 
of  mortmain  property  in  his  Roman  departments. 

On  the  19th  M.  de  Champagny  was  directed  to  tell 
Caulaincourt  to  deny  in  conversation  the  report  of  a  union 
between  a  French  princess  and  the  Prince  Royal  of  Sweden. 
We  shall  see  how  a  French  woman  afterwards  became 
Queen  of  Sweden. 

On  the  19th  May  Murat  was  complimented  on  the 
courage  shown  by  his  navy.  He  was  then  told  to  remem- 
ber that  he  had  been  on  the  throne  for  two  years,  and  that 
for  the  last  year  he  should  have  had  a  ship  of  the  line  and 
a  frigate.  If  that  had  been  the  case  he  would  not  see 
Naples  blockaded  by  an  English  ship  rasf.  "  If,"  added 
the  Emperor,  "  you  understand  the  interests  of  your  people 
you  will  have  an  8ogun  ship  by  the  end  of  the  year.  The 
Neapolitans  would  gladly  pay  10  per  cent,  extra  in  the 
way  of  taxes.  .  .  .  The  English  have  a  squadron  at 
Venice,  where  I  shall  soon  have  five  vessels ;  they  have 
squadrons  in  the  Baltic,  on  the  Dutch  coast,  off  Rochefort, 
Toulon,  Lorient,  Cherbourg,  and  Flushing,  where  at 
present  I  have  fifteen  ships  of  war.  Should  the  war  con- 
tinue until  18 12  I  shall  have  in  my  ports  and  in  those  of 
my  allies  100  ships.  .  .  .  Adopt  measures  so  as  to  have 
an  80-gun  ship  this  year,  and  five  by  the  end  of  18 12,  and 
then  the  English  will  not  come  and  blockade  you." 

The  next  day  his  Majesty  wrote  to  his  minister  of 
marine,  saying — 

;  "  I  intend  going  to  Havre.  Let  me  know  if  the  frigate 
La  Gloire  can  be  launched  while  I  am  there.  Let  me  also 
know  if  the  two  frigates  L'Oder  and  La  Perle,  which  ought 
to  be  finished  at  Dunkirk,  can  be  launched  in  my  presence. 


40      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Let  me  know  also  when  L'Iphige'nie  will  be  launched  at 
Cherbourg ;  when  La  Clorinde  and  La  Renommee  will  be 
in  the  roads  at  Brest ;  when  the  Nestor  will  be  floated 
there  ;  Le  Pregel  at  St.  Malo  ;  L'Jena  at  Rochefort ;  Le 
Wagram  and  Le  Spectre  at  Toulon. 

"  Napoleon." 

In  consequence  of  Louis  not  wishing,  or  not  being  able, 
to  adhere  to  his  engagements,  Napoleon  wrote  him  on  the 
20th  May  (letter  not  given  in  The  Correspondence),  saying 
■ — "  The  die  is  cast :  you  are  incorrigible.  Advice  and 
affection  having  failed,  I  must  resort  to  threats  and  force. 
What  are  these  prayers  and  mysterious  fasts  which  you 
have  ordered  ?  Louis,  you  do  not  wish  to  reign  any 
longer  ;  your  actions  reveal  your  sentiments  better  than 
your  letters.  Listen  to  a  man  who  knows  more  of  the 
world  than  you  do.  Return  to  the  right  road.  Act  like  a 
Frenchman,  or  your  own  people  will  drive  you  from  the 
country  ;  you  will  leave  Holland  an  object  of  pity,  and  you 
will  be  the  laughing-stock  of  the  Dutch.  It  is  with  reason 
and  with  political  acumen  that  states  are  governed,  and  not 
with  a  vitiated  and  lymphatic  temperament."  Poor  Louis, 
previously  taunted  with  sacrificing  the  interests  of  his 
Catholic  subjects,  was  now  accused  of  bigotry.  As  for  the 
dilapidated  state  of  his  health,  the  fruit  of  youthful  in- 
discretions in  Italy,  Napoleon  was  never  tired  of  raking  up 
that  misfortune  to  which  he  attributed  all  the  backslidings 
of  his  brother. 

To  MARSHAL  BERTHIER. 

"Dieppe,  rjth  May,  1810. 
"  Write  to  the  King  of  Spain,  saying  that  I  am  sorry  to 
see  this  extensive  arming  of  Spaniards,  which  is  only  fit  to 
prolong  resistance  and  to  cause  the  blood  of  French  soldiers 
to  flow ;  that  when  one  has  been  so  often  deceived  it  is 
difficult  to  understand  so  much  obstinacy.  Write  to  Mas- 
sena  that  the  English  army  is  23,000  strong,  and  that  of 


SPANISH    AFFAIRS.  4 1 

the  Portuguese  22,000 ;  that  he  must  therefore  have  more 
troops  than  are  necessary  to  beat  the  English,  should  they 
try  and  hinder  the  siege  of  Ciudad-Rodrigo.  .  .  .  Write 
to  the  King  of  Spain  that  as  the  English  alone  are  to 
be  feared,  he  should  place  Regnier  with  the  second  corps 
under  the  orders  of  Massena  to  manoeuvre  on  the  right 
bank  of  the  Tagus. 

"  Napolkon." 

Massena  had  over  50,000  men  under  his  orders  without 
Regnier's  corps.  Napoleon  had  himself  frequently  ordered 
Joseph  to  raise  Spanish  troops. 

That  all  the  Spanish  troops  in  the  French  service  had 
not  the  good  luck  to  escape  like  Romana's  corps  is  shown 
by  the  following  letter. 

To  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"Havre,  29A&  May,  1810. 

"  Inform  the  King  of  Spain  that  I  cannot  send  him  the 
regiment  Joseph-Napolhn,  which  is  animated  with  so  bad  a 
spirit  that  the  officers  have  demanded  its  withdrawal  from 
the '  frontiers  of  Spain  ;  that  he  can  judge  from  this  fact 
how  impolitic  and  inconsiderate  his  Spanish  levies  are. 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  same  day  Berthier  was  directed  to  write  again  to 
Massena,  saying  that  Wellington  had  only  24,000  men  and 
the  Portuguese  25,000.  "  But,"  added  Napoleon,  "  I  do  not 
wish  to  enter  Lisbon  at  present,  because  I  could  not  feed 
the  city,  whose  immense  population  draws  its  provisions  by 
sea.  Let  Massena  employ  the  summer  in  taking  Ciudad- 
Rodrigo  and  Almeida.    ..." 

Berthier  was  also  to  send  to  the  Moniteur  an  account  of 
the  fall  of  Leridon,  and  to  levy  a  contribution  of  several 
millions  upon  that  place. 


42  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  THE  EMPRESS. 
{Letter  not  dated.) 

"  My  Friend, — I  have  received  your  letter.  Eugene 
will  give  you  news  of  my  voyage  and  of  the  empress.  I 
approve  of  your  taking  waters,  and  I  hope  that  they  will 
do  you  good„ 

"I  greatly  wish  to  see  you.  If  you  are  at  the  Malmaison 
at  the  end  of  the  month  I  will  pay  you  a  visit. 

"  My  health  is  good.  Let  me  >know  the  name  under 
which  you  will  travel.     Do  not  doubt  the  sincerity,  &c. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  m.  fouche. 

"  St.  Cloud,  3rd  June,  1810. 

"  I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  2nd  June.  I  am 
aware  of  all  the  services  which  you  have  rendered  me,  and 
I  believe  in  your  attachment  and  your  zeal ;  however  it  is 
impossible  for  me  to  allow  you  to  keep  your  portfolio.  The 
post  of  minister  of  police  requires  an  absolute  and  entire 
confidence,  and  that  confidence  can  no  longer  exist, 
because  you  have  compromised  my  tranquillity  and  that  of 
the  state,  and  this  is  not  to  be  excused  by  the  legitimacy 
of  the  motives. 

"  A  negotiation  was  opened  with  England ;  conferences 
took  place  with  Lord  Wellesley,  and  that  minister  knew 
that  he  was  spoken  to  on  your  behalf;  he  must  have 
thought  that  it  was  on  mine  also  ;  hence  a  total  change  in 
all  my  political  relations,  and,  if  I  were  to  permit  it,  a  stain 
upon  my  character,  which  I  cannot,  and  will  not,  tolerate. 

"  Although  I  do  not  distrust  your  attachment  and  your 
fidelity,  I  am,  however,  obliged  to  keep  up  a  constant 
supervision,  which  fatigues  me.    ... 

"  Napoleon." 

The  crime  of  Fouche,  in  a  few  words,  was  this.  Napoleon 
had  put  forward  his  brother  Louis  to  appeal  to  England 


THE    DISMISSAL    OF   EOUCHE.  43 

to  make  peace,  as  unless  peace  were  concluded  the  French 
Emperor  would  inevitably  annex  Holland,  which  would  be 
a  terrible  blow  to  Great  Britain.  Negotiations  were  opened 
with  the  Marquis  of  Wellesley  through  the  medium  of  the 
Dutch  banker  Labouchere,  who  was  to  point  out  among 
other  things  that  in  refusing  to  make  peace  England  had 
already  lost  Spain,  Portugal,  Naples,  and  Trieste,  and 
would  soon  lose  Holland,  the  Hanse  towns,  and  Sicily. 
The  terms  upon  which  peace  was  indirectly  offered  were  of 
course  quite  unacceptable.  Fouche"  took  it  into  his  head 
to  negotiate  on  his  own  account,  and  sent  an  Irish  officer 
called  Fagan  to  London  with  far  more  acceptable  terms 
than  those  offered  by  M.  Labouchere,  but  the  British 
Government  did  not  consider  that  Fagan  had  sufficient 
authority  to  negotiate.  When  Napoleon  learned  that 
Fouchd  had  been  meddling  in  this  way  he  was  highly 
incensed,  although  naturally  nothing  could  have  eventually 
come  of  the  Fagan  negotiation  without  the  consent  of  the 
Emperor.  Perhaps  there  were  other  reasons  mixed  up 
with  the  disgrace  of  the  minister  of  police.  Fouche  had 
made  friends  with  Talleyrand,  he  was  on  good  terms  with 
Napoleon's  brother,  and  he  was  suspected  of  having 
warned  Lucien  of  the  wrath  that  was  coming,  and  of 
having  thus  enabled  him  to  make  his  escape  from  Rome, 
and  to  throw  himself  into  the  arms  of  the  English. 
Napoleon  at  first  thought  of  having  Fouche'  executed  for 
the  crime  of  lese  majeste. 

A  second  letter,  written  on  the  same  day,  informed  the 
-fallen  minister  that  the  Emperor  conferred  upon  him  the 
governorship  of  Rome  ;  and  on  the  5th  June  the  Emperor 
wrote  to  Maret,  Due  de  Bassano,  to  go  and  see  the  Due 
d'Otrante,  and  to  ask  him  to  give  up  all  the  documents, 
whether  written  in  visible  or  in  invisible  ink.  Maret,  too, 
was  to  persuade  Fouch6  to  leave  the  police  office  at  once, 
and  afterwards  to  turn  the  conversation  on  Rome,  and  to 
*ry  and  persuade  him  to  start  for  the  Holy  City  before  the 
15th,  his  presence  being  .much  required  there. 


44  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  M.  DE  CHAMPAGNY. 

"St.  Cloud,  14^  June,  1810. 

"  I  have  read  your  report  on  the  subject  of  the  dispute 
between  my  consul  and  the  Dey  of  Algiers.  My  agent 
seems  to  me  very  culpable ;  he  should  not  compromise  my 
interests  for  such  trifles.  Make  known  to  him  my  dis- 
pleasure. Let  M.  Thainville  settle  this-  affair.  I  will  not 
quarrel  with  the  dey  about  such  stupidities.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"  St.  Cloud,,  \"]th  June?  1810. 

"  Make  me  a  report  on  the  conscripts  who  have  not 
joined.  We  might  send  them  to  dangerous-  posts.  Would 
it  not  be  well  to  despatch  them  to  Corsica,  and  to  form  a 
corps  of  6,000  or  7,000  men  for  the  conquest  of  Sardinia  ? 
It  would  be  sufficient  to  appoint  a  good  general  and  good 
colonels  to  command  them. 

"Napoleon." 

To  M.  FOUCHE. 

"  St.  Cloud,  \%th  June,  1810. 

"  I  wrote  to  you  yesterday  for  the  letter  which  M.  Fagan 
brought  back  from  Lord  Wellesley.  I  write  to  you  again 
to-day  to  let  you  know  that  you  must  hand  to  me,  with 
that  letter,  all  the  documents,  without  exception,  con- 
cerning Ouvrard,  Labouchere,  and  Fagan.  .  .  .  I  have 
the  right  of  insisting,  and  it  is  important  for  me  and  for 
you  that  I  should  have  all  the  papers  in  this  affair.   .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

Fouchd,  Due  d'Otrante,  was  at  the  Chateau  de  Ferrieres 
when  this  angry  note  reached  him. 


DUTCH    AFFAIRS.  45 

To  THE  EMPEROR  OF  RUSSIA. 

"  St.  Cloud,  20th  June,  1810. 

*'  Prince  Kourakine  has  handed  me  the  letter  which  your 
Majesty  has  been  good  enough  to  write  in  order  to  con- 
gratulate me  on  my  marriage.  This  minister  of  state  has 
equally  expressed  to  me,  on  the  part  of  your  Majesty, 
your  good  wishes  for  my  happiness  and  for  that  of  the 
Empress,  my  well-beloved  spouse  and  companion.  .  .  . 

"  I  sincerely  share  the  desire  of  your  Majesty  to  force 
England  to  conclude  peace.  The  intimate  union  of  the 
continent,  and  especially  the  assurance  which  you  have 
given  me  to  co-operate  in  every  way  to  attain  so  desirable 
an  end,  make  me  hope  that  our  united  efforts  will  be 
crowned  with  success.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

For  a  moment  the  Emperor  conceived  hopes  of  being 
able  to  grow  his  own  cotton.  On  the  24th  June  he 
addressed  a  note  to  Champagny,  saying : — "  Bring  the 
letter  of  M.  Otto  to  the  cabinet  council  to-morrow,  and 
also  specimens  of  the  cotton  which  were  inclosed."  It 
seems  that  a  Dr.  Angelo  of  Vienna  had  proposed  to 
manufacture  cotton  goods  out  of  thistles. 

On  the  same  day  his  Majesty  wrote  another  letter  to 
his  minister  for  foreign  affairs,  saying  that  he  had  ordered 
Oudinot  to  march  upon  Amsterdam.  Instructions  were  to 
be  sent  to  the  French  ambassador,  Serurier,  to  insinuate 
that  there  remained  only  one  way  of  getting  out  of  the 
difficulty.  "Let  my  troops,"  said  Napoleon,  "be  re- 
ceived in  triumph  at  Amsterdam  ;  let  the  city  give  my 
soldiers  a  grand  banquet,  and  let  the  king  and  the  court 
display  good  feeling  towards  France ;  this  will  be  the 
only  way  to  efface  the  insult  offered  to  my  eagles  at 
Haarlem.  .  .  ." 

On  the  23rd  June,  Napoleon,  to  his  great  indignation, 
learned   that  his  charge"  d'affaires  had  been   slighted  by 


46      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON 

King  Louis  at  a  diplomatic  audience,  and  that  a  coachman 
in  the  livery  of  the  French  embassy  had  been  beaten  in  a 
squabble.  According  to  treaty  the  number  of  French  troops 
in  Holland  was  limited  to  6,000  men,  who  were  to  be 
engaged  in  protecting  the  littoral.  Napoleon  now  sent 
20,000  men  into  the  country  because  a  Dutch  officer  had 
refused  to  allow  a  French  patrol  to  pass  at  Haarlem. 
Finding  the  French  troops  closing  round  him,  Louis  wished 
to  summon  the  nation  to  arms,  to  break  the  dykes,  and  to 
defend  Amsterdam  as  Saragossa  had  been  defended.  The 
Dutch,  however,  were  not  inclined  to  put  the  country 
under  water,  and  to  sacrifice  what  little  wealth  and  freedom 
remained  to  them,  because  one  Bonaparte  bullied  another. 
The  consequence  was  that  Louis  determined  to  abdicate  in 
favour  of  his  son,  Napoleon  Louis,  and  to  seek  safety  in 
flight,  a  step  which  he  knew  would  incense  the  Emperor 
by  depriving  him  of  one  excuse  for  seizing  on  Holland, 
The  Emperor  had  always  declared  that  Louis  was  the 
source  of  all  evil.  Louis  therefore  made  up  his  mind  to 
leave  the  country,  saying,  "  We  shall  see  what  he  will  do 
now."  About  the  same  time  Lucien  fled  from  Rome, 
preferring  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  English  to  falling 
into  the  clutches  of  his  terrible  brother ;  while  Joseph 
appealed  with  increasing  persistence  to  be  released  from 
his  unenviable  position  at  Madrid. 

To  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"  St.  Cloud,  i\th  June,  1810. 
"  You  will  give  the  following  instructions  to  the  Due 
de  Reggio  (Oudinot) : — As  soon  as  he  has  assembled  a 
sufficient  number  of  troops  at  Utrecht  to  march  upon 
Amsterdam,  he  must  write  to  my  chargi  d'affaires  that 
the  French  troops  have  been  insulted  ;  that  the  gates  of 
Haarlem  Were  closed  to  them  ;  that  he  is  to  demand 
reparation  for  this  insult ;  that  the  French  eagles  can  go 
into  all  friendly  and  allied  countries ;  that  for  the  last 
fifteen  years  French  troops  have  been  in  every  portion  Q'f 


ANNEXATION    OF    HOLLAND.  47 

Holland,  and  that  therefore  a  gratuitous  insult  has  been 
paid  to  the  French  troops ;  that  the  Emperor  is  much 
offended,  and  has  ordered  additional  forces  into  Holland  ; 
that  his  instructions  did  not  order  him  to  enter  Amster- 
dam, but  that  the  challenge  offered  to  the  French  troops, 
and  the  intrigues  of  England  tending  to  arm  the  Dutch 
against  the  French,  provoked  the  order  which  he  received 
to  present  himself  before  Amsterdam ;  that  it  is  for  the 
Dutch  to  say  if  they  desire  to  treat  us  as  friends  or  as 
enemies,  and  if  they  wish  to  accept  the  perfidious  counsels 
offered  to  the  king  in  order  to  ruin  Holland.  .  .  . 

"'  Napoleon." 

To  M.  GAUDIN. 

"  St.  Cloud,  1st  July,  1810. 
"  You  will  receive  from  the  office  of  the  secretary  of 
state  a  decree  annulling  that  which  appointed  Fouche  to 
the  government  of  Rome.  Inform  General  Miollis  that  it 
is  my  intention  to  leave  him  at  the  post  which  he  fulfils 
so  well,  and  that  I  reckon  upon  his  zeal. 

"  Napoleon." 

When  this  decision  was  taken,  Fouche  thought  it  only 
prudent  to  leave  the  country,  and  go  into  voluntary  exile, 
thinking  his  Majesty  quite  capable  of  carrying  out  his  first 
intention. 

On  the  8th  July  the  Emperor  wrote  to  General  Clarke 
and  to  Admiral  D^cres,  saying  that  he  had  made  up  his 
mind  to  annex  Holland,  and  instructing  those  ministers  to 
adopt  certain  military  and  naval  measures.  He  then  wrote 
to  the  ex-consul,  now  Prince  Lebrun,  saying : — 

"  My  COUSIN, — I  require  your  services  in  Holland. 
Have  your  travelling  carriages  prepared,  and  come  to 
Rambouillet  as  speedily  as  possible  for  instructions.  It 
is  indispensable  that  you  should  leave  Paris  to-morrow 
evening  for  Amsterdam." 


48  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

On  the  day  following  Napoleon  wrote  to  the  President 
of  the  Government  Committee  which  had  been  formed  at 
Amsterdam  : — 

"  I  have  received  the  letter  written  to  me  by  the  council. 
I  much  regret  what  has  taken  place.  I  cannot  consent  to 
the  Grand  Duke  of  Berg,  my  nephew  and  ward,  becoming 
King  of  Holland.  .  .  .  Inform  the  inhabitants  of  Holland 
by  means  of  a  proclamation  that  the  circumstances  of 
Europe,  that  their  geographical  situation,  and  the  preten- 
sions of  our  common  enemies  make  it  my  duty  to  put  an 
end  to  these  provisional  governments  which  for  the  last 
sixteen  years  have  tormented  that  portion  of  the  empire  (!), 
The  inhabitants  of  Holland  shall  be  the  objects  of  my 
care.  I  shall  rejoice  in  their  prosperity  as  in  that  of  my 
good  city  of  Paris.  The  vast  field  which  I  open  to  their 
industry,  from  Amsterdam  to  Rome,  will  permit  them  to 
await  the  time  marked  by  destiny  for  opening  up  to  the 
commerce  of  my  subjects  the  countries  illustrated  by  your 
ancestors,  and  which  have  raised  so  high  the  honour  of 
Dutch  and  Batavian  names." 

And  on  the  10th  his  Majesty  announced  to  Prince 
Lebrun,  lieutenant-general  of  the  Emperor  in  Holland, 
that  he  had  just  despatched  Comte  Lauriston  to  Amster- 
dam to  bring  back  the  Grand  Duke  of  Berg  to  Paris.  He 
also  impressed  it  upon  the  mind  of  Lebrun  that  the  first 
thing  he  would  require  in  Holland  would  be  a  good 
minister  of  police. 

On  the  13th  the  Emperor  wrote  thus  to  the  Queen 
Hortense : — 

"  I  see  that  you  have  received  letters  from  Holland. 
There  is  no  news  of  the  king ;  no  one  knows  whither  he 
has  retired,  and  it  is  impossible  to  account  for  this  piece 
of  folly.  I  send  you  some  letters,  which  I  think  you 
should  write  to  the  President  of  the  Government 
Council.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 


IMPERIAL    NAVY.  49 

These  letters  were  to  say  that  her  Majesty  had  placed 
her  affairs  and  those  of  her  son  in  the  hands  of  the 
Emperor,  who  was  the  head  of  the  family.  Of  course  the 
docile  Hortense  obeyed  :  it  is  true  that  she  had  had  more 
than  enough  of  her  husband  and  of  Holland,  and  was 
enchanted  to  regain  her  freedom. 

To  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"  Rambouillet,  \$th  July,  1810. 

"  I  am  informed  that  English  prisoners  are  being  en- 
rolled in  the  Irish  legion.  I  wish  all  these  prisoners  to  be 
sent  back.  I  will  not  have  any  English  soldiers  ;  I  prefer 
that  they  should  remain  prisoners  and  answer  for  my 
prisoners  in  England  ;  and  then  most  of  them  desert. 

"  I  beg  you  will  take  measures  to  put  a  stop  to  the 
recruiting  of  Spaniards  in  the  Neapolitan  and  Portuguese 
regiments,  and  that  of  Germans  and  Irish  in  the  Polish 
regiments.  It  is  useless  to  augment  the  number  of  my 
soldiers,  especially  of  men  who  all  desert  in  Spain. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  admiral  decres. 

"Rambouillet,  i6(A  July,  18 10. 

"  I  have  read  with  interest  the  bases  of  the  budget  of 

1810,  for  the  large  ports. 

"  It  appears  to  me  that  Le  Pacificateur,  L'Auguste, 
L'lilustre  and  Le  Conqnerant  might  be  launched   in  May, 

181 1,  and  Le  Trajan,  Le  Gaulois  and  La  Superbe  in  July, 
so  as  to  have  nineteen  vessels  at  Antwerp  by  October.  .  .  . 
It  results  from  your  report  that  I  shall  have  twenty-four 
ships  before  the  end  of  the  year,  and  sixty-six  by  the  1st 
January,  18 12.  .  .  .  I  suppose  that  I  shall  have  twenty  in 
Holland,  that  will  make  eighty-six,  which,  with  the  two  of 
Italy  and  the  one  of  Naples,  will  make  eighty-nine.  The 
budget  of  181 1  must  be  so  arranged  as  to  have  twenty 

VOL.    III.  E 


50      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

more  in  France,  and  four  or  five  in  Naples  and  Italy.     In 
this  way  I  shall  have  from  no  to  115  ships  at  the  end  of 

1812.  .  .   . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  M.  DE  CHAMPAGNY. 

"St.  Cloud,  igtk  July,  1810. 

"  Insert  some  articles  in  the  papers  on  the  successes  ol 
the  Russians  in  Turkey,  and  on  the  peace  which  is  about 
to  be  concluded  on  condition  of  the  cession  of  Moldavia  and 
Wallachia,  and  the  confiscation  of  vessels  said  to  have  come 
from  Teneriffe,  but  which  in  reality  come  from  England. 

"Make  known  my  intentions  as  regards  Turkey  to 
Caulaincourt.  Write  to  him  that  I  shall  be  pleased  to 
see  Turkey  conclude  peace  by  ceding  the  left  bank  of  the 
Danube ;  but  that  Russia  would  violate  her  engagements 
with  me  should  she  keep  anything  on  the  right  bank,  and 
if  she  interfered  with  the  Servians.  You  will  write  this 
in  cipher,  letting  Caulaincourt  know  that  as  I  would  see 
with  pleasure  Russia  settle  matters  with  Turkey,  so  would 
it  displease  me  were  she  to  keep  anything  on  the  right 
bank  ;  that  a  single  place  kept  by  Russia  on  the  right 
bank  of  the  Danube  would  destroy  the  independence  of 
the  Porte,  and  would  entirely  change  the  state  of 
affairs.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  the  EMPRESS  JOSEPHINE. 

"  St.  Cloud,  7.0th,  "July,  1810. 
"  My  Friend, — I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  14th. 
I  see  with  pleasure  that  the  waters  did  you  good,  and 
that  you  liked  Geneva.  My  health  is  pretty  good.  The 
conduct  of  the  King  of  Holland  has  afflicted  me.  Hortense 
is  soon  coming  to  Paris.  The  Grand  Duke  of  Berg  is 
on  the  road,  and  I  am  expecting  him  to-morrow.  Adieu, 
my  friend. 

"Napoleon." 


COTTON    TO    BE    GROWN    AT    ROME.  5 1 

To  MADAME  MERE. 

"  St.  Cloud,  20th  July,  1810. 
"  MADAME, — I  hasten  to  inform  you  that  the  King  of 
Holland  is  at  Tceplitz  in  Bohemia.  As  you  must  have 
experienced  some  uneasiness  on  his  disappearance,  I  do 
not  lose  a  moment  in  sending  you  this  news  to  tranquillise 
you.  His  conduct  can  be  explained  only  by  the  bad  state 
of  his  health. 

"  Your  very  affectionate  son, 

"  Napoleon." 

The  two  brothers  did  not  meet  again  until  i8i4when 
Napoleon,  on  the  solicitation  of  Marie  Louise,  consented 
to  receive  the  runaway,  not  as  King  of  Holland,  but  as  a 
French  prince. 

To  THE  EMPEROR  OF  AUSTRIA. 

"  Paris,  21st  July,  18 10. 

"Sir,  my  Brother  and  Father-in-Law, — Allow 
me  to  send  your  Imperial  Majesty  a  porcelain  cup  from 
my  manufactory  of  Sevres  upon  which  the  portrait  of 
Louise  is  painted.  I  hope  that  this  present  will  be  agree- 
able  to  your   Majesty,   and   that  you  will    find    it  well 

done.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

to  comte  de  montalivet. 

"  St.  Cloud,  25M  July,  18 10. 
"  Having  suppressed  most  of  the  convents  in  Rome,  and 
wishing  as  far  as  possible  to  maintain  the  rank  and  im- 
portance of  the  population  of  that  great  city,  I  desire 
to  establish  manufactories  there,  and  to  encourage  the 
cultivation  of  cotton.  I  am  assured  that  the  soil  of  Rome 
is  good  for  that  culture,  and  that  there  are  a  great  many 
watercourses,  where  the  convents  stood,  which  can  serve 

E    2 


52      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

us  motive  power  for  machines.  Adopt  measures  in  order 
to  arrive  at  this  result.  It  is  my  intention  to  place  a  sum 
of  500,000  francs  at  your  disposal  for  this  object. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  carry  out  this  idea  of  making  Rome  the  rival  of 
Manchester,  a  competent  person  was  to  make  a  report,  and 
was  to  answer  the  following  questions  : — 

1st.  Why  have  the  environs  of  Rome  been  left  uncul- 
tivated ? 

2nd.  Why  are  they  unhealthy  ? 

3rd.  What  remedy  can  be  applied  ? 

4th.  In  what  condition  is  the  draining  of  the  Pontine 
marshes  ?  What  works  have  been  accomplished  ?  What 
is  the  system  which  has  been  pursued,  and  what  is  that 
which  ought  to  be  pursued  ? 

To  M.  DE  CHAMPAGNY. 

"  St.  Cloud,  26th  July,  1810. 
"  Have  a  courier  ready  to  convey  my  letter  to  the 
Emperor  of  Austria.  Write  to  M.  Otto  to  demand  the 
arrest  of  Pozzo  di  Borgo  as  having  been  condemned  to 
death  by  default  for  having  betrayed  France  in  favour  of 
England.  In  reality  I  shall  be  satisfied  with  demanding 
his  expulsion  from  Austria.  Write  to  M.  Otto  to  keep  an 
eye  upon  M.  de  Razumowski,  and  to  insinuate,  as  a  piece 
of  advice,  that  I  should  like  to  see  him  turned  out  of 
Vienna.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

There  was  a  sort  of  vendetta  between  the  two  Corsicans, 
Napoleon  and  Pozzo  di  Borgo,  which  commenced  in  the 
days  of  Paoli,  and  when  the  latter  preferred  leaving  the 
island  with  Sir  Gilbert  Elliot  to  acknowledging  the  French 
Republic.  After  remaining  eighteen  months  in  England, 
Pozzo  di  Borgo  took  service  in  Russia,  but  retired  to 
Austria  on  the  signing  of  the  Treaty  of  Tilsit.  He  now 
fled  from  Vienna,  and  had  to  go  to  Constantinople  to  find  a 


FIRE   AT    THE   AUSTRIAN    EMBASSY.  53 

safe  issue    from    the   Continent   in   order    to    return   to 
England. 

To  THE  EMPEROR  OF  AUSTRIA. 

"  St.  Cloud,  26th  July,  1810. 

"  Sir,  my  Brother  and  very  dear  Father-in-law,— 
I  have  received  the  letter  of  your  Imperial  Majesty  of  the 
15th.  I  beg  you  to  receive  my  thanks  for  the  amiable 
things  which  it  contains.  .  .  .  Count  Metternich,  the 
Prince  Schwartzenburg,  and  the  subjects  of  your  Majesty 
who  were  in  Paris  during  that  painful  circumstance  are 
deserving  of  all  praise,  and  their  conduct  has  given  me 
great  pleasure.  I  desire  to  give  the  Legion  of  Honour  to 
several  of  them,  and  I  have  charged  Count  Metternich  to 
obtain  the  permission  of  your  Majesty. 

"  I  do  not  know  if  the  Empress  has  informed  you  that 
the  hopes  we  have  of  her  being  enceinte  increase  every  day, 
and  that  we  have  all  the  certainty  which  is  possible  after 
two  months  and  a  half.  Your  Majesty  will  easily  under- 
stand all  that  this  adds  to  the  feelings  inspired  by  your 
daughter,  and  how  much  these  new  ties  increase  my 
desire  to  be  agreeable  to  her.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  29th  July,  Napoleon  sent  his  compliments  to 
Massena  on  the  taking  of  Ciudad  Rodrigo,  adding  that  he 
thought  Almeida  might  be  taken  towards  the  end  of 
August,  and  that  then  Massena  could  march  on  Lisbon. 
He  was  to  deliver  battle  against  the  English  if  he  liked. 
The  Emperor  was  however  opposed  to  Badajos  and  Elvas 
being  besieged  as  both  places  were  strong,  and  once  the 
English  beaten  and  re-embarked  they  would  fall  of 
themselves. 

In  a  letter  addressed  to  General  Clarke  from  Trianon 
on  the  4th  August  the  Emperor  wrote  :  "  I  see  that  the  five 
Portuguese  regiments  forming  ten  battalions  have  their 
battalions  organised  a  la  Francaise,  six  companies  to  each  ; 


54      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

but  that  out  of  these  companies  the  grenadier  and  voltigeur 
companies  are  with  the  thirteenth  provisional  demi-brigade. 
The  thirteenth  provisional  demi-brigade,  coming  from 
Metz  with  two  marching  battalions,  is  therefore  composed 
of  thirty  companies.  .  .  . 

On  the  5th  August  Napoleon  wrote  to  the  King  of  Saxony 
asking  for  some  information  of  a  military  character  with 
regard  to  the  Duchy  of  Warsaw.  He  concluded  his  letter 
thus  :  "  As  I  desire  to  have  all  this  information  secretly  and 
without  allowing  any  one  to  suppose  that  I  am  occupied 
with  these  matters,  I  consider  it  more  simple  to  write  to 
you  direct.  However,  your  Majesty  will  observe  that  this 
is  merely  a  matter  of  precaution,  because  my  relations  with 
Russia  continue  to  be  excellent." 

The  above  letter  was  one  of  the  first  symptoms  betraying 
the  intention  of  a  war  with  Russia. 

On  the  9th  August  the  Emperor  wrote  this  short  note  to 
the  Director  General  of  Customs  in  Paris  :  "  In  the  middle 
of  July  a  vessel  left  Ostende  for  England.  Who  could 
have  authorised  the  Director  of  Customs  to  allow  this 
vessel  to  pass  ?  Summon  this  director  to  Paris  to  give 
an  account  of  his  conduct,  and  send  me  a  report  on  the 
matter." 

And  on  the  14th  August  the  Director-General  received 
another  letter  to  this  effect :  "  Let  me  know  how  it  comes 
that  the  Hercule  of  120  tons,  flying  the  French  flag,  laden 
with  elephants'  teeth,  mahogany,  &c,  arrived  at  Dunkirk 
on  the  17th  July.  Who  allowed  the  introduction  of  this 
merchandise  ?  Who  authorised  the  admission  of  the  Con- 
ciliateur  which  arrived  at  Genoa  on  the  nth  July  with  a 
cargo  of  ebony,  &c.  ?  Also  La  Mise'ricorde,  which  dis- 
charged on  the  nth  July  at  Marseilles  a  cargo  of  sulphur, 
quinquina,  &c, ;  and  La  Conception  laden  with  oils,  cottons, 
&c.  ? "  and  in  fact  the  Emperor  had  to  complain  of  numer- 
ous irregularities  which  greatly-disturbed  his  blockading 
proclivities. 

On  the   10th  August  Napoleon  addressed  a   letter  to 


FOREIGN    ARCHIVES.  55 

Berthier,  who,  although  in  Paris,  was  acting  as  chief  of  the 
army  of  Spain.  In  this  letter  his  Majesty  directed  that 
the  following  note  should  be  sent  to  General  Kellermann  : 
"At  a  moment  when  his  Majesty  is  collecting  in  Paris  in  a 
single  body  the  archives  of  the  German  Empire,  those  of 
the  Vatican,  of  France  and  of  the  United  Provinces,  it  may 
be  interesting  to  search  what  has  become  of  the  archives 
of  Charles  V.  and  of  Philip  II.,  which  would  so  nicely 
complete  this  vast  European  collection.  These  archives 
should  be  under  the  care  of  the  governor  of  Old  Castile. 
This  is  what  the  historian  Robertson  says  in  his  History  of 
A  merica : — 

"By  a  singular  arrangement  of  Philip  II.  the  records  of 
the  Spanish  monarchy  are  deposited  in  the  Archivo  of 
Simancas  near  Valladolid,  at  the  distance  of  120  miles  from 
the  seat  of  government  and  the  supreme  courts  of  justice. 
The  papers  relative  to  America,  and  chiefly  to  that  early 
period  of  its  history  towards  which  my  attention  was 
directed,  are  so  numerous  that  they  alone,  according  to 
one  account,  fill  the  largest  apartment  in  the  Archivo, 
and,  according  to  another,  they  compose  873  large 
bundles.  .  .  ." 

The  archives  were  duly  sent  to  Paris,  but  they  were 
restored  to  their  rightful  owners,  like  so  much  other 
plunder,  when  the  allies  occupied  France. 

To  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"  St.  Cloud,  19th  August,  1810, 
"  I  have  received  no  details  respecting  my  army  of  Cata- 
lonia. I  am  ignorant  of  the  manner  in  which  Macdonald 
has  made  his  movement,  what  troops  he  has  taken  with 
him,  and  what  cantonments  he  has  left  behind  him.  My 
army  of  Catalonia  is  the  only  one  of  which  I  have  no 
news.  .  .  ."  «  Napoleon." 

The  fact  is  that  matters  were  not  going  on  well  in  that 
quarter. 


56  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"St.  Cloud,  22nd August,  1810. 
"I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  17th,  in  which  you 
tell  me  that  200  Englishmen  have  been  removed  from  the 
Irish  regiment.  I  believe  that  I  informed  you  before  that 
I  did  not  wish  this  regiment  to  be  recruited  any  longer 
and  that  I  even  proposed  to  disband  all  these  auxiliaries. 
Send  me  a  list  of  the  number  of  Irish  who  remain,  indicating 
the  depots  from  which  they  came,  and  with  what  English 
army  they  were  acting  when  they  were  taken  prisoners.  .  . 
Spaniards,  Germans,  Swiss,  Italians,  and  even  French 
who  have  been  captured  while  serving  against  me  must  not 
be  sent  back  to  Spain.  .  .  ." 

"  Napoleon." 

By  a  note  addressed  to  the  Minister  of  Marine  on  the 
28th  August,  on  the  subject  of  an  exchange  of  prisoners, 
we  find  that  the  French  claimed  to  have  in  their  depots — 

English     10,526 

Irish  Legion     ...    ' 932 

Hostages 500 

Spaniards 38,355 

Total      5°>3i3 

And  the  English  claimed  to  have — 


Frenchmen 
Dutchmen 
Danes 
Russians    ... 


Total 


43,774 

103 

2,294 

302 

46,473 


The  French  Government  constantly  insisted  upon  having 
Frenchmen  in  exchange  for  any  prisoners  they  might  offer 
England,  whereas  England  wished  to  have  Englishmen 
first,  on  the  ground  that  good  French  soldiers  and  sailors 
were  worth  more  than  untrained  Portuguese  and  Spaniards. 


COLONIAL    MERCHANDISE.  57 

To  the  MINISTER  OF  PUBLIC  WORSHIP. 

"  St.  Cloud,  282$  August,  1810. 
"  It  appears  that  the  number  of  curfc  who  have  refused 
to  take  the  oath  in  the  departments  of  Rome  and  Trasi- 
mene  is  500,  and  that  the  number  of  those  who  have 
taken  the  oath  is  900.  I  think  that  the  500  curfc  could  be 
dispensed  with,  and  that  the  900  curfe  will  be  sufficient. 

"  Napoleon." 

Few  days  passed  upon  which  Napoleon  did  not  issue 
some  order  for  the  confiscation  of  colonial  merchandise. 
On  the  29th  August,  however,  he  wrote  a  letter  to  Cham- 
pagny,  in  which  he  proposed  not  only  to  the  King  of 
Saxony  and  the  princes  of  the  Confederation  of  the  Rhine, 
but  also  to  Prussia  and  to  Russia  to  lay  a  heavy  tax  on  all 
the  colonial  merchandise  in  their  respective  countries  : 

"  This,"  wrote  Napoleon,  "  will  create  large  revenues  for 
those  countries.  You  will  take  care  to  make  known  that 
this  customs  measure  does  not  mean  to  say  that  colonial 
merchandise  can  enter,  but  only  that  what  exists  should 
pay  this  contribution.  .  .  .  Prussia  would  gain  several 
millions  in  this  way.  .  .  .  The  loss  will  fall  upon  English 
commerce  and  upon  the  smugglers.  .  .  Reiterate  the  order 
for  all  the  colonial  produce  in  the  towns  on  the  Oder  to  be 
seized,  and  write  to  my  agents  in  Frankfort  and  other 
commercial  towns  to  let  you  know  the  quantity  of  colonial 
merchandise  in  those  towns  and  the  place  where  it  can 
be  seized. 

"  Napoleon." 

Talleyrand,  having  tried  to  make  friends,  received  the 
following  letter  dated  from  St.  Cloud  29th  August : — 

"  I  have  received  your  letter  which  was  very  painful 
to  me.     While   you   were   at  the   head   of  the    Foreign 


58     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Office  I  closed  my  eyes  to  a  great  many  things.  I  there- 
fore regret  that  you  should  have  taken  a  step  which 
recalls  so  many  souvenirs  which  I  desire  to  forget. 

"Napoleon." 


To  THE  EMPEROR  OF  RUSSIA. 

"  St.  Cloud,  2gt/t  August,  1810. 
"  I  cannot  allow  Prince  Kourakine  to  leave  without  re- 
iterating to  him  my  feelings  towards  your  Imperial  Majesty. 
Those  which  I  bear  your  Majesty,  as  well  as  the  political 
considerations  of  my  empire,  make  me  desire  more  and 
more  every  day  the  continuation  and  the  permanence  of 
the  alliance  which  we  have  contracted.  On  my  side  it  is 
proof  against  all  change  and  no  matter  what  event.  I 
have  spoken  frankly  with  Prince  Kourakine  upon  several 
questions  of  detail.  May  I  beg  your  Majesty  to  accord 
him  your  confidence,  especially  when  he  speaks  of  my 
friendship  for  you  and  of  my  desire  to  see  the  alliance 
which  binds  us  eternal  ? 

"  Napoleon." 

Oh  the  2nd  September  the  Emperor,  in  a  letter  to 
Marshal  Davoust,  said  that  he  had  seen  with  pleasure  the 
seizure  at  Mecklenburg  of  twelve  ships  laden  with  colonial 
merchandise.  "  Let  it  all  be  sent  to  Cologne,"  he  said, 
"  and  be  confiscated."  And  the  marshal  was  instructed  to 
act  upon  this  principle,  that  all  colonial  merchandise,  no 
matter  whether  it  arrived  on  board  Danish,  Swedish, 
American,  or  Russian  ship  and  accompanied  by  a  cer- 
tificate of  origin,  was  good  prize. 

On  the  same  day  his  Majesty  refused  to  purchase  the 
wooden  hut  at  Saardam  which  Peter  the  Great  inhabited 
for  two  years.  King  Louis  had  announced  his  intention 
of  purchasing  it,  but  did  not.  However,  the  Emperor 
accorded  a  pension  of  100  francs  a  month  to  Widow 
Mallard,  the  nurse  of  Louis  XVI.,  and  a  similar  pension 


THE    PRINCE    ROYAL    OF    SWEDEN.  59 

to  Widow  Laurent,  the  nurse  of  the  unfortunate  monarch's 
daughter. 

On  the  6th  September  the  Emperor  wrote  to  Prince 
Lebrun  for  maps  and  papers  concerning  the  island  of  Java, 
as  it  was  his  intention  to  send  out  a  large  number  of 
frigates  to  that  colony. 

Java  was  the  last  colony  which  remained  to  France,  nor 
did  she  keep  it  long. 

To  the  PRINCESS  OF  PONTE  CORVO. 

"  St.  Cloud,  6th  September,  1810. 
"  My  COUSIN, — I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  4th. 
You  must  have  long  ago  been  persuaded  of  the  interest 
which  I  take  in  your  family.  I  have  no  doubt  that  the 
noble  sentiments  with  which  you  have  inspired  your  son 
will  render  him  worthy  of  the  high  destinies  to  which 
he  is  called.  <<  NAPOLEON." 

To  CHARLES  XIII.,  King  of  Sweden. 

"St.  Cloud,  6th  September,  1810. 
"Count  Rosen  has  handed  me  your  letter  of  the  21st. 
Your  Majesty  informs  me  that  the  Diet  has  appointed  the 
Prince  of  Ponte  Corvo  Prince  Royal  of  Sweden,  and  you 
ask  me  to  allow  him  to  accept.  I  was  little  prepared  for 
this  news,  since  your  Majesty  had  informed  me  that  you 
wished  to  propose  for  election  the  brother  of  the  late 
Prince  Royal.  I,  however,  appreciate  the  sentiments 
which  have  induced  the  Swedish  nation  to  give  this 
mark  of  esteem  to  my  people  and  my  army.  I  authorise 
the  Prince  of  Ponte  Corvo  to  accept  the  throne  to  which 
he  has  been  called.  «  NAPOLEON." 

To  the  EMPRESS  JOSEPHINE. 

"St.  Cloud,  \\th  September,  1810. 
"  My  Friend, — I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  9th, 
and  am  pleased  to  learn  that  you  are  in  good  health.     The 


60  THE    CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

Empress  is  in  fact  four  months  gone  in  the  family  way ; 
she  is  very  well,  and  much  attached  to  me.  The  little 
Princes  Napoleon  (the  two  sons  of  Louis — Napoleon  Louis 
and  Louis  Napoleon)  are  staying  at  the  pavilion  in  the 
park.  My  health  is  good  enough.  I  wish  to  know  that 
you  are  happy  and  satisfied.  .  .  .  "Napoleon" 

To  MARSHAL  BERTHIER. 

"  St.  Cloud,  17th  September,  1810. 
"  Exactions  of  all  kinds  are  committed  in  Spain,  and  a 
traffic  is  made  of  the  liberation  of  prisoners.  Send  an 
officer  with  a  letter  to  General  Kellermann.  Write  at  the 
same  time  to  Massena  to  have  the  individuals  guilty  of 
these  crimes  arrested.  Send  officers  to  examine  the  gar- 
rison of  Ciudad  Rodrigo,  and  especially  the  commandant 
of  artillery,  who  was  asked  for  200,000  reals  to  let  the 
garrison  go.  Let  General  Becket  inquire  into  this  affair. 
It  is  high  time  to  put  an  end  to  this  brigandage.  Massena, 
in  one  of  his  letters,  says  that  he  has  forwarded  a  list  of 
the  contributions  levied  by  Marshal  Ney,  and  which  have 
not  been  paid  in.  You  have  not  laid  that  list  before  me; 
make  me  a  report  upon  it.  «  NAPOLEON." 

There  is  something  grotesque  in  Massena  accusing  Ney 
of  plundering. 

To  MARSHAL  BERTHIER. 

"  Fontainebleau,  i8t/t  September,  1810. 
"  The   rumour    of   the   pretended   marriage  of   Prince 
Ferdinand  (Prince  of  Asturias)  with  an  Austrian  princess 
is  much  believed   in.1     It  is  important  that  you  should 

1  Comte  Miot  de  Melito,  in  his  Memoirs  (vol.  iii.  p.  179),  refers  to 
this  projected  marriage.  The  fact  is  that  Napoleon  more  than  once 
thought  of  getting  out  of  his  Spanish  difficulty  by  means  of  a  matri- 
monial alliance,  which  would  allow  him  to  come  to  some  arrangement 
with  Ferdinand.  It  was  with  this  view  that  Talleyrand  had  been 
ordered  not  to  let  his  captive  commit  himself  at  Valencay. 


MASSENA  AND    WELLINGTON.  6 1 

write  to  the  commanders  of  the  various  army  corps  in 
Spain,  warning  them  that  this  report  is  nothing  but  a 
piece  of  Parisian  gossip ;  that  they  should  deny  with 
indignation  the  very  idea  of  a  retrograde  step.  That  it 
has  never  been  a  question  of  such  a  thing. 

"Napoleon." 

to  marshal  berthier. 

"  Fontainebleau,  igtk  September,  1810. 
"  To-morrow  you  must  send  an  officer  with  a  letter  to 
Marshal  Massena,  telling  him  to  attack  and  to  overthrow 
the  English ;  that  Lord  Wellesley  has  not  more  than 
18,000  men,  of  which  15,000  are  infantry  and  the  rest 
cavalry  and  artillery ;  that  General  Hill  has  not  more 
than  6,000  men,  and  that  it  is  ridiculous  to  think  of 
25,000  Englishmen  holding  the  balance  against  60,000 
Frenchmen  ;  that  in  not  feeling  his  way,  but  in  attacking 
boldly  after  having  reconnoitred,  he  will  make  them  ex- 
perience severe  checks.  .  .  .  Marshal  Massena  has  four 
times  more  artillery  than  he  requires  against  the  enemy. 
I  am  too  far  away,  and  the  position  of  the  enemy  changes 
too  often,  for  me  to  be  able  to  give  advice  as  to  the 
manner  of  attack ;  but  it  is  certain  that  the  enemy  is  not 
in  a  position  to  resist.  According  to  authentic  news 
received  from  spies  in  London,  if  the  4.000  men  at  Cadiz 
are  joined  to  the  English  army  in  Spain,  it  is  only 
28,000  strong. 

"  Napoleon." 

The  above  letter  led  to  the  battle  of  Busaco,  when 
Wellington  was  attacked  by  Massena,  Ney,  and  Regnier, 
who  after  a  sanguinary  struggle  were  beaten  off  with  a 
loss  of  nearly  5,000  men  hors  de  combat.  Among  the 
wounded  was  General  Foy.  After  this  repulse,  Massena, 
finding  it  to  be  a  losing  game  to  "  attack  boldly,"  began 
to  feel  his  way,  and  to  try  and  turn  a  position  which  he 
had  failed  to  carry  in   a  front  attack.     Wellington,  after 


62      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

having  inflicted  this  blow  on  a  superior  force  and  proved 
that  resistance  was  not  out  of  the  question,  retired  on  the 
celebrated  lines  of  Torres  Vedras,  against  which  Massena, 
the  "spoilt  child  of  victory,"  Due  de  Rivoli,  Prince 
d'Essling,  was  destined  to  dash  in  vain. 

To  M.  DE  CHAMPAGNY. 

"St.  Cloud,  20th  September,  i8io. 
"  Write  to  Prussia,  and  speak  to  M.  de  Krusemark  here, 
saying  that  I  should  like  to  see  the  Prussian  Government 
lay  a  duty  on  the  export  of  cereals.  England  is  in  want 
of  corn,  and  it  will  be  useful  and  agreeable  to  Prussia  to 
levy  this  contribution  from  her.  Explain  this  theory  to 
my  charge'-d 'affaires  and  to  my  consuls.  Let  it  be  equally 
understood  at  Dantzic  that  this  duty  should  be  levied  in 
all  the  ports  of  the  Baltic. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  MARSHAL  DAVOUST. 

"  St.  Cloud,  20th  September,  1810. 
"  On  Sunday  I  shall  hold  a  parade  in  Paris,  at  which 
will  be  present  the  Portuguese  legion  quartered  at  Meaux, 
a  battalion  of  the  rear  guard  of  the  army  of  Spain,  the 
Dutch  Guard,  and  my  French  Guard.  My  Guard  will 
offer  a  dinner  to  all  the  Portuguese  soldiers,  and  yours 
must  give  a  dinner  to  the  officers. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"St.  Cloud,  21st  September,  1810. 

"  The  idea  of  sending  Spaniards  to  Corfu  is  bad.     Give 

orders  for  the  Spaniards  to  be  sent  to  Toulon.  ...  At 

Corfu  they  would  consume  provisions,  and  would  betray 

us  on  the  first  opportunity.     They  must  be  sent  into  the 

interior.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 


romana's  death.  63 

To  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"  Paris,  lyrd September,  18 10. 
"  I  have  read  with  surprise  a  letter  from  the  major  of  the 
Irish  regiment.  I  never  ordered  that  the  Irishmen  who 
fought  for  me  at  Flushing,  and  who  were  wounded  in  my 
service,  should  be  sent  back  among  the  prisoners.  ...  I 
can  therefore  understand  nothing  of  this  gossip.  It  is 
contrary  to  my  desire  that  deserters  and  Irishmen  who 
have  served  me  should  be  placed  among  the  prisoners. 
I  do  not  know  what  this  major  means. 

"  Napoleon." 

Everything  was  evidently  not  working  well  in  Holland, 
as  may  be  gathered  from  the  following  letter  addressed  to 
Prince  Lebrun  on  the  25th  September  : — 

"  You  speak  to  me  of  the  complaints  of  the  people  of 
Amsterdam,  of  their  uneasiness,  and  their  discontent.  Do 
the  Dutch  take  me  for  a  Grand  Pensioner  Barnevelt  ?  I 
shall  do  what  is  suitable  for  the  welfare  of  my  Empire, 
and  the  clamours  of  madmen,  who  think  that  they  know 
better  than  I  do,  inspire  me  only  with  contempt. 

"  Napoleon." 

In  a  letter  to  Berthier  of  the  29th  September,  Napoleon 
ordered  the  King  of  Spain  to  be  informed  that  he  was 
forming  an  army  of  the  centre  to  reinforce  the  army  in 
Spain.  Marshal  Soult,  too,  was  to  be  directed  to  keep  on 
the  heels  of  General  Romana  and  to  prevent  him  from 
crossing  the  Tagus.  Before  this  order  could  have  reached 
Soult  the  Marquis  of  Romana  had  managed  to  join 
Wellington  with  5,000  men.  Unfortunately  this  gallant 
Spanish  general,  who  was  so  highly  appreciated  by  the 
British  commander  and  by  all  who  knew  him,  died  shortly 
afterwards  of  heart  disease. 


64  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

TO  the  EMPEROR  OF  AUSTRIA. 

"Fontainebleau,  loth  September,  1810. 

"Sir,  my  Brother  and  very  dear  Brother-in- 
law, — I  have  several  times  seen  Count  Metternich,  and 
have  spoken  to  him  of  the  friendship  I  bear  your  Imperial 
Majesty.  I  hope  that  he  will  return  to  Vienna  fully  per- 
suaded that  I  take  a  lively  interest  in  you  and  in  your 
monarchy.  I  have  been  highly  satisfied  with  my  stay 
here.  Our  present  relations  reassure  me  perfectly  as  to 
the  intentions  of  your  Majesty.  I  no  longer  attach  any 
value  to  the  execution  of  the  secret  articles  of  the  treaty 
of  Vienna  relative  to  your  army.  I  desire  that  you  will 
see  in  my  abandonment  of  the  articles  a  wish  to  please 
you  and  to  give  you  fresh  proofs  of  my  esteem  and 
consideration. 

"  Napoleon." 


To  GENERAL  SAVARY. 

"Fontainebleau,  1st  October,  1810. 
"  I  beg  that  you  will  continue  to  take  measures  for  pro- 
curing  me   all   the  works  published   in   England,  either 
concerning  my  policy  or  on  the   affairs    of  the    day.    I 
derive  very  important  intelligence  from  them. 

"  Napoleon." 

In  spite  of  remonstrances,  the  Emperor  would  continue 
to  read  hostile  criticisms  in  the  English  papers,  which 
invariably  threw  him  into  ungovernable  fits  of  fury. 

Stringent  orders  were  sent  to  the  Viceroy  of  Italy  with 
regard  to  the  execution  of  the  decree  of  August,  and  he 
was  ordered  to  see  the  tariff  on  colonial  produce  levied 
on  all  such  merchandise,  not  only  in  warehouses  but 
in  shops,  and  at  the  same  time  "not  to  vex  citizens!" 
He  was  also  directed  to  despatch  6,000  troops  into 
the  Italian  cantons  of  Switzerland,  in  order  "to  seques- 
trate all  the  colonial  merchandise,  and  to  lay  a  duty  on 


SWISS    NEUTRALITY.  65 

all  goods  prohibited  in  Italy,  and  which  are  there  for  the 
purpose  of  being  introduced  by  contraband."  The  Italian 
charge"  d'affaires  in  Switzerland  was  to  be  informed  that 
this  measure  had  been  rendered  necessary  by  the  smuggling 
which  went  on  in  the  cantons,  and  that  this  occupation 
would  last  until  peace  was  concluded  with  England  ;  that 
"this  is  one  of  the  hostile  methods  which  I  employ  against 
England  in  Mecklenberg  and  the  German  ports,  and  that 
it  does  not  touch  the  real  neutrality  of  Switzerland.  .  .  . 
You  must  arrest  all  the  scamps  banished  from  the  kingdom 
of  Italy,  and  all  the  Englishmen  you  find  in  that  country. 
....  The  generals  whom  you  despatch  on  this  duty  must 
issue  no  proclamations  and  commit  no  follies.  You  must 
order  them  to  confiscate  all  the  English  merchandise,  and 
to  lay  a  duty  on  all  colonial  produce. 

"  I  do  not  wish  to  address  myself  direct  to  Switzerland. 
There  will  be  no  harm  in  a  quarrel  between  you  and  that 
country ;  afterwards  \  shall  be  referred  to,  and  that  will 
deaden  the  shock ;  but  it  must  appear  as  if  the  blow  came 
from  you.  You  must  write  in  this  sense  to  the  charge" 
d'affaires  of  Italy  and  of  France,  and  you  must  say  that 
the  government  has  been  driven  to  take  this  step  through 
necessity.  Besides,  you  must  allow  these  cantons  to  enjoy 
their  constitution,  and  you  must  not  impose  any  new  taxes. 
The  troops  must  be  provisioned  by  you,  and  you  must 
place  no  Frenchmen  in  the  columns.  I  am  assured  that 
there  is  a  large  quantity  of  English  merchandise  in  the 
Valais  custom-house.  Order  the  same  operation  in  the 
Upper  Valais." 

And  writing  on  the  6th  October  to  the  King  of  Saxony, 
the  Emperor  said — ■"  I  regret  to  see  that  the  pay  is  several 
months  in  arrear.  The  duty  on  the  colonial  merchandise 
should  produce  a  considerable  sum  in  Saxony  and  the 
grand  duchy  of  Warsaw.  There  is  a  great  deal  at  Leipsic. 
....  I  am  on  good  terms  with  Austria  and  with  Russia, 
but  this  latter  power  hates  the  grand  duchy  so  intensely 
that  we  must  be  on  our  guard.  .  ..." 

VOL.  III.  F 


66      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

And  on  the  7th  Napoleon  addressed  instructions  to 
Champagny,  who  was  to  insist  upon  Bavaria  executing 
the  tariff,  especially  upon  the  Swiss,  Austrian,  and 
Bohemian  frontiers. 

And,  evidently  losing  patience,  his  Majesty  wrote  to  his 
foreign  minister,  to  this  effect,  on  the  7th  : — "  Switzerland 
is  encumbered  with  colonial  produce  ;  this  state  of  affairs 
cannot  go  on.  Write  to  my  charge"  d'affaires,  to  demand — 
1st.  That  all  English  and  colonial  merchandise  be  seques- 
trated provisionally,  and  without  delay.  2nd.  That  all 
English  merchandise  being  prohibited,  all  that  is  seques- 
trated must  be  confiscated.  3rd.  That  all  colonial  pro- 
duce seized  must  be  subjected  to  the  same  duty  as  in 
France.  .  .  ." 

.    To  M.  DE  CHAMPAGNY. 

"  Fontainebleau,  Zth  October,  1810. 
"  The  information  which  Caulaincourt  has  given  you  on 
the  subject  of  the  Russian  army  will  enable  you  to  get  up 
the  case  against  Russia.  Your  correspondence  with  War- 
saw, Bucharest,  and  other  points  bordering  on  Russia,  will 
permit  you  to  rectify  this  case.  I  believe  that  in  this 
manner  I  can  be  made  acquainted  with  the  force  of  the 
Russian  army  and  its  movements.  You  must  write  to 
M.  Alquier  at  Stockholm  to  furnish  you  with  information 
on  the  subject  of  the  Russian  regiments  in  Finland. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  the  VICEROY  OF  ITALY. 

"Fontainebleau,  11th  October,  18 10. 
"  The  map  of  the  etapes x  of  France  is  no  longer  sufficient 
for  my  daily  use.  Have  one  made,  which  will  include 
Spain,  Portugal,  Italy,  Naples,  the  Illyrian  provinces, 
Holland,  and  Germany,  as  far  as  the  Inn  and  the  Vistula. 
I  require  such  a  map  at  every  moment. 

"  Napoleon." 

1  Halting  places. 


PRESENTS    TO    PRINCE    METTERNICH.  67 

To  M.  DE  CHAMPAGNY. 

"  Fontainebleau,  13M  October,  1810. 

"  I  send  you  a  draft  of  instructions  for  M.  de  Nerciat. 
I  wish  this  agent  for  the  present  to  visit  only  Syria  and 
Egypt ;  he  must  pay  attention  to  St.  Jean  d  Acre,  Jaffa, 
Rosetta,  Alexandria,  and  the  citadel  of  Cairo,  and  he  must 
study  the  political  situation  of  the  different  parties  in 
Syria  and  Egypt.  ... 

"  Napoleon." 

To  M.  DE  CHAMPAGNY. 

"Fontainebleau,  i^th  October,  18 10. 

"  I  send .  you  a  letter  from  General  Rapp.  I  beg  that 
you  will  have  an  interview  with  Prince  Kourakine  ;  that 
you  will  inform  him  that  a  great  many  vessels  laden  on 
English  account  sail  for  Russian  ports,  and  that  if  the 
Emperor  confiscates  them  he  will  be  doing  a  thing  very 
useful  to  the  cause  of  the  Continent,  and  very  damaging  to 
England.  Speak  to  him  of  the  sad  position  in  which 
England  finds  herself,  and  point  out  that  she  will  be 
obliged  to  sue  for  peace  if  Russia  does  not  open  her  ports 
to  her.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  M.  DE  CHAMPAGNY. 

"Fontainebleau,  17th  October,  1810. 

"  I  forward  a  letter,  which  has  just  fallen  into  my  hands. 
Write  to  M.  Otto  (ambassador  at  Vienna)  to  forewarn  him 
on  the  subject  of  the  false  rumours  it  contains.  Speak  in 
the  Moniteur  of  the  presents  which  I  made  M.  de  Metter- 
nich  on  his  departure,  which  consisted,  I  think,  of  some 
Gobelin  tapestry. 

"  Send  me  the  draft  of  a  bulletin  to  forward  to  my  am- 
bassadors, informing  them  of  the  truth  concerning  the  false 

F    2 


68      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

news  spread  with  regard  to  Spain  and  the  pretended  mar- 
riage of  the  Spanish  prince,  Ferdinand,  with  a  princess  of 
Austria. 

"  Napoleon." 


To  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"  Fontainebleau,  ijth  October,  1810. 
"  If  there  are  any  monks  among  the  Spanish  prisoners, 
you  must  make  them  throw  off  their  frocks  on  crossing  the 
frontier,  and  have  them  dressed  with  coats  and  mixed  up 
with  the  other  prisoners. 

"  Napoleon." 

to  the  emperor  of  russia. 

"  Fontainebleau,  zyd  October,  1810. 

"Your  Majesty  has  sent  me  such  handsome  horses,  that 
I  cannot  delay  thanking  you. 

"  The  English  suffer  greatly  from  the  union  of  Holland, 
and  the  occupation  of  the  Mecklenberg  and  Russian  ports. 
There  are  failures  every  week  in  London,  which  spread 
confusion  through  the  city.  ...  I  have  just  seized  enor- 
mous quantities  of  English  and  colonial  merchandise  in 
Switzerland  and  at  Frankfort.  Six  hundred  English 
vessels  which  were  wandering  in  the  Baltic  were  refused 
in  Mecklenberg  and  Prussia,  and  sailed  towards  the  states 
of  your  Majesty.  Should  your  Majesty  admit  them  the 
war  will  continue.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  3rd  November  the  Emperor  sent  Berthier  a  series 
of  instructions  for  his  generals  in  Spain,  in  which  he  more 
than  once  employed  the  phrase — "  as  soon  as  the  English 
have  re-embarked." 

Ten  days  after  this  letter  was  written,  Massena  had  to 
break  up  his  position  in  front  of  Torres  Vedras,  and  to  fall 
back  upon  Almeida  and  Ciudad  Rodrigo. 


PRESSURE    ON    RUSSIA.  6o 

To  M.  DE  CHAMPAGNY. 

"  Fontainebleau,  $tk  November,  18 10. 

"  Send  me  the  draft  of  a  reply  to  Prince  Kourakine, 
very  polite,  very  moderate,  but  which  nevertheless  shall 
contain  those  truths  which  it  is  fit  that  Russia  should 
know.  You  must  tell  him  that  his  note  has  been  laid 
before  me  ;  that  the  assurance  given  by  the  Emperor  of 
Russia  that  he  is  determined  to  damage  English  commerce 
has  given  me  lively  satisfaction,  that  peace  or  the  con- 
tinuation of  war  lies  in  the  hands  of  Russia ;  that  if  she 
really  wishes  to  hinder  commerce  in  colonial  goods, 
England  will  make  peace  within  a  year ;  but  that  Russia 
must  speak  frankly,  and  that  up  to  the  present  she  has 
followed  opposing  principles  ;  that  there  is  a  proof  of 
this  ;  that  the  colonial  produce  at  the  last  fair  at  Leipsic 
was  brought  from  Russia  in  700  waggons ;  that  to-day 
all  the  commerce  in  colonial  goods  is  done,  and  that 
1,200  merchant  vessels,  under  Swedish,  Portuguese,  Spanish 
and  American  colours,  which  the  English  escorted  with 
twenty  ships  of  war,  have  partly  landed  their  cargoes  in 
Russia :  that  if  Russia  desires  peace  with  England  she 
has  the  means  of  procuring  it ;  let  her  confiscate  all  the 
goods  introduced  by  the  English,  and'  let  her  unite  with 
France  in  forcing  Sweden  to  confiscate  the  immense 
quantity  of  merchandise  which  the  English  have  landed 
at  Gottenburg  under  all  kinds  of  flags  ;  as  for  the  principle 
advanced,  that  while  making  war  with  England,  Russia 
does  not  wish  to  make  war  with  neutrals,  that  principle 
is  the  result  of  an  error.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

Nothing  can  better  show  than  the  above  letter  the 
repugnance  with  which  the  obligatory  allies  of  Napoleon 
entered  into  his  continental  blockade  and  colonial 
produce  systems. 


JO  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

TO  GENERAL  SAVARY. 

"  Fontainebleau,  4th  November,  1810. 

"Send  Madame  Mere  a  passport  for  King  Louis  by 
which  he  will  be  able  to  go  to  any  part  of  the  south  of 
France  or  of  Italy,  and  to  reside  there. 

"  NAPOLEON." 

In  a  letter  addressed  to  the  minister  of  marine  on  the 
6th  November,  in  which  the  Emperor  ordered  him  to  have 
a  thousand  masts  which  had  been  purchased  in  Russia 
sent  to  Dantzic,  his  Majesty  said — "  Dantzic  is  mine; 
there  is  a  French  government  and  a  French  garrison 
there " — a  fact  which  of  course  over-rode  the  clause  in 
the  treaty  of  Tilsit  which  constituted  Dantzic  a  free 
town.1 

On  the  7th  November  the  Emperor  ordered  his  foreign 
minister  to  send  this  letter  to  M.  Laforest,  at  Madrid — 

"  The  Emperor  assembled  the  Spanish  nation  at 
Bayonne  and  presented  one  of  his  brothers  as  king. 
The  Spanish  nation,  through  its  deputies,  took  the  oath 
of  allegiance.  Thinking  that  he  had  rallied  the  majority 
of  the  nation,  the  Emperor  treated  with  the  King  of 
Spain  [brother  Joseph], 

"  Since  then  the  entire  Spanish  nation  rushed  to  arms  ; 
the  king  driven  from  his  capital  was  merely  general  of 
the  French  armies.  Upon  this  the  Emperor  entered 
Madrid  by  force. 

"  Since  that  epoch  a  great  many  battles  have  been 
fought.  Andalusia  and  even  Seville  have  been  con- 
quered ;  but  for  all  that,  not  a  Spaniard  has  joined  the 
king  ;  none  of  the  Spanish  forces  have  fought  against 
the  insurrection,  and  400,000  Frenchmen,  alone,  have  had 
to  conquer  all  the  provinces,  all  the  fortresses,  all  the 
towns,  all  the  villages ;  Spain  belongs  to  the  Emperor  by 
right  of  conquest. 

"The  King  of  Spain  would  be  nothing  were  he  not  the 
1    Vide  Art.  6. 


THE    KING    OF    SPAIN  !  7 1 

brother  of  the  Emperor  and  the  commander  of  the  French 
armies.  He  would  be  of  so  little  importance  that  not  a 
hamlet  ol  4,000  inhabitants  but  would  be  stronger  than 
him  and  all  his  partisans  in  Spain.  His  Guard  even  is 
French.  Not  a  Spanish  officer  of  name  has  shed  his  blood 
for  the  king. 

"  His  Majesty  has  no  longer  to  deal  with  Spanish  affairs 
according  to  the  treaty  of  Bayonne.  That  treaty  has  not 
been  ratified  by  the  Spanish  nation.  His  majesty  regards 
it  as  null  and  void.  He  declared  very  plainly  on  entering 
Madrid  that  if  the  country  did  not  submit,  he  would 
himself  assume  the  crown. 

"  However,  his  Majesty  having  read  in  the  English 
papers  the  acts  of  the  insurgents  assembled  in  the  isle  of 
Leon,  under  the  name  of  Cortes,  wishing  to  give  a  new 
proof  of  his  desire  to  conciliate  all  parties  and  ameliorate 
the  position  of  his  brother,  sends  the  Marquis  d'Almenara 
to  Madrid  to  persuade  the  king  and  his  cabinet  to  come 
to  terms  with  the  insurgents,  and  to  propose  the  con- 
vention of  Bayonne  as  the  basis  of  the  Spanish  constitu- 
tion. The  Emperor  will  consent  to  recognise  this  treaty 
still  if  the  insurgents  will  recognise  it  with  good  grace, 
and  show  themselves  desirous  of  sparing  the  blood  which 
must  still  be  shed." 

La  Forest  was  then  instructed  to  proceed  by  way  of 
insinuation,  but  his  insinuations  were  only  to  be  made 
after  the  French  army  had  entered  Lisbon,  and  the 
English  army  had  once  more  sought  refuge  on  board  its 
ships. 

The  letter  then  continued — 

"  I  must  acquaint  you  with  the  real  intentions  of  the 
Emperor  so  that  you  may  know  how  to  act  in  any  un- 
foreseen circumstance.  His  Majesty  is  sincere;  and,  if 
Lisbon  has  really  been  taken,  and  if  the  cabinet  of  Madrid 
can  really  decide  the  insurgents,  among  whom  are  many 
reasonable  men,  to  enter  into  an  arrangement,  his 
Majesty,  beyond  a  rectification  of  frontiers  which  will  give 


72  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

him  some  indispensable  positions,  will  consent  to  the 
integrity  of  Spain,  since  that  will  release  the  greater 
portion  of  his  troops,  and  will  finish  a  war  which  may 
still  cost  much  blood. 

"  But,  if  this  attempt  does  not  succeed,  as  there  is  reason 
to  think,  the  Emperor  wishes  to  be  able  to  show — 1st, 
that  the  Spaniards  themselves  consider  that  the  treaty  of 
Bayonne  no  longer  exists  ;  2nd,  to  make  the  guilt  of  the 
insurgents  more  apparent,  as  also  the  madness  of  England 
(which  will  have  reason  to  repent),  and  the  fault  com- 
mitted by  responsible  ministers  in  refusing  the  integrity 
of  Spain  ;  3rd,  to  make  the  cabinet  of  Madrid  acknowledge 
that  the  insurrection  has  been  the  real  cause  of  the  ruin 
of  Spain,  and  not  the  affairs  of  Bayonne." 

To  M.  DE  CHAMPAGNY. 

"  Fontainebleau,  12th  November,  1810. 
"It  is  indispensable  to  send  to  my  minister  at  Berne 
my  decree  respecting  the  annexation  of  the  Valais.  He 
must  not  make  it  known  until  General  Caesar  Berthier  has 
entered  Sion  at  the  head  of  the  French  troops  and  has  taken 
possession  of  the  country.  He  must  say  that  this  measure 
proves  the  independence  of  Switzerland,  and  that  the  rela- 
tions between  Italy  and  Switzerland  are  settled.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  14th  November,  Berthier  was  directed  to  blame 
Soult  for  the  small  amount  of  energy  he  was  showing 
and  for  having  fallen  back  shamefully  on  Seville  instead 
of  following  up  Romana. 

To  PRINCE  LEBRUN. 

"  Paris,  iZth  Noveinber,  1810. 
"  Have  all  the  merchandise  of  English  manufacture  in 
Holland,  in  the  warehouses,  shops,  &c,  burned  at  once. 

"  Napoleon." 


RUSSIA    PREPARING    FOR    WAR.  7^ 

Napoleon,  who  was  continually  insisting  upon  the 
necessity  of  Russia  closing  her  harbours  to  British 
commerce,  had  reason  to  suspect  that  his  dear  friend 
Alexander  was  growing  weary  of  an  alliance  which 
weighed  so  heavily  on  his  subjects.  Accordingly,  on  the 
5th  December  he  instructed  his  minister  for  foreign  affairs 
to  write  thus  to  Caulaincourt — "  that  the  Russians  are 
constructing  works  on  the  Dwina  and  even  on  the  Dniester, 
that  he  must  keep  his  eyes  open,  and  send  a  report  on  this 
matter ;  that  it  is  impossible  to  disguise  the  fact  that  these 
works,  being  field-works,  show  a  bad  spirit  on  the  part  of 
the  Russians.  After  having  concluded  peace  with  the 
Porte  do  they  mean  to  conclude  peace  with  the  English, 
and  to  violate  the  treaty  of  Tilsit  ? 1  Allow  Caulaincourt 
to  say  that  this  would  constitute  a  case  of  war." 

In  another  letter  within  the  same  day  M.  de  Champagny 
was  directed  to  furnish  the  Emperor  with  a  report  showing 
the  situation  of  the  troops  of  the  Confederation  of  the 
Rhine  (some  200,000  men)  including  the  grand  duchy  of 
Warsaw  ;  and  another  on  the  Russian  and  Austrian  armies. 

In  a  message  to  the  Senate  of  the  10th  December,  the 
Emperor,  after  explaining  the  reasons  which  induced  him 
to  annex  Holland,  said — 

"  I  have  had  executed  the  plan  of  a  canal  which  will  be 
made  before  five  years,  and  which  will  connect  the  Baltic 
with  the  Seine.  Indemnities  will  be  given  to  the  princes 
who  may  feel  offended  by  this  great  measure,  which  is 
commanded  by  necessity,  and  which  will  carry  the  frontiers 
of  my  empire  to  the  Baltic. 

"  Before  coming  to  this  determination  I  warned  England. 
She  knew  that  the  only  way  to  preserve  the  independence 
of  Holland  was  to  cancel  the  decrees  in  council  [in  reply 
to  decrees  of  Berlin  and  Milan].  But  that  Power  was 
deaf  to  the  voice  of  its  own  interests  and  to  the  cry  of 
Europe. 

1   Vide  letter  of  6th  November. 


74      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

"  I  hoped  to  be  able  to  establish  a  cartel  for  the  exchange 
of  prisoners  between  France  and  England,  and  to  take  the 
opportunity  of  the  stay  of  two  commissioners  in  Paris  and 
London  to  arrive  at  an  understanding  between  the  two 
nations.  My  hopes  have  been  deceived.  I  recognised  in 
their  way  of  negotiating  nothing  but  cunning,  and  bad 
faith  on  the  part  of  the  English  Government. 

"  The  annexation  of  the  Valais  is  a  consequence  foreseen 
by  the  immense  works  which  I  have  been  carrying  on  for 
the  last  ten  years  in  that  portion  of  the  Alps.  ...  As  long 
as  the  war  with  England  lasts  the  French  people  should 
not  lay  down  their  arms. 

"  My  finances  are  in  the  most  prosperous  condition.  I 
can  meet  all  the  expenses  of  this  immense  empire 
without  demanding  any  new  sacrifices  on  the  part  of  my 
people. 

"Napoleon." 

To  M.  DE  CHAMPAGNY. 

"Paris,  lyth  December,  1810. 
"  I  send  you  a  report  on  the  losses  of  Westphalia.  You 
argue  as  if  Hanover  belonged  to  Westphalia.  Hanover 
does  not  belong  to  the  King  Jerome,  for  that  prince  not 
having  executed  the  treaty  which  he  concluded  with  me,  I 
look  upon  it  as  null  and  void.  I  therefore  consider  that  I 
am  in  possession  of  Hanover.  The  population  of  the 
kingdom  of  Westphalia  was  1,900,000  inhabitants.  I  deduct 
from  that  kingdom  200,000  souls,  a  revenue  of  so  much, 
taxes  to  such  an  amount.  Propose  to  me  to  give  him 
[brother  Jerome]  in  exchange,  the  portion  of  Hanover  which 
I  do  not  take.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  COMTE  BIGOT  {Minister  of  Public  Worship). 

"Paris,  23rd December,  1810. 
"  The  Prefect  of  Savona  writes  that  the  Pope  is  disposed 
to  come  to  terms  and  to  play  the  pope  wherever  I  like. 


GENERAL    FOY.  75 

This  is  the  first  time  that  I  have  heard  such  language. 
If  this  expose  is  exact,  and  if  the  Pope  be  sincere,  as  I 
desire  nothing  better  than  to  enter  into  an  arrangement, 
you  can  write  to  M.  Chabrol  that  I  have  learned  from  Prince 
Borghese,  and  from  the  minister  of  police,  that  in  a  con- 
ference which  he  had  with  the  Pope,  the  Pope  said  that  he 
would  act  as  pope  wherever  it  was  wished  ;  that  he  would 
exercise  his  spiritual  power  only,  without  hampering  the 
temporal  power ;  in  a  word,  that  he  wished  to  come  to  an 
arrangement.  ...  I  shall  make  no  temporal  concession, 
and  if  the  Pope  desires  an  arrangement  he  must  write  a 
letter  to  the  Emperor  on  the  misfortunes  of  the  Church, 
&c.  This  letter  must  be  written  without  bitterness,  with 
Gospel  charity.  .  .  .  You  must  add  that  the  Emperor  will 
no  doubt  return  a  favourable  reply  to  such  a  letter.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

M.  Chabrol,  the  Prefect  of  Savona,  was  much  mistaken 
if  he  really  announced  that  Pius  VII.  was  inclined  to  yield 
to  either  artifice  or  violence. 

To  MARSHAL  BERTH  I ER. 

"Paris,  26th.  December,  1810. 

"Send  an  estafette  to  Bayonne,  and  write  to  General 

Foy  to  say  that  we  have  news  from  London  of  the  22nd, 

from  which  it  results  that  on  the  3rd  December  Massena 

still  occupied  Santarem,  that  he  had  had  some  affairs  with 

the  English  advanced  guard,  which  he  repulsed,  and  that 

Lord   Wellington    had    resumed   his    position   at   Torres 

Vedras.  .  .  .    Send    General    Foy    three    copies    of   the 

Moniteur    containing    the    news    received    from   London 

yesterday. 

"  Napoleon. 

Massena  appears  to  have  had  no  idea  of  the  existence  of 
the  lines  of  Torres  Vedras  until  he  found  himself  in  front 
of  that  impregnable  position   which   he  reconnoitred   in 


j6  THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

vain  in  the  hope  of  finding  some  vulnerable  point.  He 
had  written  several  letters  to  Berthier  imploring  re- 
inforcements, but  receiving  no  reply,  he  imagined  that  his 
despatches  must  have  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy. 
At  that  time  it  required  fully  500  men  to  take  a  letter 
from  one  point  of  Spain  to  another.  In  his  difficulty 
Massena  determined  to  send  General  Foy  to  Paris  under 
a  strong  escort,  and  that  officer,  on  his  arrival,  explained 
to  Napoleon  how  matters  stood,  and  was  able  to  justify 
his  chief  in  the  eyes  of  the  Emperor.  General  Foy  was 
on  his  way  back  to  Spain  when  the  above  letter  was 
written. 

Massena  was  right  in  his  conjecture,  at  least  as  regards 
some  of  his  despatches.  In  one  of  his  intercepted  letters 
he  gave  a  very  fair  account  of  the  battle  of  Busaco,  in 
which  he  acknowledged  that  he  had  been  repulsed  in  both 
his  attempts  to  carry  the  English  position,  and  that  he  had 
lost  4,000  men  and  a  large  proportion  of  his  best  officers. 
This  did  not  hinder  Napoleon,  in  the  Moniteur,  trans- 
forming Busaco  into  a  French  victory,  where  the  English 
were  attacked,  turned,  and  hotly  pursued  ;  the  French  loss 
was  reduced  from  4,000  to  200  men.  The  army  of  Massena 
suffered  the  most  terrible  privations,  but  people  read  in 
the  Moniteur  that  it  was  amply  provided  with  bread,  meat, 
rice,  wine,  rum,  sugar,  and  coffee ! 

After  breaking  up  his  position  in  front  of  Torres  Vedras 
in  the  middle  of  November,  Massena  had  fallen  back  with 
great  skill  upon  the  strong  position  of  Santarem,  in  which 
Wellington  did  not  venture  to  attack  him  with  the  force 
at  his  disposal. 


CHAPTER     II. 

THE  YEAR  1811. 

THERE  was  peace  onf  the,  Continent  in  18 11  between  the 
great  powers,  or  rather  a  truce.  In  France  and  Austria 
it  had  been  fondly  hoped  that  the  marriage  between 
Napoleon  and  Marie  Louise  would  close  the  era  of  war, 
and  that  Europe  would  at  least  be  allowed  time  to  recover 
itself.  The  realisation  of  this  hope  seemed  more  probable 
in  the  month  of  March  when  an  heir  to  the  imperial  crown 
was  born  ;  the  very  anxiety  of  Napoleon  to  have  a  direct 
successor,  and  to  found  a  dynasty,  led  people  to  believe 
that  he  would  change  his  warlike  policy,  and  not  stake  his 
fortunes  in  the  uncertain  game  of  war.  It  will  be  re- 
membered why  Cambaceres  had  voted  in  favour  of  a 
matrimonial  alliance  with  Russia ;  he  felt  certain  that  if 
that  alliance  were  not  concluded,  the  Emperor  would 
march  to  St.  Petersburg.  Prince  Metternich,  too,  was  of 
the  same  opinion.  In  the  correspondence  of  181 1  we 
shall  find  many  symptoms  of  the  storm  which  was 
gathering  in  the  north ;  and  before  the  close  of  the  year 
it  became  evident  that  a  collision  between  the  French 
Emperor  and  the  czar  was  inevitable.  Russia  was  the 
only  power  on  the  Continent  which  had  not  been  com- 
pletely subdued,  and  "  Carthage "  had  still  to  be  de- 
stroyed by  means  of  the  continental  blockade  against 
which  Russia  seemed  inclined  to  rebel.      We  shall   find 


78  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

Napoleon,  under  various  pretences,  moving  troops  and 
sending  arms  to  the  north,  and  Russia  recalling  divisions 
from  Finland  and  the  banks  of  the  Danube,  and  concen- 
trating them  on  the  Polish  frontier  where  danger 
threatened.  We  shall  also  find  Prussia,  goaded  to  despair, 
making  some  show  of  resistance,  but  speedily  reduced  to 
obedience,  and  Sweden  also  exhibiting  signs  of  impa- 
tience ;  she  had  been  plundered  by  Russia  on  one  hand, 
and  she  was  being  ruined  by  France  on  the  other.  The 
czar  had  despoiled  her  of  Finland,  and  Napoleon  had 
ruined  her  commerce  by  forcing  her  to  adhere  to  the 
continental  system. 

Several  letters  in  1811  show  that  Napoleon,  in  spite  of 
the  great  naval  superiority  of  England,  had  not  renounced 
all  idea  of  meeting  us  once  more  on  the  ocean.  He  was 
indefatigable  in  building  ships  and  preparing  expeditions, 
especially  an  expedition  to  Ireland  which  would  force 
the  British  Government  to  hurry  back  its  troops  from 
Spain,  where  matters  were  not  faring  well.  For  the 
moment,  however,  all  his  military  ports  were  strictly 
blockaded,  and  none  of  his  fleets  dared  to  put  to  sea. 

His  Majesty  did  not  write  as  many  letters  on  Spanish 
affairs  as  might  have  been  expected,  or  else  some  letters 
must  have  been  suppressed,  especially  concerning  the 
battle  of  Fuentes  de  Honor,  and  the  removal  of  Massena, 
who  was  replaced  by  Marmont,  whose  military  capacity 
was  not  to  be  compared  to  that  of  "  the  darling  child  of 
victory."  The  French  were  surprised  at  Sabugal  and  at 
Arroyo  del  Molinos,  they  lost  a  post  at  Olivenza,  they 
evacuated  Almeida,  they  were  defeated  at  Albuera  and  at 
Fuentes  de  Honor,  and  obliged  to  retire  from   Portugal. 

In  181 1  Napoleon  found  time  to  occupy  himself  a  good 
deal  with  the  affairs  of  the  Church.  As  Lanfrey  observes 
in  his  message  to  Parliament  of  the  29th  June,  the 
Emperor  referred  to  his  difference  with  the  Holy  See 
without  allowing  any  one  to  suspect  the  harsh  way  in 
which  he   had    behaved    towards    the    Pope    personally. 


PERSECUTION    OF   PIUS    VII.  79 

Napoleon  said,  "  I  have  united  Rome  to  my  empire,"  and 
as  an  excuse  for  wishing  the  pontiff  to  reside  in  Paris, 
he  remarked  that  the  Pope  liked  to  be  in  the  centre  of 
Christendom.  "  It  was  thus  that  St.  Peter  preferred  Rome 
to  remaining  in  the  Holy  Land."  Pius  VII.  was  still  a 
prisoner  at  Savona,  and  he  still  refused  to  consecrate  the 
bishops  named  by  Napoleon.  The  Emperor  imagined  to 
have  the  bishops  consecrated  by  their  various  chapters. 
The  pontiff  gave  the  chapters  to  understand  that  they 
were  not  to  elect  bishops.  The  amount  of  opposition 
which  ensued,  greatly  incensed  the  Emperor,  who  threw  the 
Abbe  d'Astros,  one  of  the  boldest  adherents  of  the  Pope, 
into  Vincennes,  where  he  remained  till  the  fall  of  the 
empire.  Cardinals  di  Pietro,  Oppizoni,  and  Gabrielli, 
who  had  distributed  the  papal  brief,  shared  the  same  fate, 
while  several  members  of  the  chapters  of  Asti  and 
Florence  were  committed  to  the  cells  of  Fenestrelle,  in 
which  were  Cardinal  Pacca  and  a  number  of  other 
ecclesiastics. 

Napoleon  thought  seriously  of  deposing  the  Pope,  but 
he  ended  by  trying  what  physical  suffering  would  do. 
Orders  were  given  for  Pius  VII.  to  be  treated  with  the 
greatest  severity  ;  his  few  comforts  were  suppressed  ;  he 
was  strictly  guarded,  he  was  deprived  of  his  carriages,  he 
was  forbidden  to  hold  any  communication  or  to  correspond 
with  any  one  outside  the  walls  of  his  prison ;  his  con- 
fessor and  his  intimate  servants  were  thrown  into  prison  ; 
his  papers  were  seized,  his  pen,  ink  and  paper,  even  his 
breviary  and  a  purse  containing  a  few  pieces  of  gold 
were  taken  from  him.  It  may  well  be  asked  if  Napoleon, 
when  complaining  of  his  treatment  at  St.  Helena,  remem- 
bered how  he  had  treated  a  venerable  and  defenceless 
old  man. 

Napoleon  next  imagined  to  summon  a  council,  but  first 
of  all  he  got  Cardinal  Fesch  and  nineteen  bishops  to  sign 
a  document  in  which  they  implored  the  Pope  not  to  reduce 
the  Church  of  France  to  the  dire  extremity  of  providing 


50      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

for  her  own  preservation.  Three  bishops  were  sent  to 
Savona  to  try  and  shake  the  determination  of  Pius  VII. 
who  naturally  insisted  that  a  prisoner  and  deprived  of  the 
aid  of  his  usual  counsellors,  he  could  not  possibly  come 
to  a  determination  which  would  greatly  modify  the  con- 
stitution of  the  Church.  The  bishops  however  persevered, 
and  after  a  long  struggle,  the  Pope,  driven  almost  out  of_ 
his  mind,  consented,  not  to  sign,  but  to  accept  a  note 
giving  satisfaction  to  most  of  the  demands  of  the  Emperor. 

Napoleon  was  not  satisfied.  The  council  was  sum- 
moned, and  its  first  sitting  terminated  by  a  solemn  oath 
of  obedience  to  the  Pope,  and  it  was  with  great  difficulty 
that  Cardinal  Fesch  prevented  his  colleagues  from  going 
to  St.  Cloud  to  throw  themselves  at  the  feet  of  the 
Emperor  and  to  implore  the  liberty, of  the  pontiff.  After 
a  time  the  council,  upon  the  report  of  the  Bishops  of 
Tournay,  Bordeaux,  and  Ghent,  pronounced  itself  incom- 
petent to  usurp  the  rights  of  the  Church.  The  con- 
sequence was  that  the  council  was  dissolved  and  the 
Bishops  of  Tournay,  Bordeaux  and:  Ghent  were  arrested 
and  flung  into  Vincennes. 

His  Majesty  now  set  Savary  to  work,  and  such  was 
the  terror  inspired  by  the  minister  of  police,  that  when 
Napoleon  convoked  another  council  in  August,  the  prelates 
voted  a  decree  to  the  effect  that  if  before  six  months  the 
Pope  did  not  consecrate  Napoleon's  bishops,  they  were  to 
be  consecrated  without  him.  The  Pope  accepted  his 
Majesty's  demands  with  some  slight  reserves  concerning 
the  Gallican  Church,  and  here  the  matter  remained  for  a 
time  as  the  Emperor  had  to  turn  his  attention  from 
spiritual  affairs  to  those  of  Russia,  where  a  storm  was 
rapidly  brewing.  He  left  the  Pope's  affectionate  letter, 
accepting  the  decrees,  unanswered  until  his  return  from 
Moscow,  and  he  did  not  communicate  the  papal  brief  to 
his  council  of  state,  hoping  to  obtain  even  more  than  he 
had  done  from  the  unfortunate  Pius  after  the  Russian 
campaign. 


HIS    HOLINESS    AT    SAVONA.  8 1 

Napoleon  appears  to  have  written  only  two  letters  on 
the  ist  January.  In  the  first  he  complained  to  Marshal 
Davoust,  who  was  in  command  of  the  army  of  Germany, 
that  his  ex-Secretary,  Bourrienne,  civil  governor  of  Ham- 
burg, had  gained  7  or  8,000,000  francs  by  selling  licences 
and  by  other  malpractices.  The  second  letter,  addressed 
to  King  Jerome,  ran  thus  — 

"  My  brother,  I  thank  you  for  what  you  say  on  the 
occasion  of  the  new  year.  I  hope  that  you  may  have  a 
son  this  year.     It  is  the  best  thing  I  can  wish  you." 

Although  General  Miollis  had  exceeded  orders  in  laying 
violent  hands  on  the  Pope,  Napoleon  was  determined 
not  to  let  his  Holiness  escape.  On  the  2nd  January  he 
wrote  thus  to  his  brother-in-law,  Prince  Borghese,  governor 
of  the  transalpine  departments. 

"  It  is  necessary  to  send  a  company  of  the  4th  regi- 
ment of  artillery  to  Savona,  and  to  keep  the  guns  of  the 
citadel  in  good  order.  I  even  desire  you  will  always  keep 
100,000  rations  of  biscuit  in  that  place  so  that  in  case  of 
emergency  the  garrison  may  be  able  to  throw  itself  into 
the  citadel,  with  the  Pope." 

To  PRINCE  EUGENE.. 

"  PARIS,  yd  January,  181 1. 
"  They  have  just  discovered  a  party  of  the  Pope  here. 
An  Abbe  Gregori  and  an  Abb6  Fontana,  whom  I  brought 
here  from  Rome,  were  the  intermediaries  of  a  correspond- 
ence between  the  Pope  and  the  Vicars-General  of  Paris. 
They  have  been  arrested  with  their  papers  ;  it  results  that 
the  Pope  has  been  guilty  of  the  most   horrible  conduct 

joined  to  the  greatest  hypocrisy.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

And  on  the  5th  his  Majesty  wrote  to  Barbier  to  know  if 
there  existed  any  examples  of  emperors  having  suspended 
or  deposed  popes,  and.  to  Comte  Bigot  to  sound  the  French 
bishops  on  the  subject  of  summoning  a  National  Council, 

VOL.  III.  G 


82      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

and  to  draw  up  a  report  on  these  matters — "  The  refusal 
of  the  Pope  to  confirm  the  bishops ;  on  his  bull  of  ex- 
communication ;  on  his  absence  from  Rome ;  on  the  liberty 
he  enjoyed  at  Savona,  on  the  abuse  he  made  of  it;  on  the 
letters  he  wrote  to  Cardinal  Fesch,  showing  the  state  of 
irritation  and  frenzy  with  which  he  is  animated;  on  his 
letters  to  Cardinal  Maury  and  to  the  Grand  Vicar  of 
Astros."  The  Archbishops  of  Paris,  Lyons,  Tours,  Marines, 
Toulouse,  Turin,  and  Bordeaux  were  to  be  consulted  on 
these  matters. 

On  the  6th  January,  1811,  Napoleon,  in  reply  to  an 
address  on  the  part  of  the  Chapter  of  Paris,  complained 
bitterly  of  the  conduct  of  the  Pope,  and  explained  his  own 
deep  political  designs  to  his  astonished  audience:  He  told 
them  how  it  was  necessary  in  the  struggle  which  he  had 
undertaken  against  heretic  England,  that  he  should  be 
master  of  the  Adriatic  and  be  able  to  close  all  the  ports 
of  Italy  to  that  Power.  "But,"  pursued  the  Emperor, 
'\these  great  considerations  had  no  influence  on  the  mind 
of  the  Pope.  He  confined  himself  to  replying  that  he  had 
no  reason  for  declaring  against  the  English  ;  that  he  was 
the  common  father  of  the  faithful ;  that  he  should  not 
deprive  himself  of  the  means  of  communicating  with  the 
faithful  in  countries  beyond  the  sea.  I  could  not,  however, 
leave  him  at  the  mercy  of  the  English.  A  long  negotia- 
tion ensued.  .  .  .  He  did  not  confine  himself  to  insults — 
he  excommunicated  me,  my  ministers,  and  all  the  persons 
employed  in  my  government."  Napoleon  afterwards  spoke 
in  violent  terms  of  some  letters  which .  the  Pope  had 
secretly  written  and  which  were  circulated  through  the 
empire.  "  These  culpable  letters  were  taken  from  Savona 
to  Lyons,"  he  said,  "by  a  valet-de-chambre  of  Pius  VII., 
and  it  was  a  woman  who  from  Lyons  brought  them  even 
to  Paris.  The  Abb6  dAstros,  the  Prelate  Gregori,  and 
Father  Fontana  dipped  their  hands  in  this  intrigue,  and 
that  is  why  I  punished  them."  His  Majesty,  after  speak- 
ing  at   some  length   in    his    usual  strain,   explained  the 


ORGANISATION    OF   THE    GRAND    ARMY.  83 

conditions  upon  which  he  was  willing  to  release  Pius  VII. 
The  above  is  not  to  be  found  in  The  Correspondence. 

On  the  10th  January  Napoleon  announced  that  he  had 
organised  the  Grand  Army  in  four  corps.  The  two  first, 
under  the  orders  of  Davoust  and  Oudinot,  were  on  the 
Elbe;  the  third,  under  Ney,  was  to  occupy  Mayence, 
Dusseldorf,  and  Dantsic.  In  other  words,  the  Emperor 
was  moving  towards  the  Russian  frontier. 

King  Joseph  had  sad  complaints  to  make  against 
General  Belliard,  who  had  been  left  in  command  of 
Madrid  by  Napoleon,  who  on  the  17th  January  wrote 
to  Berthier — "  If  it  be  true  that  the  King  of  Spain  has 
deprived  Genera  Belliard  of  the  government  of  Madrid, 
let  it  be  restored  to  him  without  delay :  this  is  my 
formal  order."  And  his  Spanish  Majesty  consented  to 
reign  on  such  terms ! 

To  COMTE  BIGOT. 

"  Paris,  29^  January,  181 1. 
"I  send  you  back  your  report  on  Papal  affairs ;  I  find 
it  incorrect.  For  instance,  the  union  of  the  Papal  States 
to  the  Empire  did  not  take  place  until  the  Pope  was  at 
Savona.  You  must  not  speak  of  the  marriage  and  the 
legitimacy  of  the  child ;  that  is  too  absurd.1  You  must 
say  that  it  was  found  necessary  to  remove  the  Pope  from 
Rome  because  he  wished  to  excite  a  revolution,  and  that 
I  ordered  him  to  be  taken  to  Savona.  Say  nothing  about 
Grenoble.  .  .  .  You  must  show  how  the  Pope  has  con- 
stantly endeavoured  to  weaken  the  power  of  France,  and 
quote  the  briefs  which  I  received  the  day  after  the 
victories  of  Austerlitz  and  Friedland,  in  which  I  was 
insulted  because  he  thought  that  I  would  be  beaten.  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

In  a  letter  addressed  to  Marshal  Bessieres  on  the  2nd 
February  Napoleon   said  :  "  I  have  appointed  Brigadier- 
General  Dumesnil  commandant  at  Vincennes." 
1  The  King  of  Rome,  who  was  expected. 

G  2 


84      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

The  gallant  Dumesnil,  nicknamed  Jambe  de  Bois,  gave 
serious  trouble  to  the  allies  when  Napoleon  abdicated,  by 
refusing  to  surrender  Vincennes  until  a  leg  which  he  had 
lost  in  battle  was  restored  to  him.  The  statue  of  this 
obstinate  warrior  now  stands  in  one  of  the  avenues  leading 
to  the  fort  he  persisted  in  holding,  and  his  name  is  still 
popular  in  France. 

In  a  letter  to  his  War  Minister,  dated  the  3rd  February, 
the  Emperor  wrote  :  "  If  I  were  to  have  war  with  Russia, 
I  reckon  that  I  should  require  200,000  muskets  with 
bayonets  for  the  Polish  insurgents."  A  good  many  letters 
were  written  at  this  time  about  the  purchase  of  arms. 
Austria  had  50,000  French  muskets  to  sell ! 

On  the  9th  February  Napoleon  wrote  to  General  Clarke, 
complaining  of  the  number  of  conscripts  who  escaped 
service.  On  the  march  to  Rome  twenty-nine  out  of  100 
deserted  at  Breglio  ;  on  the  28th  November  thirty-eight 
escaped  at  a  short  distance  from  Toulon,  and  on  the  24th 
December  twenty  more,  and  so  on. 

To  ADMIRAL  DECRES. 

"Paris,  i/^th  February,  181 1. 
"  The  first  time  that  you  write  to  the  Transport  Office 
you  may  mention  that  a  man  named  Kolli,  who  says  he  is 
an  Irishman,  and  who  was  the  bearer  of  a  letter  written 
by  the  King  of  England  and  a  commission  appointing  him 
plenipotentiary  minister  to  Ferdinand  VII.,  is  among  the 
prisoners,  and  that  the  Emperor  would  be  willing  to 
exchange  him  for  a  person  of  the  same  rank. 

"  Napoleon." 

At  this  date  Ferdinand  was  supposed  to  be  on  the  best 
of  terms  with  his  Imperial  jailer.  He  had  asked  him  to 
remove  that  scheming  monk  Don  Juan  de  Escoiquiz,  and 
had  written  to  him  assuring  him  of  his  "blind  obedience," 
expressing  his  confidence  in  that  generosity  which  charac- 
terised him,  and  asking  Napoleon  to  adopt  him  as  his  son. 


CAULAINCOURT    RECALLED.  85 

The  Annual  Register,  in  the  State  Papers  for  181 1,  gives 
an  account'of  the  Kolli  affair,  and  says  that  the  baron  was 
betrayed  by  Ferdinand  ! 

On  the  17th  the  Emperor,  evidently  determined  to 
deal  Russia  a  blow,  wrote  these  two  letters  to  M- 
Champagny : — 

"I  desire  you  to  send  a  courier  to  Constantinople. 
Write  to  M.  Latour-Maubourg  to  make  advances  to  the 
Porte,  and,  without  compromising  himself,  to  act  so  that 
the  Sultan  may  write  to  me  and  send  me  an  ambassador ; 
that  on  my  side  I  will  reply  and  will  send  an  ambassador. 
While  passing  through  Vienna  the  courier  must  hand  a 
letter  to  M.  Otto  reassuring  him.  .  .  ." 

And  in  the  second  letter : — 

"  I  beg  that  you  will  send  a  courier  to  St.  Petersburg 
to-morrow,  sending  letters  of  recall  to  Caulaincourt.  You 
must  inform  him  that  after  having  conferred  with  the 
Russian  Government  he  can  quit  his  post  on  the  ground 
of  having  obtained  leave  for  two  months,  or  as  having  been 
replaced  and  presenting  his  letters  of  recall,  according  as 
the  Emperor  of  Russia  may  deem  fit ;  but  in  either  case 
he  must  make  known  at  St.  Petersburg  that  I  desire  to 
replace  him  by  the  Comte  de  Narbonne,  the  Comte  de 
Larochefoucauld,  or  the  Comte  Lauriston  ;  that  I  wish  to 
know  which  of  the  three  will  be  most  agreeable  to  the 
Emperor  Alexander.  You  must  give  Caulaincourt  instruc- 
tions on  the  subject  of  the  Oldenburg  affair.  I  did  what 
I  could  in  the  way  of  giving  the  Czar  an  exact  and  real 
indemnity. 

"You  must  tell  Caulaincourt  to  have  a  conference  with 
M.  de  Romanzoff  and  with  the  Emperor  ;  to  declare  to 
both  that  I  persist  in  the  alliance ;  that  I  cannot  foresee 
any  possible  circumstance  for  inducing  me  to  make  war 
with  Russia  unless  Russia  should  side  with  England  ;  that 
I  have  no  alliance  with  any  Power,  and  that  my  policy 
remains  unchanged." 

His    Majesty    had    appropriated    Oldenburg   a   month 


86      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

before,  and  was  of  course  well  aware  of  the  effect  which 
such  an  insult  would  have  on  the  Court  of  St.  Petersburg. 
The  Duke  of  Oldenburg  was  the  brother-in-law  of  the 
Czar,  having  married  the  Grand  Duchess  Catherine,  whose 
hand  Napoleon  had  demanded  at  Erfurth. 

On  the  19th  the  Emperor  wrote  thus  to  the  Grand 
Chamberlain  : — 

"  The  service  of  the  ushers  of  the  chamber  is  very  badly 
performed.  At  the  Privy  Council  which  I  held  yesterday 
everything  was  arranged  upside  down  :  that  is  not  astonish- 
ing ;  the  door  of  the  grand  apartments  was  kept  by  a 
valet.  The  service  of  the  ushers  was  never  worse  done. 
Strike  the  man  called  Henri  off  the  list  of  ushers,  and 
see  that  the  door  of  my  cabinet,  and  especially  that  of  the 
grand  apartments,  is  in  charge  of  ushers." 

To  M.  DE  CHAMPAGNY. 

"  Paris,  25M  February,  181 1. 
"  I  have  read  with  attention  the  letters  from  Stockholm. 
There  is  so  much  effervescence  and  turmoil  in  the  head  of 
the  Prince  of  Sweden,  that  I  attach  no  importance  to  the 
communication  he  has  addressed  to  Baron  Alquier.  I  wish 
nothing  to  be  said  about  it  to  the  Minister  of  Denmark,  or 
to  the  Minister  of  Sweden,  and  I  desire  to  ignore  it  until 
further  orders.1  .  .  .  Write  to  my  minister  in  Denmark  to 
tell  the  Danish  Government  to  keep  the  fortified  places  in 
Norway  in  good  order,  ...  to  encourage  and  support 
Denmark,  and  say  that  as  long  as  she  acts  thus  I  shall 
sustain  her  with  the  whole  force  of  my  empire.  .  .  .  Write 
to  my  minister  at  Stockholm  that  I  attach  no  importance 
to  the  overture  made  by  the  Prince  of  Sweden  ;  that  I  am 
sufficiently  powerful  to  stand  in  need  of  no  one  to  help 
me  ;  that  my  relations  with  Russia  are  excellent,  and  that 

1  Bernadotte,  Prince  of  Sweden,  had  offered,  in  the  event  of  war 
between  France  and  Russia,  to  invade  Finland,  and  to  threaten  St. 
Petersburg,  provided  that  Napoleon  would  aid  Sweden  to  recover 
Norway  from  Denmark. 


MOLDAVIA   AND    WALLACHIA   AGAIN.  87 

I  have  no  fear  of  war  with  that  country ;  that  I  am  in  a 
good  situation  as  regards  Austria  ;  but,  that  as  my  finances 
are  in  so  prosperous  a  condition  I  have  augmented  my  armies 
by  1 50,000  men,  and  that  I  calculate  upon  doing  the  same 
next  year.  He  ought,  however,  to  insinuate  that  as  long 
as  the  alliance  with  Denmark  lasts,  France  cannot  permit 
any  harm  to  be  done  to  Norway.  This  should  be  said 
very  gently,  and  some  time  after  the  arrival  of  the  courier. 
He  must  add  that  to  wish  to  take  Norway  would  be  a 
piece  of  folly  on  the  part  of  Sweden  ;  that  Russia  would 
be  no  more  satisfied  than  Denmark,  as,  mistress  of  Norway, 
Sweden  would  be  better  able  to  recover  Finland.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

In  a  P.S.  the  Emperor  admitted  that  he  had  no  system 
with  regard  to  the  countries  in  question,  and  directed  that 
Baron  Alquier  should  speak  in  general  terms. 

On  the  same  day  M.  de  Champagny  was  directed  to  send 
a  courier  to  Vienna  with  instructions  for  M.  Otto,  who  was 
to  speak  about  the  approaching  confinement  of  the 
Empress,  and  to  express  the  hope  that  this  event  would 
draw  closer  the  bonds  uniting  the  two  empires.  M.  Otto 
was  also  directed  to  "  sound  M.  de  Metternich  on  the 
subject  of  a  near  war  between  Russia  and  Turkey,  to  know 
what  Austria  wishes  and  is  inclined  to  do.  By  the  treaty 
of  Tilsit,  France  stipulated  the  restoration  of  Moldavia 
and  Wallachia  to  the  Porte.  Since  then,  at  Erfurth,  the 
Czar  persuaded  France  to  ignore  that  clause,  and  to  med- 
dle no  more  with  the  question.  France  agreed  to  this 
through  hatred  of  Austria,  who  was  then  arming,  nothing 
being  more  opposed  to  the  interests  of  the  Austrian 
monarchy  than  the  occupation  of  those  provinces  by 
Russia.  To-day  France  regrets  to  see  this  large  terri- 
torial increase  on  the  part  of  Russia,  all  the  more  so 
because  the  last  ukase  will  exclude  French  silks  and 
produce  from  Moldavia  and  Wallachia.  But  it  is  to  be 
hoped  that  the  Porte  will  be  able  to  defend  the  two  pro- 


88      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

vinces  against  Russia  for  another  year.  Is  it  not  to  be 
feared  that  in  addition  to  these  provinces  the  Porte  may- 
lose  Servia  or  see  Russia  establish  a  hospodar  there  ? 
France  cannot  express  any  opinion  contrary  to  the  pos- 
session of  Moldavia  and  Wallachia  by  the  Russians  with- 
out annoying  them  and  driving  them  to  make  peace  with 
England,  a  peace  which  would  inevitably  lead  to  war 
between  France  and  Russia.  Besides,  Russia  has  gone 
too  far  to  renounce  the  two  provinces  to-day  in  cold  blood. 
Lastly,  France  has  only  a  secondary  interest  in  Moldavia 
and  Wallachia,  whereas  they  are  of  first-rate  interest  to 
Austria ;  it  is  important  to  know  how  far  Austria  is  dis- 
posed to  go,  and  what  she  is  in  a  position  to  do  to  hinder 
their  union  to  Russia. 

"All  this  should  be  said  in  conversation,  vaguely,  in 
order  to  feel  the  ground  and  to  form  an  idea.  The  union 
of  the  two  empires,  the  happy  circumstance  of  the  confine- 
ment of  the  Empress,  which  draws  them  closer  together ;  it 
is  from  this  point  that  you  must  start  in  order  to  try  and 
discover  the  real  intentions  of  the  ministry.  The  dis- 
pleasure occasioned  by  the  occupation  of  Moldavia  and 
Wallachia,  does  it  go  so  far  as  to  make  Austria  not  fear 
a  war  with  Russia  ?  Then  what  is  her  system  in  this 
affair  ?  What  hopes  does  she  conceive  from  the  resistance 
of  the  Turks  ?  Tell  Comte  Otto  to  find  out  the  names  and 
the  strength  of  the  Russian  regiments  in  the  two 
provinces. 

"  Napoleon." 

Three  days  after  writing  the  above  instructions,  Na- 
poleon addressed  the  following  observations  to  his  dear 
ally  of  the  raft  on  the  Neimen.  He  began  by  saying 
that  Caulain court  being  ill  he  wished  to  replace  him  by  the 
Comte  de  Lauriston,  and  he  was  profuse  in  his  expressions 
of  attachment  to  the  Czar,  but  he  added — "I  cannot  dis- 
guise from  myself  that  your  Majesty  has  no  longer  any 
friendship  for  me.    You  raise  all  kinds  of  difficulties  on  the 


INDICTMENT    AGAINST    THE    CZAR.  89 

subject  of  Oldenburg,  when  I  do  not  refuse  to  give  an 
equivalent  for  that  country,  which  has  always  been  a  hot 
bed  of  English  smugglers,  and  when  the  situation  of  that 
country  rendered  it  indispensable  that  I  should  unite  it  to 
my  states.  The  last  ukase  of  your  Majesty,  in  spirit,  and 
especially  in  form,  is  directly  aimed  at  France.  In  other 
days,  before  adopting  such  a  measure  against  my  com- 
merce, your  Majesty  would  have  given  me  warning.  .  .  . 
All  Europe  views  the  matter  in  this  light ;  and  already  our 
alliance  has  ceased  to  exist  in  the  eyes  of  England  and  of 
Europe.  .  .  .  Allow  me  to  say  frankly  to  your  Majesty 
that  you  forget  the  benefits  you  have  derived  from  this 
alliance  ;  and  yet  what  has  happened  since  Tilsit  ?  By 
the  treaty  of  Tilsit  you  should  have  restored  Moldavia 
and  Wallachia  to  Turkey  ;  yet,  instead  of  restoring  those 
provinces,  you  have  united  them  to  your  empire.  Mol- 
davia and  Wallachia  form  a  third  part  of  Turkey  in 
Europe  ;  it  is  an  immense  acquisition  which  in  resting 
the  vast  empire  of  your  Majesty  on  the  Danube,  deprives 
Turkey  of  all  force,  and,  it  may  be  said,  annihilates  that 
Power — my  most  ancient  ally.  However,  instead  of  hold- 
ing to  the  execution  of  the  treaty  of  Tilsit,  in  the  most 
disinterested  manner,  and  by  pure  friendship  for  your 
Majesty,  I  recognised  the  annexation  of  those  fine  and 
rich  countries ;  but,  without  my  confidence  in  your 
friendship,  several  unfortunate  campaigns  would  not  have 
induced  France  to  see  her  oldest  ally  thus  despoiled.  In 
Sweden,  when  I  restored  the  conquests  which  I  had  made 
in  that  country,  I  consented  that  your  Majesty  should  keep 
Finland,  which  was  the  third  of  Sweden,  and  a  province  so 
important  for  your  Majesty,  that  it  may  be  said  Sweden 
no  longer  exists.  And  yet  Sweden,  in  spite  of  the  false 
policy  of  its  king,  was  one  of  the  oldest  friends  of  France. 
Insinuating  men,  urged  on  by  England,  fatigue  the  ears  of 
your  Majesty  with  calumnies.  They  say  that  I  wish  to  re- 
establish Poland.  I  was  master  to  do  this  at  Tilsit.  Twelve 
days  after  Friedland  I  might  have  been  at  Wilna.     If  I 


90      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

had  wished  to  re-establish  Poland,  I  should  have  disinter- 
ested Austria  at  Vienna;  she  asked  to  preserve  her  ancient 
provinces  and  her  communications  with  the  sea,  and  that 
her  sacrifices  might  fall  on  her  Polish  possessions.  I  might 
have  re-established  Poland  in  1810,  when  all  the  Russian 
troops  were  engaged  against  the  Porte.  I  might  do  so  at 
present  without  waiting  for  your  Majesty  to  come  to  terms 
with  the  Porte.  As  I  have  not  done  so  under  any  of 
these  circumstances,  it  must  be  because  the  re-establish- 
ment of  Poland  does  not  enter  into  my  views.  But  if  I 
change  nothing  in  the  condition  of  Poland,  I  have  the 
right  to  insist  that  no  one  shall  interfere  with  what  I  do 
on  this  side  of  the  Elbe.  However,  it  is  true  that  our 
enemies  have  succeeded.  The  fortifications  which  your 
Majesty  is  constructing  at  twenty  points  along  the  Dwina, 
the  protests  in  connection  with  Oldenburg  and  the  ukase 
prove  it.  I  feel  the  same  towards  you,  but  I  am  struck 
by  the  evidence  of  facts  and  the  idea  that  your  Majesty  is 
inclined,  on  the  first  opportunity,  to  make  an  arrange- 
ment with  England,  which  would  be  equivalent  to  kindling 
war  between  the  two  countries.  ...  I  beg  your  Majesty 
to  read  this  letter  calmly,  and  to  see  nothing  in  it  but 
what  is  conciliatory,  calculated  to  remove  all  kinds  of 
distrust,  and  to  re-establish  between  the  two  nations  that 
intimate  alliance  which  for  nearly  four  years  has  been  so 
beneficial." 

Up  to  the  very  moment  of  drawing  the  sword  the  two 
potentates  who  were  so  recently  engaged  in  dividing  the 
world  between  them,  were  profuse  in  their  assurances  of 
friendship  but  neither  deceived  the  other,  and  both  knew 
in  what  these  negotiations  would  end. 

On  the  2nd  March,  181 1,  the  Emperor  wrote  a  letter  to 
Comte  Bigot,  which  is  not  inserted  in  The  Correspondence, 
saying — "  I  desire  that  100  more  of  the  worst  priests  be 
sent  from  Parma  and  Placentia  to  Spezzia,  and  be  there 
embarked  for  Corsica.  Let  the  minister  of  police  take 
measures   for  sending  the    necessary   funds    to   Corsica. 


NAVAL   AFFAIRS.  9 1 

Write  to  General  Morand  that  all  these  priests  must  be 
disembarked  at  Bastia  and  united  at  the  same  place.  .  ."1 

In  replying  to  a  deputation  from  Finistere  on  the  3rd 
March  the  Emperor  said  :  "  I  shall  go  to  Brest  as  soon  as 
possible.  The  power  of  my  people  is  such  that  in  four 
years  I  shall  have  more  than  100  line-of-battle  ships  and 
200  frigates.  The  sailors  of  the  Adriatic  and  those  of 
the  Baltic  already  rival  my  Bretons  and  Provencals  in  zeal 
and  courage,  in  order  to  contribute  to  the  liberation  of  the 
sea,  which  interests,  not  only  my  empire,  but  all  the  other 
nations  in  the  world.1' 

And  although  trade  and  commerce  were  represented  as 
so  flourishing,  on  the  4th  his  Majesty  wrote  to  Mollien 
saying :  "  I  authorise  you  to  employ  a  million  [40,000/.]  in 
making  advances  to  the  manufacturers  of  Amiens.  .  .  . 
I  authorise  you  to  have  purchases  made  at  Rouen,  St. 
Quentin,  and  Ghent  for  2,000,000  by  the  bank.  Follow 
these  operations  secretly  and  with  all  due  prudence." 

In  a  letter  addressed  to  Admiral  D^cres  on  the  8th 
March,  the  Emperor  thus  explained  his  naval  tactics  for 
1811  :— 

"  I  do  not  wish  my  squadrons  to  put  to  sea,  but  that  they 
must  be  always  provisioned  as  if  about  to  sail  ;  that  sealed 
orders,  to  be  opened  at  a  certain  distance  from  land,  be 
frequently  despatched  to  the  various  ports,  so  that  my 
admirals  themselves  may  think  that  they  are  about  to  sail. 
.  .  .  This  will  oblige  the  English  to  blockade  me  with 
five  squadrons,  or  sixty  vessels."  He  then  spoke  of  send- 
ing 30,000  men  to  Ireland,  of  expeditions  to  Sicily  or 
Egypt,  to  St.  Domingo,  Martinique,  Cayenne,  Surinam, 

1  Number  of  priests  who  suffered  persecution  since  senatus  con- 
sultum  of  17th  February,  1810: — Thirteen  Italian  cardinals  deprived 
of  the  emblems  of  their  dignity,  and  detained  in  France  under  the 
supervision  of  the  imperial  police.  Nineteen  bishops  of  the  Papal 
States  sent  from  Rome  to  France  under  the  escort  of  gendarmes  to 
live  there  under  the  same  conditions.  Similar  measures  struck  a 
number  of  canons  and  grand  vicars,  and  more  than  two  hundred 
priests  were  transported  to  Corsica. 


92  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

the  East  and  West  Indies,  and  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope. 
He  wrote  five  long  letters  to  Admiral  Decres  on  the  same 
day  upon  his  naval  conceptions,  which,  however,  depended 
a  good  deal  on  the  turn  taken  by  affairs  in  Spain.  Once 
able  to  withdraw  his  troops  from  that  country,  he  would, 
avoiding  the  British  cruisers,  spread  80,000  men  over  the 
two  hemispheres. 

To  M.  DE  CHAMPAGNY. 

"  Paris,  10th  March,  181 1. 
"  Send  a  courier  to  St.  Petersburg  with  a  letter  from 
General  Lauriston  to  Count  Romanzoff,  announcing  his 
approaching  departure,  his  desire  to  be  agreeable,  and  the 
hope  that  his  mission  will  meet  with  the  approbation  of 
the  Czar.  Inform  Caulaincourt  that  the  English  intend 
sending  a  large  fleet  into  the  Baltic,  and  that  I  have 
thought  fit  to  reinforce  Dantsic  with  a  few  companies  of 
infantry  and  artillery ;  that  the  infantry  is  all  Saxon 
or  Polish,  that  only  a  portion  of  the  artillery  is  French.  .  . 
Tell  him  to  say  that  I  am  this  year  forming  large  camps 
at  Toulon,  Boulogne,  the  Escaut,  and  at  Texel  [very  far 
from  the  Russian  frontier] ;  that  the  levies  are  aimed  at 
England  ;  that  I  have  no  wish  to  search  a  quarrel  with 
Russia,  but  that  I  shall  be  obliged  to  declare  war  should 
she  conclude  peace  with  England.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"Paris,  wth  March,  1811. 
"  I  have  received  your  report  on  the  Irish  regiment. 
Send  me  a  more  detailed  report,  informing  me  if  the 
officers  of  that  corps  are  Irish,  and  if  there  are  means  of 
creating  an  Irish  regiment  principally  recruited  among 
Germans.  This  regiment  might  be  useful  in  the  event  of 
an  expedition  to  Ireland.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 


BIRTH    OF    THE    KING    OF    ROME.  93 

On  the  1 6th  March  Napoleon  addressed  a  long  note  to 
the  ecclesiastical  committee,  in  which  he  recapitulated  the 
crimes  of  the  Pope.  He  said  :  "  Bulls  and  letters  have 
been  printed  by  order  of  the  Pope  and  spread  through 
the  whole  of  Christendom  ;  it  was  not  his  fault  that  the 
scenes  of  Clement,  of  Ravaillac,  and  of  Damiens  were  not 
renewed  ;  that  I  was  not  abandoned  by  my  people  and  by 
my  armies  like  Philippe  le  Long.  I  am  therefore  obliged 
to  admit  that  if  the  thunders  of  the  Church  have  had  little 
effect,  I  have  to  thank  the  intelligence  of  the  age,  and 
perhaps  the  fact  that  religion  has  lost  a  great  deal  in  the 
minds  "of  all  the  people  of  Europe.  .  .  . 

"  I  have  decided  upon  assembling  a  Council  of  the  West, 
to  which  I  shall  summon  the  bishops  of  Italy  and  Germany. 
...  I  desire  to  know,  1st,  how  the  convocation  should  be 
made,  2nd,  what  matters  should  be  treated  with  the  view 
of  causing  the  scandalous  struggles  between  the  temporal 
and  the  spiritual  to  disappear,  struggles  which  have  been 
so  baneful  to  religion,  for  they  have  occasioned  the  separa- 
tion of  the  Greek  Church,  of  that  of  England,  and  of  all 
the  northern  powers.  How  shelter  my  empire  from  the 
hatred  and  enmity  of  the  Court  of  Rome  which  will 
constantly  fall  on  my  descendants  as  it  fell  on  the 
descendants  of  Charlemagne.  .  .  ." 

On  the  19th  March  M.  de  Champagny  was  instructed  to 
give  plausible  explanations  to  Prince  Kourakine  on  the 
subject  of  the  12,000  men  sent  to  Dantsic  and  a  large 
number  of  guns  and  muskets  sent  to  Dresden. 

To  the  EMPEROR  OF  AUSTRIA. 

"  Paris,  20th  March,  181 1. 

"Sir,  my  Brother,  and  Father-in  Law,— Yester- 
day at  7  P.M.  the  Empress  sent  for  me.  I  found  her  on  a 
couch  beginning  to  feel  the  first  pains  of  child-birth.  She 
went  to  bed  at  eight  o'clock,  and  from  that  time  until  six 
she  suffered  severely.  The  doctor  thought  that  this 
deliverance  would  be  delayed  for  twenty-four  hours,  which 


94      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

made  me  send  away  the  court,  and  tell  the  senate,  the 
municipal  body,  and  the  chapter  of  Paris  that  they  could 
withdraw.  This  morning  at  eight  o'clock  the  accoucheur 
came  to  me  in  a  great  state  of  mind  to.  tell  me  that  the 
deliverance  would  be  very  difficult  and  would  be  attended 
with  great  danger  for  the  child.  The  Empress,  very 
weak  from  pain,  showed  the  greatest  courage,  and  at  nine 
the  faculty  having  declared  that  not  a  moment  was  to  be 
lost,  the  deliverance  took  place,  accompanied  by  great 
pain,  but  with  complete  success.  The  child  is  in  perfect 
health  and  the  Empress  as  well  as  can  be  expected  ;  she 
has  slept  a  little  and  taken  some  food.  Your  Majesty  can 
have  no  doubt  of  the  satisfaction  which  I  experienced  ;  the 
hope  of  this  event  perpetuating  the  bonds  which  unite  us 
is  considerably  increased. 

"  Napoleon." 

A  similar  announcement  was  sent  to  all  the  members  of 
the  imperial  family  with  the  exception  of  the  fugitive 
Louis. 

To  the  EMPRESS  JOSEPHINE. 

"Paris,  22nd March,  1811. 
"  My  Friend, — I  have  received  your  letter  and  thank 
you.  My  son  is  big  and  healthy.  I  hope  that  he  will 
grow  up  well.  He  has  my  chest,  my  mouth,  and  my 
eyes.  I  trust  that  he  will  fulfil  his  destiny.  I  continue  to 
be  satisfied  with  Eugene;  he  has  never  given  me  any 
pain. 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  24th  March  Napoleon  sent  pages  of  instructions 
to  Marshal  Davoust,  who  was  commanding  at  Hamburg, 
explaining  that  he  expected  Russia  would  force  on  a  war 
next  year  when  she  had  finished  with  the  Turks.  The 
marshal  was  to  represent  all  his  military  preparations  as 
directed  against  England,  and  he  was  to  persuade  Prince 
Poniatowski  to  form  national  guards  in  all  the  towns  in 


RUSSIA   AND    SERVIA.  95 

Poland,  and  to  say  that  he  had  100,000  muskets  packed 
up  for  arming  them. 

On  the  25th  March  Napoleon  wrote  a  long  letter  to 
M.  de  Champagny  on  the  subject  of  Mecklenburg,  which 
country  was  threatened  with  the  loss  of  its  independence 
unless  it  adhered  to  the  continental  system  and  furnished 
600  good  sailors  to  France  :  "  I  have  no  need  of  Mecklen- 
burg," said  his  Majesty,  "  but  I  shall  annex  it  if  it  does 
not  second  me  in  my  three  principal  means  of  war  against 
England.  I  am  not  obliged  to  respect  any  one,  since  the 
English  respect  no  one  at  sea."  The  same  sort  of 
language  was  to  be  held  to  Prussia  by  Comte  de  St. 
Marsan,  who  was  instructed  to  call  on  the  Prussian 
Government  to  prevent  smuggling,  to  intercept  all  com- 
mercial communications  with  England,  and  to  try  and 
persuade  Prussia  as  delicately  as  possible  to  furnish  1,000 
sailors.  He  was  also  to  say  clearly  that  peace  would 
depend  on  the  observation  of  the  treaty  of  Tilsitt  and 
the  execution  of  the  Berlin  decree.  Similar  threats  were 
to  be  held  out  to  Denmark  and  Sweden.  The  ambassador 
of  the  latter  country  was  to  be  told  that,  "  if  an 
American,  Danish,  Swedish,  Spanish,  or  Russian  vessel 
laden  with  colonial  produce  is  admitted  into  any  of  the 
ports  of  .Swedish  Pomerania,  my  troops  and  custom 
house  officers  shall  at  once  take  possession  of  that 
province." 

On  the  26th  March  Napoleon  directed  M.  de  Champagny 
to  send  further  instructions  to  his  ambassador  at  Vienna 
with  regard  to  Russia.  He  had  no  idea  of  allowing  the 
Russians  to  establish  themselves  in  Servia,  and  to  threaten 
the  tranquillity  of  Dalmatia  and  his  Illyrian  provinces. 

"  The  influence  of  the  new  Servian  Government,"  M.  de 
Champagny  was  to  write  to  M..Otto,  "would  extend  along 
the  whole  shore  of  the  Adriatic  to  the  Mediterranean  ;  a 
Grecian  sovereignty  established  in  Servia  would  arouse  the 
pretensions  and'  the  hopes  of  20,000,000  Greeks  from 
Albania   to    Constantinople,    who,   on   account   of   their 


96      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

r.eligion,  can  rally  only  round  Russia,  and  the  Turkish 
empire  would  be  wounded  to  the  heart. 

"  The  Emperor  wishes  you  therefore  to  declare  to  the 
Court  of  Vienna  that  he  will  not  permit  the  Russians, 
after  the  peace,  to  preserve  any  influence  in  Servia,  or  to 
establish  a  government  of  their  choice  there.  If  you  find 
the  Austrian  Cabinet  favourable,  you  can  even  concert 
measures  with  it,  so  that  on  the  conclusion  of  peace  Servia 
may  be  restored  to  the  Porte. 

"  The  Emperor  Alexander  entered  into  an  engagement 
with  the  Emperor  Napoleon  to  keep  nothing  in  Servia. 
The  occupation  of  Belgrade  is  a  violation  of  this 
promise.  ..." 

This  Servian  affair  was  to  be  kept  quite  clear  from  the 
Moldavian  Wallachian  affair,  concerning  which  Austria  had 
not  yet  replied. 

On  the  27th  March  the  Emperor  instructed  M.  de 
Champagny  to  inform  Prince  Kourakine  that  the  measures 
taken  by  Russia  necessitated  measures  on  the  part  of 
France  which  "  this  year  cost  4,000,000/.  ;  that  it  was  the 
Czar  who  commenced.   .  .  ." 

To  M.  DE  CHAMPAGNY 

"Paris,  2nd  April,  181 1. 

"  I  forward  you  a  report  from  Marshal  Marmont  with 
regard  to  the  request  of  Prince  Schwartzenberg  relative  to 
affairs  in  Illyria.  You  should  see  the  Marshal  in  order  to 
draw  up  a  reply,  and  try  if  it  would  not  be  better  to  settle 
the  mortmain  affairs.  Austria  can  then  do  what  she  likes 
with  the  Church  property  on  her  side,  and  I  shall  be  able 
to  seize  upon  all  on  my  side.  Matters  will  thus  be  equally 
balanced,  and  it  can  be  proved  in  a  note  that  Austria 
began. 

"  There  is  a  report  that  the  Emperor  of  Austria  has 
assumed  the  title  of  King  of  Dalmatia.  M.  Otto  has  said 
nothing  about  this, 

"  Napoleon." 


THE  CONFEDERATION  QF  THE  RHINE.      97 

On  the  2nd  April  the  Emperor  addressed  a  long  letter 
to  the  King  of  Wirtemberg  asking  for  a  regiment.  The 
kings  of  Saxony,  Bavaria,  and  Westphalia  had  contributed 
one  each.  The  object  was  to  protect  Dantsic  from  the 
English  or  any  other  Power.     Napoleon  added : — 

"  I  hope  and  believe  that  Russia  will  not  go  to  war. 
However,  since  the  end  of  last  year,  she  has  raised  new 
regiments,  and  is  marching  divisions  from  Finland,  Siberia, 
and  Moldavia,  to  the  frontiers  of  the  Grand  Duchy  of 
Warsaw,  &c.  These  are  facts.  All  that  is  repeated  to 
the  Czar  for  the  last  six  months  is  false.  They  have  made 
him  believe,  for  example,  that  I  have  asked  the  Con- 
federation for  troops.  His  commercial  ukase  proves  that 
his  policy  has  changed  ;  not  that  he  was  not  at  liberty  to 
adopt  this  measure,  but  one  remarks  in  it  something 
favourable  to  England  and  hostile  to  France.  Now  the 
Emperor  alone  in  Russia  was  in  favour  of  the  alliance 
against  England. 

"  Under  these  circumstances  your  Majesty  will  not,  I. 
am  sure,  allow  me  to  entertain  any  doubts  with  regard  to 
the  Confederation,  doubts  which  would  entirely  upset  the 
system  in  which  you  have  found  tranquillity  and  happiness- 
...  I  annexed  Hamburg  and  the  Hanse  towns  because  I 
was  unable  to  count  upon  them  in  my  system  against 
England.  If  the  princes  of  the  Confederation  allow  me 
to  entertain  the  smallest  doubt  with  regard  to  their  inten- 
tions, I  frankly  declare  that  they  will  ruin  themselves  ;  for 
I  prefer  having  open  enemies  to  having  doubtful  friends. 
As  soon  as  I  think  I  shall  have  an  enemy  the  more  I  shall 
raise  an  additional  30,000  men." 

After  pointing  to  the  melancholy  fate  which  overtook 
the  King  of  Prussia,  who  wept  before  Jena,  and  the 
Emperor  of  Austria,  Napoleon  went  on  to  say  : — 

"I  am  not  far  from  thinking  that  the  same  fate  will 
befall  the  Czar.  ...  If  Alexander  desires  war,  public 
opinion  is  in  conformity  with  his  intentions ;  if  he  does 

VOL.  III.  H 


98      THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

not  wish  for  war,  and  does  not  quickly  stop  the  impetus 
which  has  been  given,  he  will  be  carried  away  by  it  next 
year ;  and  thus  war  will  take  place  in  spite  of  him,  in 
spite  of  me,  in  spite  of  the  interests  of  France  and  those 
of  Russia.  I  have  seen  this  happen  so  often  that  my 
experience  of  the  past  unveils  the  future.  All  this  is  an 
operatic  scene,  the  shifting  of  which  is  in  the  hands  of  the 
English.  If  anything  can  remedy  the  situation,  it  is  the 
frankness  with  which  I  have  explained  matters  to  Russia. 
.  .  .  Lastly,  your  Majesty  cannot  suppose  that  I  wish  for 
war.  Why  should  I  wage  war  ?  To  re-establish  Poland  ? 
I  might  have  done  that  after  Tilsit,  after  Vienna,  this  year. 
.  .  .  Then  I  have  war  with  Spain  and  Portugal,  extending 
over  a  country  larger  than  France,  and  occupying  a  large 
number  of  men  ;  then  I  cannot  desire  war.  And  yet  I 
have  this  year  raised  120,000  men,  and  next  year  I  shall 
raise  120,000  more.  I  am  forming  new  regiments,  &c,  &c, 
because  I  suspect  that  Russia  is  acting  in  such  a  manner 
that  war  will  break  out  in  1812.  My  extraordinary  ex- 
penditure this  year  amounts  to  4,000,000/.  Do  you  think 
that  it  amuses  me  to  incur  expenses  so  considerable  ?  But 
if  I  do  not  wish  for  war,  and  if  I  am  far  from  desiring  to 
be  the  Don  Quixote  of  Poland,  I  have  the  right  to  insist 
upon  Russia  remaining  faithful  to  the  alliance,  and  I  must 
take  measures  not  to  permit  her  to  come  to  me  when  she 
has  concluded  the  war  with  Turkey,  and  to  say,  '  I  am 
going  to  withdraw  from  the  alliance,  and  to  make  peace 
with  England.'  .  .  .  "NAPOLEON." 

Caulaincourt  had  been  recalled  from  St.  Petersburg 
owing  to  lukewarmness,  and  because  he  evidently  dis- 
approved of  the  policy  of  his  master. 

On  the  5th  April  M.  de  Champagny  was  directed  to 
send  instructions  to  this  effect  to  Comte  Laufiston  at  St. 
Petersburg.  That  the  Emperor  would  not  go  to  war 
about  Poland,  nor  the  ukase  which  damaged  his  com- 
merce,  but   only   in   the   event   of    Russia   seizing  upon 


LETTER    TO    THE    CZAR.  99 

Servia,  or,  tearing  up  the  treaty  of  Tilsit,  concluding 
peace  with  England.  Napoleon  was  determined  not  to 
allow  Greek  influence  to  creep  down  by  way  of  Monte- 
negro and  the  Morea  to  the  Mediterranean.  He  added 
in  his  instructions : — 

"  As  for  Moldavia  and  Wallachia,  it  may  be  said  that 
Russia  holds  those  provinces  from  France.  The  policy  of 
the  Emperor  at  the  present  moment  is  not  to  meddle  with 
them ;  but  no  declaration  must  be  made  to  this  effect, 
because  if  matters  become  more  embroiled  it  is  probable 
that  Russia  will  end  by  losing  those  two  provinces.  ... 

"  Napoleon." 

To  the  EMPEROR  ALEXANDER. 

"  Paris,  6th  April,  181 1. 
"As  soon  as  I  learned  that  the  choice  of  Comte 
Lauriston  was  agreeable  to  your  Majesty,  I  gave  him 
orders  to  start.  I  do  not  send  your  Majesty  a  man  skilled 
in  diplomacy,  but  a  man  true  and  straightforward  as  the 
feelings  I  bear  you ;  and  yet  the  news  which  I  daily 
receive  from  Russia  is  not  pacific.  Yesterday  I  learned 
that  the  Russian  divisions  in  Finland  were  marching  on 
the  Grand  Duchy,  and  that  five  divisions  had  left  Moldavia 
and  Wallachia  for  Poland.  .  .  .  This  is  the  repetition  of 
what  happened  in  Prussia  in  1807,  and  in  Austria  in  1809. 
As  for  myself,  I  shall  remain  the  personal  friend  of  your 
Majesty,  even  should  that  fatality  which  drags  Europe 
along  place  arms  in  the  hands  of  our  two  nations.  ...  I 
shall  not  be  the  first  to  attack,  and  my  troops  shall  not 
advance  until  your  Majesty  has  torn  up  the  treaty  of 
Tilsit.  .  .  .  "Napoleon." 

-     To  THE  PRINCE  ROYAL  OF  SWEDEN.1 

"  Paris,  6th  April,  1811. 
"  My  COUSIN, — I  have  received  the  letter  in  which  you 
inform  me  that  the  King  of  Sweden,  owing  to  a  serious 
1  Bernadotte. 

H   2 


IOO    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

illness,  has  decided  to  hand  over  to  you  the  administration 
of  the  kingdom.  This  circumstance,  painful  to  your 
heart,  offers  you  an  opportunity  of  showing  the  nation 
over  which  you  have  been  called  to  reign  what  it  has  to 
expect  from  your  devotion  to  its  glory  and  its  happiness. 
I  hope  that  your  efforts  will  be  crowned  with  success.  I 
renew  with  pleasure  my  assurances  of  esteem  and 
friendship. 

"  Napoleon." 

to  comte  de  montalivet. 

"Paris,  i^th  April,  1811. 
"I  have  fixed  upon  the  2nd  June  for  the  baptism  of  the 
King  of  Rome,  which  will  be  celebrated  in  the  church  of 
Notre  Dame,  to  which  I  and  the  Empress  will  repair  to 
render  thanks  to  God  for  his  birth.  After  the  ceremony 
at  Notre  Dame,  I  shall  dine  at  the  Hotel  de  Ville  of  my 
good  city  of  Paris,  and  I  shall  witness  a  display  of  fire- 
works. The  same  day  a  Te  Deum  must  be  sung  through- 
out the  whole  Empire.  I  desire  fetes  and  rejoicings  to 
take  place  at  the  same  time.  .  .  .  You  must  send  me  a 
list  of  the  marriages  which  can  be  performed  in  each  of 
the  principal  towns,  endowing  poor  girls  and  orphans,  and 
uniting  them  to  old  soldiers. 

"  Napoleon." 


To  MARSHAL  DAVOUST,  at  Hamburg. 

"Paris,  16th  April,  181 1. 
"  I  send  you  two  fine  Spanish  battalions  forming  2,000 
men,  with  a  general.  The  soldiers  are  good  ;  they  volun- 
teered, and  have  served  for  two  years.  I  think  that  they 
will  fight  like  the  Portuguese,  and  that  there  will  be  very 
few  deserters  if  not  sent  to  the  outposts.  ...  It  is  pro- 
bable that  they  will  be  surrounded  by  pimps.  The  police 
should  keep  their  eyes  on  these  battalions ;  they  will 
catch  lots  of  English  agents. 

"  Napoleon." 


THE   ARMY    OF    GERMANY.  IOI 

Lord  Londonderry  mentions  that  when  Almeida  fell,  a 
large  portion  of  the  garrison  volunteered  to  serve  in  the 
French  army,  possibly  preferring  the  chance  of  desertion 
to  a  French  prison. 

On  the  same  day  Napoleon  sent  the  King  of  Saxony 
several  pages  of  instructions  to  serve  him  in  the  event  of 
war  with  Russia,  and  on  the  19th  he  furnished  General 
Clarke  with  the  composition  of  "  The  Army  of  Germany,'' 
which  was  to  be  divided  into  three  Corps  d 'Observation j 
of  the  Elbe,  of  the  Rhine,  of  Italy.  On  the  20th  his 
Majesty  called  for  a  return  of  the  numbers  of  Portuguese 
in  the  army,  saying,  that  well  fed  and  well  paid  they 
would  be  useful,  but  they  were  not  to  be  left  in  France, 
as  the  Emperor  objected  to  having  suspected  troops  in 
his  rear. 

On  the  24th  April  Napoleon  addressed  instructions  to 
the  Minister  of  Public  Worship  on  the  subject  of  de- 
spatching the  Archbishop  of  Tours,  and  the  bishops  of 
Nantes  and  Treves,  to  Savona  to  confer  with  the  Pope. 
This  mission  was  to  be  kept  secret.  If  the  Pope  would 
confirm  the  bishops  appointed  by  the  Emperor,'  and  if  he 
would  take  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  Emperor,  he 
would  be  allowed  to  return  to  Rome.  Should  he  refuse 
to  take  the  oath,  he  might  be  allowed  to  go  to  Avignon, 
where  he  would  enjoy  a  revenue  of  80,000/.  a  year,  on 
promising  to  do  nothing  contrary  to  the  four  propositions 
of  the  Gallican  Church.  As  for  the  temporal  power,  that 
was  dead  and  gone. 

On  the  30th  April  the  Emperor,  in  a  letter  addressed  to 
M.  Maret,  Due  de  Bassano,  who  had  succeeded  M.  de 
Champagny,  Due  de  Cadore,  complained  that  smuggling 
was  very  active  in  Prussia.  He  was  to  speak  to  the 
Prussian  ambassador  about  this.  He  was  also  to  write  to 
Saxony,  and  to  complain  that  smuggling  was  tolerated, 
and  to  ask  how  it  came  that  there  was  an  accumu- 
lation of  English  goods  at  Leipsic  The  Emperor 
added  : — 


102  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

"  Write  to  M.  St.  Marsan  that  he  allows  himself  to  be 
duped  by  Prussia  ;  that  all  these  movements  of  troops 
along  the  coasts  are  useless,  as  no  descent  on  the  part  of 
the  English  is  feared  ;  that  if  Prussia  be  arming,  it  must 
be  against  me,  and  that  I  shall  occupy  the  country  ;  that 
Prussia  must  therefore  remain  quiet  and  make  no  move- 
ment until  my  quarrel,  with  Russia  is  terminated.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

to  marshal  berthier. 

"  St.  Cloud,  "jth  May,  1811. 
"  I  send  you  a  translation  of  the  English  papers.  You 
will  see  that  Wellington  passed  the  Tagus  on  the  18th 
April.  .  .  .  You  will  perceive  that  what  I  foresaw  has 
happened ;  that  they  were  simple-minded  enough  [his 
generals]  to  leave  a  small  force  at  Olivenza,  and  to  allow 
300  men  to  be  captured.  Olivenza  was  taken  on  the  14th. 
It  appears  astonishing  to  me  that  Soult,  who,  on  the  4th 
April  was  aware  of  the  passage  of  Lord  Beresford,  did 
nothing  up  to  the  25th,  and  did  not  take  measures  to 
relieve  Badajoz  before  the  arrival  of  Wellington. 

"  Napoleon." 

That  there  was  a  considerable  amount  of  distress  in 
France  at  this  period  is  shown  by  many  letters.  On  the 
8th  May  Napoleon  directed  his  new  Minister  of  the 
Interior,  Comte  de  Montalivet,  to  double  the  amount  of 
money  given  in  charity,  and  to  triple  it  in  the  dangerous 
faubourgs  of  St.  Antoine  and  St.  Marceau,  also  at  Lyons 
and  Rouen.  Considerable  sums  were  to  be  distributed  at 
once,  and  large  public  works  undertaken  ;  large  purchases, 
too,  were  to  be  made,  especially  in  the  way  of  furniture, 
harness,  &c. 

On  the  26th  May,  the  Emperor  being  then  on  a  tour  of 
inspection,  wrote  to  Berthier  from  Caen  on  the  subject  of 
the  operations  in  Portugal.     He  said  : — 

"  Should  the  English  march  upon  Ciudad  Rodrigo,  let 


SPANISH   AFFAIRS.  IO3 

Bessieres  concentrate  his  forces  in  order  to  go  to  the  help 
of  Marmont,  and  to  deliver,  at  last,  a  grand  battle.  You 
will  point  out  to  him  that  instead  of  writing  every  day 
he  writes  hardly  ever.  Recommend  Marmont  to  re- 
organise his  army  well,  and  to  deliver  battle  if  the 
English  march  upon  Ciudad  Rodrigo,  in  which  case 
Bessieres  can  reinforce  him  with  10,000  men  of  my 
Guard  ;  tell  him  that  he  should  announce  my  approaching 
arrival  and  his  march  upon  Lisbon  as  soon  as  the  harvest 
is  cut.  ..." 

And  on  the  27th,  Joseph  being  still  in  Paris  : — 

"  The  king  can  leave  when  he  likes  ;  he  is  at  liberty  not 
to  await  my  return  to  Paris. 

"  I  require  a  marshal  to  command  the  army  of  the 
north.  Bessieres  does  not  appear  to  suit  the  king ;  I  am 
inclined  to  replace  him  by  Marshal  Jourdan,  if  that  be 
agreeable  to  the  king  and  to  the  marshal.  But  I  cannot 
change  the  organisation  of  the  army  of  the  north,  which 
must  remain  as  it  is,  further  than  placing  it  under  the 
orders  of  a  French  marshal  who  enjoys  the  confidence  of 
the  king." 

Up  to  the  1st  July  the  king  was  to  receive  20,000/.  a 
month,  and  for  the  remainder  of  the  year  40,000/.  a  month. 
The  Emperor  had  just  promised  Joseph  that  he  should 
act  as  commander-in-chief  in   Spain. 

King  Joseph  had  not  gone  to  Paris  for  the  christening 
of  the  King  of  Rome,  as  was  officially  announced,  but  to 
endeavour  to  persuade  Napoleon  to  allow  him  to  reign  in 
Spain,  and  not  to  ruin  the  country  and  drive  the  inhabit- 
ants to  despair.  Joseph,  in  a  royal  progress,  had  been  so 
well  received  that  he  felt  confident  of  being  able  to  rule 
if  his  terrible  brother  would  only  cease  devastating  the 
country.  What  his  position  was  before  he  left  for  Paris 
may  be  gathered  from  such  letters  as  the  following : — 

King  Joseph,  appealing  to  Berthier  for  money  on  the 
2 1st  February,  said:  "I  repeat  to  you  that  all  which  is 
robbed  here   is  afterwards  paid  for  in  French  blood.     I 


104  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

must  add  that  this  habit  of  pillaging  causes  many  of 
the  allied  soldiers  to  desert,  and  even  turns  them  into 
brigands." 

MINISTER  OF  WAR  TO  NAPOLEON. 

"Paris,  13th  March,  181 1. 
"  I  have  the  honour  to  lay  before  your  Majesty  details 
concerning  the  malversations    of  which  several  superior 
officers  of  the  army  of  Portugal  are  accused.     Follows  list 
of  colonels  and  embezzlements." 

JOSEPH  TO  BERTHIER. 

"  Madrid,  \?,th  March,  1811. 
"...  The  troops  in  my  service  have  neither  been  paid 
nor  clothed  for  eight  months.  .  .  .  The  contractors  have 
just  been  given  all  the  objects  of  value  which  still  existed 
in  the  palace  of  Madrid,  and  I  have  been  obliged  to  strip 
the  chapel  of  my  house.  .  .  .  MM.  Mazzarado  and  Campo 
Alange  have  been  reduced  to  asking  me  to  allow  them 
rations  for  their  families,  and  I  was  obliged  to  refuse,  as  all 
the  other  civil  servants  would  have  made  the  same  demand. 
My  ambassador  in  Russia  is  a  bankrupt ;  -the  one  in  Paris 
died  in  the  greatest  poverty,  and  I  live  here  amid  the  ruins 
of  a  great  monarchy." 

And  poor  Joseph  implored  permission  to  send  all  the 
thieves  back  to  France. 

To  MARSHAL  BERTHIER. 

"ALENgON,'lj/y«««,  l8ll. 

"  I  suppose  that  you  send  the  Moniteur  to  Spain.  Inform 
Marshal  Marmont  that  a  battle  took  place  on  the  16th  at 
five  leagues  from  Badajoz  between  Marshal  Soult,  who  is 
supposed  to  have  had  from  25,000  to  30,000  men,  and  the 
allies,  composed  of  the  Spaniards  of  Blake  and  Castanos, 
and  the  Portuguese  and  English  of  Beresford  and  Hill. 
The  English  say  in  their  newspapers  that  they  lost  three 


SPANISH    AFFAIRS.  IO5 

generals  and   8,000  men,  and  that  Lord  Wellington  was 

going    to    march    with    12,000    men   to   the   support    of 

Beresford. 

"  Napoleon." 

The  battle  here  alluded  to  was  Albuera,  in  which  the 
allies  suffered  very  heavily,  but  at  the  same  time  Soult  was 
foiled  in  his  attempt  to  relieve  Badajos.  We  find  no 
mention  in  The  Correspondence  of  the  retreat  of  Massena 
from  his  position  at  Santarem  in  front  of  the  lines  of 
Torres  Vedras,  no  mention  of  the  battle  of  Fuentes 
de  Honor,  nor  the  evacuation  of  Almeida,  which  shortly 
preceded  Soult's  failure.1 

1  Michaud,  in  his  Biographie  universelle,  thus  speaks  of  the  career 
of  Massena  when  fighting  against  us  in  the  Peninsula  :— 

"Wishing  to  drive  the  English  out  of  Portugal,  where  Junot  and 
Soult  had  failed,  Napoleon  in  18 10  selected  Massena,  the  most  daring 
and  fortunate  of  his  lieutenants,  and  confided  to  him  an  army  of 
80,000  men.  It  is  even  believed  that  the  Emperor  held  out  to  him  in 
perspective  the  crown  of  Portugal  as  the  reward  of  success.  Massena 
at  first  invested  Ciudad  [Rodrigo,  which  he  took,  and  then  laid  siege 
to  Almeida,  which  fell  in  the  middle  of  September.  He  then  pene- 
trated into  Portugal,  and  found  the  English  army,  commanded  by 
Wellington,  posted  on  the  heights  of  Busaco.  Instead  of  turning  it, 
he  attacked  it  in  front,  and  lost  between  6,000  and  7,000  men  in  killed 
and  wounded.  His  debut  was  therefore  marked  by  a  blunder.  Having 
at  last  turned  this  position  he  marched  upon  Lisbon,  and  Wellington 
retired  before  him.  Massena  thought  that  he  was  going  to  re-embark ; 
but  at  the  sight  of  the  formidable  lines  of  Torres  Vedras,  which 
covered  Lisbon,  he  was  struck  with  astonishment,  and  did  not  dare  to 
attack.  This  hesitation  made  the  campaign  a  failure.  All  his  opera- 
tions came  to  naught  in  presence  of  the  coolness  and  firmness  of  his 
adversary.  The  country  was  laid  waste ;  the  French  army  was 
perishing  from  hunger  and  want.  At  last,  after  having  passed  five 
months  near  Lisbon,  and  having  in  vain  offered  battle  to  Wellington, 
the  marshal,  seeing  his  forces  disorganised  and  half  exhausted,  made 
preparations  to  fall  back.  This  retreat  was  worthy  of  the  high  repu- 
tation of  our  troops  and  of  Massena  himself.  ....  This  campaign 
cost  him  20,000  men.  He  little  expected,  when  his  army  was  re- 
organised, reinforced,  and  once  more  formidable,  to  find  his  prudent 
antagonist  suddenly  changed  into' a  daring  adversary.      His  pride, 


106     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

On  the  2nd  June,  1811,  in  a  letter  to  the  minister  of 
public  worship,  not  inserted  in  The  Correspondence, 
Napoleon  said — 

"  I  have  turned  the  Bishop  of  Seez  out  of  my  house,  and 
I  have  had  one  of  the  canons,  named  Le  Gallois,  arrested 
and  sent  to  Paris.  The  Minister  of  State  will  send  you  the 
resignation  of  the  bishop.  It  is  impossible  for  any  one  to 
be  more  evil-minded.  Everything  was  going  wrong  in  his 
diocese.  .  .  ." 

The  facts  of  the  case  appear  to  be  as  follows  : — On  the 
31st  May,  181 1,  Napoleon,  passing  through  Seez  with 
Marie  Louise,  was  told  that  the  bishop  of  that  place  was 
imbued  with  royalist  proclivities.  The  prelate  was  sent 
for,  and  after  some  violent  abuse,  was  ordered  to  resign, 
while  all  his  papers  were  seized.  A  few  hours  afterwards 
the  grand  vicars  and  the  chapter  were  sent  for,  and  the 
Emperor  poured  forth  all  the  vials  of  his  wrath  upon  the 
Abbe  Le  Gallois,  who  was  said  to  have  exercised  great 
influence  over  the  bishop,  whose  crime  was — 1st,  that  he 
had  ordered  vespers  to  be  sung  on  religious  feast  days 
suppressed  by  the  Emperor.  2nd,  that  he  was  frequently 
absent  when  rosihes  married  retired  officers.  The  result 
of  this  scene  was  that  the  bishop  got  an  attack  of 
paralysis  and  died  before  the  end  of  the  year,  and  the 
Abbe  Le  Gallois  was  taken  to  Paris  in  custody  of  two 
gendarmes,  and  thrown  into  the  prison  of  La  Force, 
where  he  remained  for  eleven  days  in  solitary  confine- 
ment, "  sleeping  on  the  still  warm  straw  of  an  unfortu- 
nate wretch  who  had  been  led  to  the  scaffold."  The 
Minister  of  Police,  in  a  report  upon  the  affair,  to  the  an- 
noyance of  the  Emperor,  acquitted  the  abbe.    The  reply 

wounded  to  see  Wellington,  after  having  pursued  him,  invest  Almeida, 
and  carry  off  his  prey  under  his  very  eyes,  drove  him  to  make  two 
murderous  attacks  on  the  English  army  posted  at  Fuentes  de  Honor. 
He  was  not  more  fortunate  than  at  Busaco,  and  abandoning  Portugal 
he  fell  into  disgrace  with  the  Emperor,  who  appointed  as  his  successor 
a  less  skilful  and  more  unfortunate  commander  (Marmont)." 


GENERAL    BELLIARD.  107 

of  Napoleon  was — "  He  is  too  clever ;  he  is  a  dangerous 
man ;  let  him  be  confined  at  Vincennes,"  and  there  he 
remained  for  nine  months.  He  was  then  attacked  with 
paralysis,  and  was  removed  to  a  hospice,  where  he 
remained  till  the  fall  of  the  Empire.1 

King  Joseph  had  been  anxious  to  get  rid  of  General 
Belliard,  and  to  keep  Marshal  Jourdan,  but  he  was 
ordered  to  retain  the  services  of  the  first,  and  was 
obliged  to  dispense  with  the  services  of  the  second. 
Now  Napoleon  was  inclined  to  send  Jourdan  back  to 
Spain,  and  wrote — 

To  MARSHAL  BERTHIER. 

"St.  Cloud,  Zth  June,  1811. 
"  Reply  to  General  Belliard,2  that  you  have  laid  his  letter 
before  me ;  that  he  must  have  lost  his  head  when  he  wrote 
it ;  that  to  offer  his  resignation  on  account  of  not  obeying 
orders  is  equivalent  to  declaring  that  he  will  not  obey  ; 
that  this  is  to  incur  the  penalty  of  capital  punishment ; 
that  his  3,000  men  and  1,200  horses  might  have  saved  the 
army  of  the  south  ;  that  he  is  very  culpable,  ....  that 
there  are  three  or  four  paragraphs  in  his  letter  which 
are  not  those  of  a  soldier,  that  if  you  had  placed  them 
under  the  eyes  of  the  Emperor,  he  would  have  had  him 
arrested  and  would  have  made  an  example  of  him  for  this 
breach  of  military  discipline  ;  that,  through  respect  for  his 
previous  services,  and  owing  to  the  friendship  you  bear 
him,  you  have  not  informed  the  Emperor  of  his  uncalled- 
for  expressions,  and  that  you  confined  yourself  to 
saying  that  my  orders  had  been  carried  out ;  that  this 
affectation  of  sentiments  of  honour  and  personality  is  the 
height  of  ridicule  and  of  military  insubordination  ;  that  the 
honour  of  a  general  consists  in   obeying,  in  keeping  his 

1  L'Eglise  Romaine  et  le  Premier  Empire,  Comte  d'Haussonville, 
vol.  iv.  p.  183. 

2  Belliard  had  seen  an  immense  amount  of  service,  and  had  saved 
Napoleon's  life  at  Areola. 


108     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

subalterns  in  the  road  of  probity,  in  maintaining  discipline, 
in  devoting  himself  exclusively  to  the  interests  of  his 
country  and  his  sovereign,  and  in  entirely  disdaining 
private  interests  ;  that  you  see  by  the  tone  of  his  letter 
that  he  has  unlearned  what  France  is,  and  that  when  it 
is  a  question  of  executing  the  orders  of  the  Emperor  he 
thinks  that  he  is  speaking  to  the  King  of  Spain. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  ADMIRAL  DECRES. 

"  St.  Cloud,  13th  June,  181 1. 
"I  beg  that  you  will  write  a  letter  to  the  transport  office, 
demanding  the  return  to  France  of  all  the  prisoners  who 
are  in  England,  captured  at  Baylen  with  Dupont's  army. 
Put  forward  some  reasons  to  show  how  just  this  would 
be. 

"  Napoleon." 

Dupont  had  capitulated  to  the  Spaniards,  on  condition 
of  being  allowed  to  return  to  France  with  his  army,  it  was 
therefore  argued  that  the  English  had  no  right  to  capture 
any  of  Dupont's  men  returning  home  by  sea. 

On  the  1 6th  June,  at  the  opening  of  parliament,  Napo- 
leon made  a  speech  to  this  effect — "  The  peace  concluded 
with  Austria  has  been  cemented  by  the  happy  alliance 
which  I  contracted.  The  birth  of  the  King  of  Rome  has 
fulfilled  the  wishes,  and  assures  the  future  of  my  people." 

Turning  to  religious  affairs,  and  "the  pretensions  of  a 
small  corner  of  Italy,"  his  Majesty  said — "  I  have  united 
Rome  to  the  empire.  I  have  accorded  palaces  to  the 
Popes  in  Rome  and  in  Paris.  If  they  have  the  interests 
of  religion  at  heart,  they  will  often  sojourn  in  the  centre  of 
affairs  in  Christendom.  .  .  .  Holland  has  been  united  to 
the  empire  ;  she  is  but  an  emanation  of  it ;  without  her  the 
empire  would  not  be  complete."  Then  came  a  few  words 
about  the  conduct  of  England,  which  had  obliged  him  to 
make  sure  of  the  mouths  of  the  Ems,  the  Weser,  and  the 


THE  STRUGGLE  WITH  CARTHAGE.       109 

Elbe.  He  had  also  been  obliged  to  annex  the  Valais,  "  in 
order  to  conciliate  the  interests  of  Switzerland  with  those 
of  France  and  of  Italy." 

As  for  the  English  they  were  accused  of  all  kinds  of 
crimes,  and  French  legislators  were  informed  that  "war 
through  every  part  of  the  Continent  could  alone  insure 
the  prosperity  of  England."  Then  the  author  of  war,  in 
every  portion  of  Europe,  declared — "  I  wish  for  nothing  but 
what  is  contained  in  the  treaties  which  I  have  concluded. 
I  shall  never  sacrifice  the  blood  of  my  people  for  interests 
not  immediately  connected  with  those  of  my  empire.  I 
flatter  myself  that  the  peace  of  the  Continent  will  not  be 
disturbed. 

"The  King  of  Spain  came  to  take  part  in  this  last 
solemnity.  I  have  granted  him  all  that  is  necessary  for 
.his  people.  .  .  .  Since  1809  most  of  the  strong  places  in 
Spain  have  been  taken  after  memorable  sieges ;  the 
insurgents  have  been  beaten  in  a  number  of  pitched 
battles.  England  understands  that  this  war  is  drawing 
to  a  close,  and  that  henceforth  intrigues  and  gold  are  not 
sufficient  to  feed  it.  She  has  been  forced,  from  an  aux- 
iliary, to  become  the  chief  actor  in  that  war.  All  her 
regular  troops  have  been  despatched  to  the  Peninsula. 
English  blood  has  been  shed  in  streams  in  several  actions 
glorious  to  the  French  arms.  This  struggle  against  Carth- 
age, which  was  to  have  been  decided  on  the  ocean,  or 
beyond  the  seas,  will  henceforward  be  decided  in  the  plains 
of  Spain  !  When  England  is  exhausted,  and  feels  the  mis- 
fortunes with  which  she  has  so  cruelly  afflicted  the  Conti- 
nent for  twenty  years;  when  half  of  her  families  are 
covered  with  mourning,  a  thunder  stroke  will  put  an  end 
to  the  affairs  of  the  Peninsula,  to  the  destinies  of  her 
armies,  and  will  revenge  Europe  and  Asia  by  bringing 
this  second  Punic  war  to  a  close." 

After  this  fine  flourish  came  the  usual  announcement 
that  the  country  and  the  finances  were  in  a  prosperous 
condition,  and  that  no  new  taxes  were  to  be  levied. 


IIO  THE    CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  M.  MARET. 

"  St.  Cloud,  21  si  June,  181 1. 
"  I  beg  that  you  will  hint  gently  to  the  Swedish  ambas- 
sador that  I  regret  to  see  the  Princess  Royal  arrive  in 
France  without  having  obtained  permission ;  that  this  is 
not  usual,  and  that  I  am  sorry  she  should  have  left  her 
husband  at  so  critical  a  moment.  You  should  also  speak 
to  the  ambassador  about  the  relations  of  Sweden  with 
England.  «  NAPOLEON. " 

The  Princess  Royal  was  Napoleon's  old  flame,  Desired 
Clary,  the  sister  of  Joseph's  wife,  who  married  Bernadotte. 
Napoleon  would  probably  have  liked  her  to  remain  at 
Stockholm  to  play  the  spy. 

On  the  21st  June  further  instructions  were  sent  to  Comte 
Lauriston  at  St.  Petersburg.  He  was  to  speak  very  plainly 
to  the  Czar,  and  to  say  that  France  was  quite  ready  for 
war,  and  had  men  under  arms  and  money  in  her  coffers ; 
he  was,  however,  to  add  that  Napoleon  desired  peace,  but 
was  to  leave  the  court  of  St.  Perersburg  no  hope  that  his 
Majesty  would  allow  Poland  to  be  touched  ;  that  would 
dishonour  him,  and  he  preferred  honour  to  life. 

Writing  the  next  day  to  M.  Maret,  the  Emperor  said 
that  "  Russia  appears  to  be  frightened  since  I  picked  up 
the  glove ;  but  nothing  is  yet  decided ;  the  object  of 
Russia  seems  to  be  to  obtain,  as  an  indemnity  for  the 
Duchy  of  Oldenburg,  the  cession  of  two  districts  of 
Poland,  which  I  will  not  consent  to,  by  honour  and 
because  that  would  altogether  destroy  the  grand  duchy." 
The  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs  would  write  this  to  the 
poor  King  of  Saxony,  who  had  been  driven  from  his  capital 
during  the  war  with  Austria,  and  was  once  more  in  a 
dangerous  position,  and  was  to  add — "  Marshal  Davoust  has 
130,000  men  in  hand,  and  I  wish  the  Saxon  corps 
to  be  held  in  readiness  to  march,  also  the  three  Polish 
divisions  in  the  Grand  Duchy." 


A    HINT    TO    MURAT.  I  I  I 

At  the  close  of  a  letter  addressed  to  his  minister  of  war 
on  the  23rd  June,  the  Emperor  wrote — 

"  I  wish  to  see  the  plans  relative  to  the  invasion  of 
Ireland  again,  so  as  to  force  England  to  withdraw  troops 
from  Spain.  Nothing  ought  to  be  more  easy  than, 
towards  the  end  of  October,  to  throw  25,000  men  into 
Ireland." 

On  the  26th  June,  M.  Maret  was  instructed  to  complain 
to  the  minister  of  Naples  that  the  king  of  that  country 
(Murat)  was  doing  nothing  for  the  common  cause,  "  and  yet," 
added  the  Emperor,  "  I  have  reduced  the  number  of  French 
troops  in  that  kingdom.  ...  Point  out  to  Baron  Durand 
the  difference  between  the  kingdoms  of  Naples  and  Italy, 
which  is  also  one  of  my  conquests  ;  that  the  kingdom  of 
Italy  brings  me  in  30,000,000  francs  a  year,  holds  60,000 
men  at  my  disposal,  spends  3,000,000  francs  on  the  strong 
places  which  cover  my  frontier,  has  offered  me  several 
frigates,  has  eight  ships  of  the  line  afloat,  and  will  soon 
have  nine,  and  furnish  over  1,500  sailors."  M.  Maret 
was  to  add  in  conversation  that  when  Louis  was  king, 
Holland  was  of  no  assistance,  but  that  now  she  furnished 
10,000  sailors  and  twelve  ships  of  the  line — which  was  a 
gentle  hint  to  King  Murat. 

To  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"  St.  Cloud,  4M  July,  181 1. 

"  Send  for  O'Connor  and  the  other  Irishmen  in  Paris 
and  get  up  an  Irish  party.  I  have  at  this  moment 
twenty-five  ships  of  war  at  the  Escaut,  and  nine  at  Texel. 
I  am  inclined  to  send  an  expedition  of  30,000  men  and 
4,000  horses  to  Ireland  at  the  end  of  October.  ...  I  will 
conclude  any  treaty  that  the  Irish  wish.  I  attach  great 
importance  to  this.  I  wish  to  have  a  plan  and  to  know 
how  I  stand  before  a  fortnight.  There  is  nothing  to  pre- 
vent me  getting  out  of  the  Scheldt,  and  the  English, 
having  no  soldiers  in  England,  will  be  obliged  to  recall 


112     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

their  troops  from  the  Peninsula.  This  will  take  two  or 
three  months,  and  we  shall  have  time  to  establish  ourselves 
in  the  country  before  they  arrive. 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  1 2th  July,  Napoleon,  who  was  then  at  the 
Trianon,  drew  up  a  note  on  the  completion  of  the  Palace 
of  Versailles  in  which  we  find — "  His  Majesty  will  inhabit 
the  first  floor  in  the  portion  built  by  Louis  XIII.  The 
Empress  will  inhabit  the  ground  floor  below  the  Emperor, 
and  the  children  of  France  the  other  part  of  the  ground 
floor."  His  Majesty  proposed  to  lay  out  over  14,000,000 
francs  on  the  necessary  additions  and  embellishments.  As 
a  matter  of  fact,  Napoleon  never  inhabited  Versailles, 
where  no  French  sovereign  has  taken  up  his  abode  since 
the  ill-fated  Louis  XVI.  was  dragged  from  that  palace 
and  escorted  to  Paris  by  the  revolutionary  mob  which 
afterwards  put  him  to  death. 

To  M.  MARET. 

"St.  Cloud,  1st  August,  181 1. 
"I  shall  make  no  difficulty  about  granting  Prussia 
licences  for  the  exportation  of  Silesian  cloths.  Demand 
that  Prussia  shall  no  longer  receive  any  colonial  produce 
coming  from  Russia.  I  will  willingly  give  Prussia  licences 
for  exporting  corn  to  England  on  condition  of  her  being 
paid  in  money.  The  duties  will  go  to  Prussia,  and  I  shall 
only  have  the  duty  on  the  licence.  The  great  affair  is  to 
prevent  colonial,  produce  entering  Prussia  by  way  of 
Russia.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

It  was  one  of  the  causes  of  dispute  with  Russia,  that 
while  Napoleon  insisted  upon  her  rigorously  observing 
the  continental  system,  he  violated  the  system  himself  by 
the  sale  of  licences. 


LICENCES. 


"3 


The  effect  of  the  system  of  licences  may  be  thus  sum- 
med up.  The  English  alone  possessed  the  merchandise 
required,  which  they  sold  to  the  holders  of  licences  at  an 
exorbitant  price.  The  French  purchaser  was  supposed  to 
offer  French  goods  in  exchange,  but  it  frequently  happened 
that  the  goods  thus  offered  were  prohibited  in  England, 
and  had  to  be  thrown  overboard  to  keep  up  the  exports  ! 
Add  to  the  above  charges  the  tax  paid  for  the  licence,  and 
the'profit  of  the  merchant,  and  a  fair  idea  may  be  formed 
of  the  price  which  the  consumer  had  to  pay  for  a  pound 
of  sugar  or  of  coffee,  and  of  the  encouragement  thus  given 
to  smugglers.  Finding  that  prohibited  goods  existed  in 
large  quantities  in  France,  Napoleon  placed  a  tax  of  50 
per  cent,  on  all  colonial  produce,  and  ordered  goods  of 
English  manufacture  to  be  burned,  although  the  loss  fell 
upon  French  merchants.  To  see  his  decrees  carried  out, 
forty-one  special  tribunals  were  created  which  punished 
smugglers,  &c,  with  the  penalty  of  death,  of  hard  labour, 
and  branding,  while  informers  were  encouraged  by  the 
promise  of  half  the  prohibited  merchandize  they  enabled 
the  authorities  to  seize.  The  taxes  of  50  per  cent,  was 
levied  on  all  colonial  produce,  no  matter  what  its  origin, 
whether  it  belonged  to  a  person  who  had  purchased  a 
licence,  or  whether  it  had  been  captured  by  a  French 
corsair  and  sold.  The  merchant  who  could  not  pay  in 
money  had  to  forfeit  half  his  stock. 

According  to  Miot  de  Melito,  the  continental  blockade 
caused  such  distress  in  France  that  complaints  arose  on 
all  sides  and  broke  forth  in  murmurs  and  insulting 
placards.  The  Emperor,  he  says,1  made  the  following 
remarkable  reply  at  this  time  to  a  deputation  of  merchants 
to  whom  he  granted  an  audience— reply  which  is  not  given 
in  The  Correspondence — 

1  In  a  note  Comte  Miot  de  Melito  says  that  the  effect  of  the  decrees 
would  have  been  disastrous  for  England  but  for  the  scandalous  traffic 
in  licences,  which  enriched  the  courtiers,  and  was  said  to  have 
swelled  the  privy  purse  of  the  Emperor. 

VOL.   III.  I 


114    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

"  The  decrees  of  Berlin  and  of  Milan  are  the  funda- 
mental laws  of  my  empire.  As  for  neutres,  I  look  upon 
the  flag  as  an  extension  of  the  territory ;  the  power  which 
allows  it  to  be  violated  cannot  be  considered  as  neutral. 

"The  fate  of  American  commerce  will  soon  be  decided; 
I  shall  favour  it  if  the  United  States  conform  to  these 
decrees  ;  if  they  do  not,  their  ships  shall  be  driven  from 
my  empire. 

"  The  commercial  relations  with  England  must  cease. 
I  say  this  firmly,  gentlemen  ;  those  merchants  who  have 
business  to  terminate  and  funds  to  withdraw  must  do  so 
at  once.  I  gave  this  advice  some  time  ago  to  the 
people  of  Antwerp,  and  they  find  themselves  very  well  off. 
I  wish  for  peace,  but  not  a  patched-up  peace ;  I  wish  for 
it  in  good  faith,  for  I  have  not  forgotten  the  losses  which 
commerce  experienced  by  the  last  declaration  of  war. 
I  should  not  have  made  peace  at  Tilsit ;  I  should  have 
gone  to  Wilna  and  further  but  for  the  promise  of  the 
Emperor  of  Russia  to  bring  about  peace  between  France 
and  England.  Before  the  annexation  of  Holland  I  made 
new  overtures  for  peace ;  the  English  Government  would 
not  listen  to  them. 

"  The  Continent  shall  remain  closed  to  English  import- 
ations. I  shall  remain  armed  from  head  to  foot  in  order 
to  cause  my  decrees  to  be  executed,  and  to  resist  the 
attempts  of  the  English  in  the  Baltic.  Some  fraudulent 
practices  still  exist,  but  they  shall  be  annihilated.  Those 
who  only  think  of  evading  the  law  by  means  of  extrava- 
gant operations  end  by  becoming  bankrupts.  But,  if  they 
manage  to  escape  my  custom-house  officers,  my  sword 
shall  reach  them  sooner  or  later. 

"  I  have  an  ear  in  the  chambers  of  commerce ;  I  know 
that  my  measures  are  loudly  blamed,  and  that  the 
merchants  say  I  am  badly  advised.  I  cannot  be  angry 
with  them  for  their  opinions  because  they  are  not  in  a 
position  to  see  and  calculate  as  I  am.  Those  persons  who 
have  just  returned  from  England,  and  who  have  seen  the 


FRENCH    COMMERCE.  I  I  5 

effect  produced  by  the  interruption  of  trade  with  the 
Continent,  cannot  help  saying — '  Perhaps  he  is  right,  and 
will  attain  his  end.' 

"  In  my  empire  the  internal  commerce  amounts  to  over 
160,000,000/.  It  is  upon  this  basis  that  its  resources  and 
prosperity  must  be  combined.  I  know  that  Bordeaux, 
Hamburg,  and  other  ports,  suffer  by  the  interruption  of 
maritime  commerce,  while  the  municipal  regulations  in- 
troduced by  the  Czar  will  do  harm  to  the  manufactures 
of  Lyons.  There  are  individual  losses.  I  endeavour  to 
alleviate  them.  But  the  exportations  for  Russia,  which 
do  not  exceed  1,000,000/.,  are  of  little  account.  Russia 
has  paper  money,  Austria  also ;  England  is  swamped 
with  it.  France  is  the  richest  country  in  the  globe. 
Her  territorial  resources  are  enormous.  She  has  a  great 
deal  of  money.  After  an  inquiry  just  made,  over 
40,000,000/.  has  entered  France  in  the  shape  of  war  con- 
tributions. I  have  8,000,000/.  in  my  private  treasury  at 
the  Tuileries." 

Napoleon  went  on  to  say  that  France,  thanks  to 
chemistry,  would  soon  be  able  to  do  without  the  sugar 
and  the  indigo  of  India,  to  talk  of  building  a  fleet  of 
200  line  of  battle  ships,  and  to  indulge  in  other  dreamy 
speculations. 

To_PRINCE  CAMBACERES. 

"St.  Cloud,  ^rd  August,  181 1. 
"  I  send  you  the  papers  relative  to  the  order  of  the 
union.  The  shield  and  the  device  do  not  suit  me.  A 
great  state  cannot  take  for  device — Fais  ce  que  dots, 
adrienne  que  pourra.  That  is  the  device  of  a.  doughty 
knight.  A  device  must  be  formed  showing  the  advan- 
tages of  the  union  of  the  Baltic,  the  Mediterranean,  the 
Adriatic,  and  the  Ocean.  This  great  event,  which  really 
characterises  the  empire,  might  be  called  the  Order  of  the 
Union.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

1  2 


Il6    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

To  ADMIRAL  DECRES. 

"St.  Cloud,  16th  August,  1811. 
"  Which  is  the  best  port  for  assembling  my  squadron 
of  the  ocean  ?  I  see  only  two  between  which  to  choose — 
Brest  or  Cherbourg.  Which  of  those  two  ports  offers 
the  greatest  facilities  for  invading  England  or  Ireland? 
Which  of  the  two  offers  the  greatest  facilities  for  sailing 
to  America  and  India  ?  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

The  Emperor  was  always  most  particular  in  seeing  that 
the  lives  of  his  troops  were  not  uselessly  sacrificed,  and 
that  unhealthy  quarters  were  not  occupied. 

To  MARSHAL  DAVOUST. 

"St.  Cloud,  idth  August,  181 1. 
"  I  send  you  a  letter  from  a  soldier  in  garrison  at 
Stettin.  He  says  that  there  are  a  great  many  men  on  the 
sick  list.  I  thought  that  the  air  of  Stettin  was  good.  .  .  . 
Take  care  to  have  my  troops  quartered  in  places  where 
no  sickness  is  to  be  feared.  Better  fight  the  most 
sanguinary  battle  than  leave  troops  in  an  unhealthy  spot. 
Remember  what  happened  to  Moraud's  division  after  the 
battle  of  Wagram. 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  17th  August  Napoleon  wrote  to  the  Minister  of 
Public  Worship,  giving  him  instructions  for  the  deputa- 
tion which  was  going  to  Savona  to  ask  the  Pope  to  adhere 
to  the  decree  of  the  council  which  had  been  assembled  in 
Paris.  In  order  to  render  this  deputation  all  the  more 
imposing,  it  was  to  consist  of  no  less  than  nine  prelates, 
the  Archbishops  and  Bishops  of  Paris,  Tours,  Venice, 
Treves,  Malines,  Nantes,  &c.  "  The  '  decree/  said 
Napoleon,  extends  over  all  the  bishoprics  of  the  empire, 


THE   IONIAN    ISLANDS.  117 

of  which  Rome  forms  a  part,  and  over  those  of  our  king- 
dom of  Italy,  of  which  Ancona,  Urbino  and  Feltro  form 
part.  Also  over  Hamburg,  Munster,  the  grand  duchy  of 
Berg,  Holland,  Illyria,  and  all  the  countries  united,  or  to 
be  united,  to  France." 

On  the  1 8th  August  the  Emperor  received  a  deputation 
from  the  Ionian  Islands,  at  the  Tuileries,  and  in  reply  to 
an  address  said : — 

"  I  have  carried  out  large  works  in  your  island.  I 
collected  a  great  many  troops  there,  and  ammunition  of 
all  sorts.  I  do  not  regret  the  money  which  Corfu  has  cost 
my  treasury  ;  it  is  the  key  of  the  Adriatic.  I  shall  never 
abandon  isles  which  have  fallen  into  the  power  of  the 
enemy  owing  to  his  superiority  at  sea.  In  India,  as  in 
America  (meaning  West  Indies),  as  in  the  Mediterranean, 
all  that  is  and  has  been  French  shall  remain  French. 
Conquered  by  the  enemy,  owing  to  the  vicissitudes  of 
war,  they  will  return  to  the  empire  by  other  vicissitudes, 
or  by  the  stipulations  of  peace.  .  .  ." 

,  "Napoleon." 

To  ADMIRAL  DECRES. 

"St.  Cloud,  igtk  August,  181 1. 
"  Let  me  know  what  day  my  troops  can  embark  at 
Cherbourg.  When  will  all  the  vessels  be  there  ?  .  .  .  I 
have  a  great  many  relations  with  Ireland.  I  already  hold 
the  thread  which  sets  a  good  many  things  in  motion.  My 
agents  begin  to  come  and  go.  .  .  . 

"Napoleon." 

To  GENERAL  DUROC,  Due  de  Frioul. 

"St.  Cloud,  19th  August,  181 1. 

"You   must   inform   Comte   de  Remusat   that  he   has 

nothing  more  to  say  to  my  wardrobe.     Until  I  have  found 

some  one  to  replace  him,  you  must  perform  the  functions. 

I  send  you   the   budget  of  my  wardrobe   which  I  have 


Il8     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

drawn  up,  and  an  order  on  Comte  Esteve  for  16,000  francs 
which  I  owe.  I  do  not  wish  to  charge  this  sum  to  the 
budget.  The  treasurer  will  then  pay  these  16,000  francs 
out  of  my  privy  purse.  Call  for  a  list  of  my  things,  and 
verify  it.  I  think  that  a  further  economy  can  be  made. 
See  that  the  tailor  does  not  do  any  bad  work,  and  that  the 
budget  be  not  exceeded.  The  day  that  new  clothes  are  to 
be  bought  you  must  present  them  to  me  so  as  to  see  if 
they  fit  well,  and  then  they  will  be  received.  Settle  all 
this,  so  that  there  may  be  well-established  rules  for  the 
master  of  the  wardrobe  when  I  appoint  one.  It  seems  to 
me  that  Comte  de  Remusat  was  not  appointed  by  a  decree. 
If  there  was  a  decree  appointing  him,  present  me  with  a 
decree  dismissing  him.  «  NAPOLEON  " 

In  the  list  drawn  out  by  his  Majesty  one  finds  nine  coats 
of  various  description,  which  were  to  last  each  three  years. 
Then  forty-eight  vests  and  breeches,  at  eighty  francs  (they 
must  be  furnished  every  week,  and  last  three  years) ;  two 
dressing-gowns ;  forty-eight  flannel  waistcoats  (one  every 
week ;  four  dozen  shirts  (one  every  week)  ;  four  dozen 
pocket-handkerchiefs  (one  every  week)  ;  two  dozen  pair  of 
silk  stockings  (one  pair  every  fortnight) ;  twenty-four  pairs 
of  shoes  (one  pair  every  fortnight),  to  last  two  years,  and 
six  pairs  of  boots ;  four  hats.  And  at  the  end  of  a  long 
list,  in  which  the  price  and  duration  of  each  article  is 
minutely  given,  comes  "  perfumery,  taking  out  the  grease, 
Eau  de  Cologne,  washing  of  linen  and  silk  stockings, 
divers  expenses.  .  .  .  Nothing  is  to  be  spent  except  after 
the  approbation  of  his  Majesty."  The  amount  to  be  laid 
out  in  perfumery,  washing,  &c,  is  left  in  blank. 

Strange  contrast  with  the  wardrobe  of  Frederick  the 
Great. 

To  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"St.  Cloud,  22nd August,  1811. 
"I  beg  that  you  will  have  the  fortifications  of  Geneva 
blown  up.    Perhaps  in  a  military  point  of  view  it  would  be 


THE    BOULOGNE    FLOTILLA.  119 

of  interest  to  keep  this  place  ;  but,  the  inhabitants  having 
always  exhibited  a  bad  feeling,  I  have  decided  upon 
blowing  up  the  fortifications  without  delay. 

"  Napoleon." 

Just  as  he  ordered  the  fortifications  round  Vienna  to  be 
blown  up  after  peace  had  been  concluded,  although  from 
a  military  point  of  view  they  had  little  value. 

To  ADMIRAL  DECRES. 

"St.  Cloud,  23rd  August,  1811, 
"  The   Boulogne   flotilla   has   returned  to  harbour.     It 
sustained  some  damage.     I  think   even   that   a   gunboat 
went  down.     Write  that  this  should  cause  no  discourage- 
ment.    These  gales  are  just  the  things   to  exercise  the 

crews. 

"  Napoleon.'* 

To  marshal  berthier. 

"St.  Cloud,  13rd August,  1811. 
"  Express  my  displeasure  to  Marshal  Soult  for  sending 
me  the  flags  of  Albuera  by  a  foreigner.  ...  It  appears 
that  he  was  in  the  Austrian  service,  and  he  must  therefore 
have  fought  against  us.  It  is  ridiculous  of  Soult  to  send 
such  a  man.1 

"  Napoleon." 

To  M.  MARET. 

"  St.  Cloud,  24^  August,  181 1. 

"  It  is  necessary  for  you  to  write  again  to  my  minister 

at  Carlsruhe.     The  Princess  Stephanie  is  wrong  to  show 

a  preference  for  Manheim ;  her  duty  is  to  be  with  her 

husband.     The  princess  is  wrong  to  wish  to  dine  at  five 

1  Napoleon  himself  often  employed  generals  and  other  officers  who 
had  borne  arms  against  him,  such  as  Colli  and  others,  and  we  sha'l 
find  him  in  1812  recommending  the  Emperor  of  Austria  to  make 
Prince  Schwartzenberg  a  marshal  for  services  rendered  to  France  in 
Poland. 


120     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

o'clock;  her  duty  is  to  dine  at  the  same  hour  as  her 
husband ;  her  duty  is  to  do  what  he  wishes,  and  to  be 
where  he  is.  Instead  of  encouraging  the  princess  in  these 
little  acts  of  resistance,  Baron  de  Moustier  should  give  her 
advice  through  her  lady  of  honour.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

Napoleon  had  forced  Stephanie  de  Beauharnais  into 
this  marriage  with  the  heir  to  the  Duchy  of  Baden,  and 
it  was  a  long  time  before  the  union  was  attended  with 
domestic  felicity. 

To  M.  MARET. 

"Trianon,  2$th  August,  1811. 

"  I  send  you  extracts  from  the  English  journals.     You 

must  show  them  to  Prince  Kourakine  while  conversing 

with   him.     After  this   you   must   send   them  to  Comte 

Lauriston,  so  that  he  may  show  them  in  Russia.     You 

must  tell  him  that  we  have  received  news  of  150  ships 

under  false  American  flags  having  arrived  in  Russia  .... 

that  the  plans  of  Russia  are  unmasked ;  that  she  wishes 

to  renew  her  commerce  with  England,  and  that  is  why 

she  is  concentrating  troops,  and  will  not  terminate  the 

Oldenburg  affair. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  COMTE  MOLLIEN. 

"CompiSgne,  3rd  September,  1811. 
"  I  beg  that  you  will  pay  2,500  francs  a  month  to  the 
ex-Queen  of  Etruria,  at  her  convent  in  Rome.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

The  poor  Queen  of  Etruria,  deprived  of  her  kingdom, 
which  was  handed  over  by  Napoleon  to  his  sister  Eliza, 
was  most  cruelly  treated.  She  has  left  an  account  of  her 
persecution  in  a  small  volume  of  memoirs,  and  the  tale  of 
her  martyrdom  is  curious  if  not  very  interesting. 


INVASION    OF    IRELAND.  121 

To  MARSHAL  DAVOUST. 

"CompieGNE,  yd  September,  1811. 
"  I  have  received  your  letter  concerning  the  cheating  of 
Bourrienne  at  Hamburg.  It  will  be  important  to  throw 
light  upon  what  he  has  done.  Have  the  Jew,  Gumprecht 
Mares,  arrested,  seize  his  papers,  and  place  him  in  solitary 
confinement.  Have  some  of  the  other  principal  agents 
of  Bourrienne  arrested,  so  as  to  discover  his  doings  at 
Hamburg,  and  the  embezzlements  he  has  committed  there. 

"  Napoleon." 

Bourrienne  had  been  a  fellow  student  of  Napoleon  at 
Brienne,  and  had  for  several  years  acted  as  his  private 
secretary.  He  was,  however,  an  incorrigible  swindler,  and 
had  to  be  dismissed  even  from  the  Imperial  service. 

To  M.  GAUDIN  {Finance  Minister). 

"Compiegne,  yth  September,  1811. 
"  I  send  you  a  memorandum  concerning  Lippe.  ...  I 
think  that  we  must  treat  with  the  Grand  Duke  of  Berg. 
It  was  never  my  intention  to  leave  him  all  the  domain. 
.  .  .  Everything  in  the  shape  of  forests  and  domains 
should  belong  to  me.  If  there  be  any  reason  for  in- 
demnifying the  Grand  Duke  he  must  be  indemnified 
with  rentes. 

"  Napoleon." 

The  Grand  Duke  of  Berg  was  the  second  son  of  Louis, 
who  at  this  period  'was  seven  years  of  age. 

To  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"  COMPlfcGNE,  Stk  September,  i8tl. 
"  I    have    read    with    interest    the    letter   of    General 
O'Connor,  which  I  return.     It  appears  very  important  to 
me  to  establish  relations  with  Ireland.     Ask  for  particulars 


122     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

with  regard  to  the  state  of  public  opinion  at  present.     I 

am  rather  inclined  to  send  6,000  horses  and  30,000  men 

there. 

"  Napoleon." 

to  marshal  davoust. 

"Compiegne,  147/z  September,  181 1. 

"  I  have  sent  a  courier  to  Berlin  to-day  to  tell  Comte  St. 
Marsau  to  leave  that  capital  if  the  Prussians  continue  their 
fortifications  and  provisioning  Spandau  and  Kolberg. 

"  As  soon  as  Comte  St.  Marsan  leaves  Berlin  you  must 
march  on  that  city  with  your  army.    .    .    . 

"  Warn  the  King  of  Westphalia,  who  must  unite  his 
troops  at  Magdeburg. 

"  Write  to  the  King  of  Saxony  to  concentrate  his  forces 
at  Glogau.    .    .    . 

"  My  resolution  is  expressed  in  such  strong  terms  that  I 
hope  Prussia  will  feel  her  impotency  and  the  folly  of  her 
pretentions,  and  that  Comte  St.  Marsan  will  not  leave. 
You  must  not  make  any  preparations  which  may  be 
considered  as  a  threat.  Your  troops,  however,  should  be 
kept  on  the  alert,  and  have  four  days'  rations  on  pretext  of 
a  review.  If  you  enter  Prussia  issue  no  proclamation — say 
nothing,  but  take  and  disarm  everything  ;  and,  above  all, 
maintain  strict  discipline.  You  must  try,  in  this  case,  to 
surprise  Spandau. 

"  Napoleon." 

to  marshal  bessieres. 

"  Boulogne,1  2.0th  September,  181 1. 
•  "  Go  often  to  see  the  King  of  Rome  ;    see  Madame  de 
Montesquiou,  and  adopt  measures  for  her  security.  Inform 

1  Nothing  appears  in  The  Correspondence  on  the  subject  of  a  little 
disaster  which  befel  the  Boulogne  flotilla  in  an  engagement  with  the 
Naiad  frigate,  three  brigs,  and  a  cutter,  which  took  place  by  order  of 
and  under  the  eyes  of  his  Majesty.  One  praam,  with  sixty  soldiers 
and  fifty-two  sailors  on  board  was  captured,  and  the  rest  of  the 
flotilla,  with  the  admiral,  escaping  by  running  under  the  shore; 
batteries. 


NAPOLEON    AFLOAT.  I2J 

Madame  de  Montesquiou  that  in  the  event  of  anything, 
happening  she  should  address  herself  to  you. 

"  Napoleon." 

to  prince  cambaceres. 
"On  Board  the  'Charlemagne,'  Flushing  Roads, 
"  2$th  September,  1811. 

"  I  have  been  for  the  last  two  days  on  board  the 
Charlemagne.  We  were  thirty-six  hours  without  com- 
municating with  the  land,  owing  to  an  equinoctial  gale. 
This  did  not  hinder  me  from  eating  and  sleeping  well.  The 
sea  was  very  rough  ;  however,  the  roads  are  excellent.  If 
the  weather  becomes  better,  I  propose  manoeuvring  my 
squadron  to-morrow. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  the  COMTESSE  DE  MONTESQUIOU. 

"Antwerp,  ^oth  September,  181 1. 
"  I  have  seen  with  pleasure  your  different  letters  re- 
specting the  health  of  the  King.  Since  you  have  not  gone 
to  Meudon  I  suppose  that  the  report  of  the  Faculty  is 
opposed  to  that  place.  It  appears  to  me  extraordinary 
that  this  house,  so  well  situated,  should  not  be  healthy. 
...  I  desire  the  constitution  of  the  King  to  be  formed 
at  an  early  age  by  a  solid  regime.  However,  as  regards 
that,  I  have  full  confidence  in  you,  madam. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  GENERAL  SAVARY  {Minister  of  Police). 

"Amsterdam,  i^rd  October,  1811. 
"  I  see  with  pleasure  King  Charles  IV.  leave  Marseilles 
with  his  household  and  go  to  Rome.  I  authorise  you  to 
send  some  persons  to  him  who  enjoy  his  confidence  to 
make  him  this  proposition.  I  should  like  him  to  take 
advantage  of  the  remainder  of  the  fine  season  to  start.  On 
the  road  the  greatest  honours  must  be  rendered  to  him, 
and  even,  should  he  visit  the  fleet  at  Toulon,  he  must  be 


124    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

received  there  as  a  king.  The  garrisons  must  furnish  him 
escorts,  and  the  Generals  commanding  the  districts 
through  which  he  passes  must  accompany  him.  From 
Nice  he  could  go  by  Tende  Pass,  from  there  to  Placentia, 
and  thence  to  Rome.  You  must  assure  him  that  he  shall 
receive  the  same  pension  as  to-day.  If  he  has  debts  I 
cannot  pay  them,  seeing  that  Spain  costs  me  so  much 
[was  in  fact  a  bad  bargain  even  at  the  low  price  given  for 
her],  and  that  80,000/.  in  his  situation  should  be  sufficient. 
As  for  his  residence,  he  can  be  lodged  in  the  Borghese 
palace,  or  in  one  of  the  palaces  which  I  have  in  that  city. 

"  Arrange  this  affair  delicately.  ...  It  is  well  for  the 
Bourbons  to  be  at  Rome  :  their  stay  there  will  be  useful 
to  the  great  city.1  .    .    . 

"  The  Duchesse  de  Bourbon,  the  Duchesse  d'Orleans, 
and  the  Prince  de  Conti  are  very  unhappy  in  Catalonia. 
As  I  continue  to  pay  them  a  pension  you  might  also 
propose  to  them  that  they  should  go  to  Rome.  They  must 
pass  rapidly  through  the  southern  provinces,  without  any 
honours  being  paid  to  them  on  the  road,  and  you  must  see 
that  their  journey  creates  no  sensation  [as  was  the  case 
with  the  Pope].  If  they  can  obtain  a  passport  from  the 
English  cruisers,  which  I  think  possible,  they  would  do 
better  to  embark  at  Barcelona  for  Civita  Vecchia. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  PRINCE  EUGENE. 

"  Rotterdam,  26th  October,  181 1. 
"...  From  this  place  I  intend  going  to  the  Grand 
Duchy  of  Berg,  and  afterwards  to  Fontainebleau.  I  am 
extremely  satisfied  with  the  Dutch.  The  only  recollection 
they  have  preserved  of  their  independence  is  that  which 
makes  them  feel  the  advantages  of  a  union  such  as 
uniformity  in  the  law,  a  system  of  moderate  contributions, 
and  the  regular  march  of  affairs.  They  are  more  French 
than  any  inhabitants  of  the  united  countries.  As  for  the 
1  Nearly  all  the  Bonapartes  flocked  thither  after  Waterloo. 


DOCTOR   PORTA. 


125 


King  [poor  Louis]  they  remember  him  only  as  a  good  sort 
of  man,  very  changeable,  who  had  very  limited  views  on 
the  subject  of  administration,  and  who  undid  in  the 
evening  what  he  had  done  in  the  morning.  .  »  .  I 
acknowledge  that  I  have  been  agreeably  surprised.  I 
have  several  vessels  on  the  stocks,  and  the  Dutch  will  be 
extremely  useful  for  my  navy,  for  they  are  all  sailors  ;  this 
country  is  highly  interesting. 

"Napoleon." 

With  regard  to  the  Dutch  it  is  certain  that  on  the 
occasion  of  the  visit  of  the  French  Emperor  and  Empress 
they  were  guilty  of  the  most  base  adulation. 

To  COMTE  BIGOT. 

"Wesel,  1st  November,  1811. 
"  I  return  you  the  letters  from  Savona.  Reply  yourself 
to  the  Doctor  Porta  that  you  have  laid  his  letter  before 
the  Emperor  ;  that  his  Majesty  has  written  in  the  margin 
of  his  letter  from  Amsterdam  that  no  matter  what 
discussions  may  have  taken  place  between  the  Pope  and 
his  Majesty,  and  no  matter  how  animated  they  may  have 
been,  his  Majesty  will  always  consider  personal  services 
rendered  to  the  Pope  as  if  they  were  rendered  to  himself ; 
that  the  Doctor  Porta  had  merely  to  make  known  what  he 
required,  and  that  his  salary  would  be  paid  to  him  as 
when  the  Pope  was  at  Rome  ;  that  in  consequence  a  salary 
of  i2,ooof.  is  allowed  to  him  from  the  moment  he  left 
Rome,  which  salary  will  be  continued  as  long  as  he 
remains  with  the  Pope.    .    .    . 

"  Napoleon." 

Doctor  Porta  had  consented  to  act  as  a  spy  on  the 
Pope  and  to  do  what  he  could  to  persuade  him  to  accept 
the  terms  imposed  by  Napoleon.  This  traitor  was  to 
receive  40/.  a  month,  while  only  2s.  o\d.  were  to  be  allowed 
for  the  keep  of  Pius  VII.  and  of  each  of  his  attendants. 


126  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  PRINCE  CAMBACERES. 

"Dusseldorf,  yd  November,  1811. 
"  I  beg  that  you  will  see  the  Queen  of  Spain  and  tell  her 
that  I  wish  the  Princess  of  Sweden  *  to  leave  Paris  and 
return  to  Stockholm.  This  is  all  the  more  important 
because  the  measures  being  taken  by  Sweden  will  probably 
bring  about  war  between  the  two  countries,  and  that  it 
would  not  be  right  for  the  princess  to  be  here  at  such  a 
moment ;  that  I  think  the  princess  should  lose  no  time 
and  not  await  my  arrival  in  order  to  return  to  her 
husband.  » NAPOLEON." 

The  crime  of  Sweden  was  an  evident  leaning  towards 
Russia  and  England  and  violations  of  the  continental 
blockade.  Napoleon  therefore  instructed  his  Minister  for 
Foreign  Affairs  to  draw  up  a  general  report  on  the  conduct 
of  Sweden,  which  was  a  bad  sign,  and  concluded  his  letter 
by  saying  :  "  I  desire  to  remain  at  peace  with  Sweden,  but 
I  prefer  war  to  such  a  peace  as  this." 

The  Prussian  Government]  having  declared  that  it  was 
in  spite  of  its  orders  that  General  Blucher  had  executed 
works  at  Kolberg,  the  Emperor  wrote  thus  to  M.  Maret 
on  the  3rd  November  :  "  Write  to  Comte  St.  Marsan  that 
he  should  prevent  General  Blucher  from  being  employed, 
and  thus  put  the  good  faith  of  the  Prussian  Government 
to  the  test." 

To  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"Dusseldorf,  yd  November,  181 1. 

"  I  am  waiting  with  impatience  for  news  from  Ireland  and 
I  receive  none.  You  must  send  some  more  agents  there. 
My  means  are  ready,  and  if  I  were  sure  of  finding  a  party 
there  I  would  undertake  an  expedition  which  might  sail 
at  the  end  of  February  or  the  beginning  of  March.  You 
must  despatch  agents  and  complete  the  Irish  regiments. 

"  Napoleon." 

1  Wife  of  King  Joseph  and  the  wife  of  Bernadotte  were  sisters. 


PACIFIC   INTENTIONS.  I  27 

To  KING  JEROME. 

"Dusseldorf,  yd  November,  181 1. 
"I  am  informed  that  you  have  made  a  present  of  some 
horses  to  the  Prince  Royal  of  Sweden.  I  desire  that  you 
countermand  the  despatch  of  these  horses.  Sweden  is 
behaving  very  badly,  and  at  any  moment  we  may  go  to 
war.  These  gifts  are  therefore  not  proper  at  the  present 
moment.  You  do  not  know  to  what  a  man  you  make  these 
presents.  Besides,  the  sending  of  horses  has  always  the 
air  of  rendering  homage.    Nothing  can  displease  me  more.1 

*'  Napoleon." 

From  Cologne,  on  the  6th  November,  the  Emperor 
addressed  a  letter  to  M.  Maret,  in  which  he  said  : — 

"  Your  language  in  Paris  should  be  this  :  That  if  Russia 
wishes  to  disarm,  I  shall  ask  nothing  better  than  to  disarm 
also ;  that  this  would  tranquillise  Prussia  and  reassure 
every  one,  but  that  Russia  must  reassure  us  with  regard  to 
her  manifesto  ;  that  this  can  only  be  done  by  terminating 
the  Oldenburg  affair.  .  .  ." 

Prussia,  too,  was  to  be  told  that  she  was  pursuing  a 
miserable  policy  which  would  lead  her  to  ruin,  and  that 
she  would  perish  without  inspiring  esteem :  "  While  in 
allying  herself  openly  to  Russia  or  any  other  Power  which 
she  supposes  going  to  wage  war  with  France  she  would,  if 
she  succumbed,  at  all  events  fall  with  honour." 

"On  the  1 2th  November  his  Majesty  wrote  to  M. 
Maret  telling  him  to  prepare  a  despatch  for  Comte 
Lauriston,  informing  him  of  the  Emperor's  arrival  in 
Paris,  of  his  pacific  views,  and  his  desire  to  see  his  differ- 
ences with  Russia  terminated  "  this  winter."  You  must 
tell  him,"  added  Napoleon,  "  that  a  division  of  cuirassiers 
has  gone  to  Erfurth  ;  that  the  uncertainty  of  all  that  is 

1  In  a  letter  to  the  King  of  Spain,  16th  February,  1808,  he  an- 
nounced a  gift  of  horses,  and  in  a  letter  to  the  Czar,  23rd  October, 
1810,  he  thanked  Alexander  for  sending  him  a  similar  present. 


128     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

doing  in  Prussia  rendered  this  augmentation  of  cavalry 
necessary."  ....  On  the  same  day  the  Emperor 
addressed  a  letter  to  General  Clarke  on  the  subject  of 
Switzerland  and  his  Swiss  troops,  in  which  he  said : 
"  Switzerland  costs  me  a  great  deal  of  money  and  renders 
me  no  service.  Up  to  the  present  I  have  been  duped." 
After  insisting  that  the  cantons  should  maintain  a  force 
of  12,000  men  Napoleon  added,  that  in  the  event  of  a  war 
with  Russia  or  with  Austria,  which  would  interest  the 
Swiss,  they  should  furnish  1 6,ooo  men. 

Napoleon  then  related  the  following  incident  to  his 
Minister  of  War : — 

"As  I  was  passing  through  Givet  a  detachment  of 
English  prisoners  set  to  work  to  repair  the  flying  bridge. 
I  remarked  especially  the  zeal  and  activity  of  eight  or  ten 
of  them,  who  threw  themselves  into  a  little  boat.  Give 
orders  for  a  list  to  be  made  of  the  ten  men  who  most  dis- 
tinguished themselves  upon  this  occasion  ;  let  them  receive 
a  new  suit  of  clothes  and  five  Napoleons  each,  with  an 
order  to  go  to  Morlaix,  where  they  must  be  handed  over 
to  the  Transport  Office,  making  known  the  cause  of  their 
release.  .  .  .  There  is  an  English  clergyman  there  who 
asked  my  permission  to  spend  three  months  in  England  ; 
grant  this  to  him.  He  might  take  charge  of  the  others. 
I  also  send  you  a  petition  handed  to  me  under  the  same 
circumstances  by  an  English  lady  ;  send  me  a  report  upon 
this  demand." 

On  the  14th  November  further  instructions  were  sent  to 
Marshal  Davoust  on  the  subject  of  Prussia  and  what  was 
to  be  done  in  the  event  of  war.  Then  the  Emperor  said  : 
"  M.  Saint  Marsan  is  engaged  in  negotiating,  but  there  is 
so  much  bad  faith  and  uncertainty  in  the  Berlin  cabinet 
that  I  fear  it  will  be  impossible  to  prevent  the  ruin  of 
Prussia  .  .  .  Your  corps  will  be  able  to  reach  the  Vistula 
before  the  Russians  because  you  will  be  at  Berlin  before 
they  know  anything  at  St.  Petersburg.  .  .  .  The  Russians 
have  obtained  great  successes  over  the  Turks,  who  behaved 


RIGHT    OF    APPEAL. 


129 


like  brute  beasts.     I  see  that  peace  is  about  to  be  con- 
cluded.    I  have  made  sure  of  Austria." 

On  the  16th  November  the  Emperor  wrote  to  Admiral 
Decres  on  the  subject  of  the  Boulogne  flotilla,  which  he 
intended  to  keep  up  as  one  of  the  most  powerful  means  of 
influencing  England  ;  it  would  oblige  the  English  to  keep 
a  squadron  off  Boulogne  and  to  have  a  reserve  force  in  the 
Thames  and  the  Downs,  he  wrote. 


To  GENERAL  SAVARY  {Minister  of Police). 

"  St.  Cloud,  20M  November,  181 1. 

"  You  have  committed  a  breach  of  duty  in  prosecuting  an 
individual  simply  because  he  made  some  complaints  against 
you  ;  this  was  all  the  more  unjust,  because  he  told  me  things 
which  I  did  not  know  and  which  I  ought  to  have  known. 
Taking  this  man  from  the  present  moment  under  my 
special  protection,  no  measures  must  be  adopted  against 
him  without  my  special  authorisation.  I  hope  that  you 
will  not  fall  again  into  the  same  error.  All  French 
citizens  have  the  right  of  appealing  to  me  against  no 
matter  who.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

In  another  long  letter  to  Marshal  Davoust,  of  the  2nd 
December,  the  Emperor  said  : 

"  The  Germans  complain  that  all  the  reports  on  the 
subject  of  an  insurrection  in  Germany  are  fomented 
by  the  French  ....  and  that  you  said  at  Rostock 
that  you  would  know  how  to  prevent  Germany  from 
becoming  a  Spain.  This  speech  has  done  a  great  deal 
of  mischief.  There  is  nothing  in  common  between 
Spain  and  the  German  provinces.  Spain  would  have 
been  reduced  long  ago  but  for  the  60,000  Englishmen, 
but  for  those  1,000  leagues  of  coast  which  oblige  our 
VOL.  III.  K 


I30     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

armies  to  be  always  on  the  frontiers,  and  but  for  the 
100,000,000  fr.  furnished  by  South  America,  for  England 
is  not  in  a  position  to  furnish  Spain  with  money.  But,  as 
there  is  no  America  in  Germany,  nor  sea,  nor  numerous 
fortresses,  nor  60,000  Englishmen,  there  is  nothing  to  be 
feared,  even  were  the  Germans  as  lazy,  as  idle,  as  addicted 
to  assassination,  as  superstitious,  as  given  over  to  monks 
as  the  people  of  Spain,  where  there  were  300,000  monks. 
Judge  then  what  there  is  to  fear  from  a  nation  so  good,  so 
reasonable,  so  cold,  so  tolerant,  so  removed  from  all 
excesses  that  there  is  not  an  example  of  a  single  French- 
man having  been  assassinated  during  the  war  in  Germany. . . 

"  Napoleon." 

to  marshal  berthier. 

"  Paris,  s,th  December,  181 1. 
"  Write  to  Marshal  Suchet  to  complain  that  his  wife  in 
her  letters  to  Madame  de  Saligny  speaks  about  military 
matters  ;  that  these  details  should  not  be  found  in  the  letter 
of  a  lady,  who  should  know  nothing  either  of  the  number 
of  the  troops  or  their  movements,  but  speak  of  her  health, 
and  that  is  all.1 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  6th  December,  in  another  letter  to  Marshal 
Berthier,  the  Emperor  said — "  Express  my  dissatisfaction 
with  regard  to  the  flank  march  made  by  General  Gerard 
in  presence  of  the  enemy — march  of  three  days — all  the 
more  ill  combined  because  the  enemy  were  always  in  a 
position  to  cut  him  off.  .  .  .  It  is  unfortunate  that  with 
an   army   of  80,000   men    those     measures    dictated    by 

1  It  is  rather  curious  that  the  widow  of  Marshal  Suchet,  the 
Duchesse  d'Albufera,  thus  ordered  to  speak  only  of  her  health, 
should  be  still  alive,  and  residing  in  Paris  in  the  mansion  close  to 
the  English  embassy,  which  King  Joseph  gave  her  as  a  wedding 
present. 


M.    DE    NESSELRODE.  13  I 

prudence  were  not  taken  to  avoid  receiving  an  affront  from 
a  small  English  corps  of  6,000  men.  Tell  him  that 
my  opinion  remains  the  same,  that  every  time  that  he 
delivers  battle,  especially  with  the  English,  he  must  not 
divide  his  forces,  but  present  imposing  masses.  .  .  .  Marshal 
Soult  has  the  finest  army  in  the  world,  and  yet  he  holds  in 
check  neither  General  Hill  nor  the  army  of  Murcia,  the 
whole  of  which  marched  to  the  relief  of  Valencia.  .  .  ." 


To  M.  MARET. 

"  PARIS,  \6th  December,  181 1. 

"  M.  de  Nesselrode  will  soon  be  here,  and  that  decides 
me  to  raise  the  conscription.  ...  I  also  desire  a  commu- 
nication to  be  addressed  to  the  princes  of  the  confedera- 
tion to  remount  their  cavalry  and  to  prepare  their 
contingents.  They  must  give  as  a  reason  the  Russian 
levy  of  four  men  in  every  500,  the  large  number  of  troops 
on  the  frontier,  and  the  decision  at  which  Russia  seems  to 
have  arrived  of  making  war.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

And  on  the  20th,  his  Majesty  wrote  to  his  Foreign 
Minister  to  inform  Baron  Bignon  that — "  in  the  event  of 
war  he  is  to  be  attached  to  the  head-quarters'  staff,  and 
placed  at  the  head  of  the  secret  police,  including  the  spy 
system  in  the  ranks  of  the  enemy,  the  translation  of  inter- 
cepted letters,  the  reports  of  prisoners,  &c.  It  is  therefore 
necessary  for  him  to  organise  the  secret  police  at  once." 
A  free  use  was  to  be  made  of  Poles  speaking  Russian  and 
acquainted  with  military  matters,  and  the  Emperor  said 
that  he  would  not  regret  to  spend  12,000  francs  a  month 
for  satisfactory  information.  "  My  brother  of  France,"  said 
Frederick  the  Great,  on  one  occasion,  "  has  twenty  cooks 
and  one  spy  where  I  have  one  cook  and  twenty  spies." 
Napoleon  had  lots  of  both. 

K   2 


132  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  PRINCE  CAMBAC^RES. 

"  Paris,  26th  December,  181  r. 

"  Comte  Auguste  Talleyrand,  on  his  marriage,  declared 
to  his  wife's  family  that  he  had  a  sum  of  8,000/.  which  had 
been  given  to  him  by  his  cousin,  the  Prince  de  Benevento 
(Talleyrand)  then  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs.  However, 
the  prince  insisted  upon  having  bills  payable  to  order  for 
this  sum.  These  bills  have  since  been  placed  in  circula- 
tion ;  they  are  in  the  hands  of  a  stockbroker,  and  must 
shortly  be  paid,  or  Comte  Augustus  Talleyrand  will  be 
dishonoured.  I  cannot  approve  of  this  double  dealing. 
Matrimonial  clauses  are  sacred,  and  as  it  was  declared  that 
the  Prince  de  Benevento  gave  8,000/.,  he  should  not  have 
exacted  bills,  and  having  exacted  them,  delicacy  ought  to 
have  prevented  him  from  allowing  them  to  get  into  circu- 
lation. Having  made  a  sacrifice  of  88,000/.  in  purchasing 
the  residence  of  the  Prince  de  Benevento  simply  to  enable 
him  to  settle  his  affairs,  that  sum  must  also  serve  to  settle 
those  of  Comte  Auguste  Talleyrand.  I  beg  you  to  speak 
to  the  Prince  de  Benevento  and  Comte  Auguste  Talleyrand 
on  this  subject,  and  to  constitute  yourself  their  arbitrator. 
I  wish  this  affair  to  take  the  form  of  a  family,  and  not  a 
commercial  arrangement,  which  should  not  exist  between 
men  of  honour. 

"  Napoleon." 

Comte  Auguste  Talleyrand  was  one  of  the  Emperor's 
chamberlains*  and  hence  this  interference  on  his  behalf. 

To  M.  DE  CHAMPAGNY. 

"PARIS,  31st December,  1811. 
"  I   have  just   seen   the   porcelain   service   sent  to  the 
Empress    as    a    new  year's  gift.      It  is  very  ugly.      See 
that  it  be  prettier  another  year.     Have  a  breakfast  ser- 
vice made,  and  on  each  cup  the  portraits  of  the  Empress 


ATTRACTIONS    OF    PARIS.  133 

and  of  the  six  princesses,  my  sisters  and  sister-in-law. 
Have  another  set  made  with  the  portraits  of  the  ladies  of 
honour  to  the  Empress. 

"  Napoleon.  " 


To  the  MAJOR-GENERAL. 

"  Paris,  31  si  December,  18 11. 
"  General  Fournier  is  granted  permission  to  go  home. 
The  major-general  must  state  what  county  he  belongs  to 
so  as  to  hinder  him  from  coming  to  Paris.  It  is  the  cor- 
ruption of  the  great  city  which  attracts  all  these  young 
fellows. 

"  Napoleon." 


CHAPTER     III. 

THE  YEAR  1812. 

1812  will  for  ever  remain  memorable  as  the  year  of  the 
Russian  campaign  and  the  retreat  from  Moscow.  General 
Gouiron  de  St.  Cyr  traced  the  conduct  of  Napoleon  in  this 
big  war  to  ambition.  Certain  it  is,  however,  that  the 
French  Emperor,  who  seldom  forgot  or  pardoned"  a  slight 
unless  it  suited  his  policy,  had  several  pretexts  for  quarrel- 
ling with  the  Czar.  At  Erfurth  Napoleon  threw  out  a  hint 
that  he  should  like  to  form  a  matrimonial  alliance  with  the 
Russian  Imperial  family,  and  the  Dowager  Empress  imme- 
diately gave  the  hand  of  her  only  marriageable  daughter  to 
the  Duke  of  Oldenburg.  During  the  war  with  Austria  the 
Czar  gave  Napoleon  very  little  aid,  and  after  the  treaty  of 
Vienna  the  advances  of  his  Majesty,  who  demanded  the 
hand  of  the  youthful  Grand  Duchess  Anne  were  so  coldly 
met,  that  Napoleon  turned  to  the  court  of  Vienna,  and 
married  the  Archduchess  Marie  Louise.  The  first  serious 
consequence  of  this  marriage  was,  that  Napoleon  refused 
to  ratify  a  decree  which  had  been  signed  by  his  ambassa- 
dor, in  which  it  was  proposed  to  abolish  even  the  name  of 
Poland.  When  the  match  with  the  Czar's  sister  was 
broken  off,  Napoleon  assumed  a  tone  of  virtuous  indigna- 
tion, and  swore  to  protect  Poland,  or  that  portion  of  the 
country  not  in  the  grasp  of  Austria  and  Prussia.  This 
determination  was  in  itself  enough  to  kindle  war  between 


RUPTURE   WITH    RUSSIA.  135 

the  two  empires.  Again,  there  was  constant  bickering 
going  on  over  the  continental  blockade,  the  principles  of 
which  Napoleon  insisted  should  be  strictly  observed  by 
Russia,  while  he  eluded  them  himself  by  means  of  licences. 
The  first  act  of  independence  in  which  the  Czar  indulged, 
was  the  issuing  of  a  ukase,  which  ordered  that  all  goods 
manufactured  in  England  should  be  burned,  and  also 
several  articles  manufactured  in  Germany  and  in  France, 
especially  cloths  and  silks.  M.  Thiers  says  in  his  history 
(vol.  xiii.,  p.  447)  that  Napoleon,  on  learning  the  news, 
exclaimed — "I  would  sooner  receive  a  blow  on  the  cheek 
than  see  the  produce  of  the  industry  and  labour  of  my 
subjects  burned."  It  must  be  said  that  he  himself  acted 
in  the  same  way  with  regard  to  some  of  the  products 
of  Switzerland,  his  ally,  and  of  Italy,  his  domain. 

Another  cause  of  rupture  with  Russia  is  mentioned  by 
Lanfrey  (vol.  v.  p.  501).  It  appears  that  in  reply  to  the 
remonstrances  of  his  finance  ministers,  Gaudin  and  Mollien, 
he  replied — "  I  shall  wage  this  war  in  a  political  interest, 
but  also  in  the  interests  of  my  finances.  Have  I  not 
always  re-established  them  by  means  of  war  ?  "  Napoleon 
recalled  Caulaincourt,  because  he  had  become  too  Russian, 
and  replaced  him  by  Lauriston  ;  a  similar  change 
was  made  at  the  Foreign  Office,  where  the  servile  M. 
Maret,  Due  de  Bassano,  replaced  M.  Champagny,  Due 
de  Cadore,  who  tacitly  disapproved  of  war  with  Russia. 

In  August,  181 1,  Napoleon,  at  a  grand  reception, 
addressed  the  most  violent  reproaches  to  Prince  Koura- 
kine,  on  the  subject  of  the  conduct  of  Russia — reproaches 
and  invectives  similar  to  those  addressed  to  Lord  Whit- 
worth  on  the  rupture  of  the  treaty  of  Amiens,  to  Prince 
Metternich,  on  the  eve  of  war  with  Austria,  and  to  Cardinal 
Consalvi,  over  the  Concordat,  to  the  Portuguese  ambassador 
at  Fontainebleau,  and  to  the  Neapolitan  ambassador  at 
Milan.  However,  up  to  the  very  last  moment,  both  Czar 
and  Emperor  denied  that  their  intentions  were  hostile. 
Both  protested  that  they  were  acting  on  the  defensive,  and 


136     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

both  protested  that  they  would  not  be  the  first  to  strike. 
It  was  not  until  June,  181 2,  that  hostilities  commenced.  On 
one  side  stood  France,  Austria,  Prussia,  the  Confederation 
of  the  Rhine,  Switzerland,  Poland,  and  Italy,  on  the  other 
Russia.    The  Emperor  had  reckoned  on  the  co-operation  of 
Sweden  and  Turkey,  but  both  those  powers,  exasperated  by 
the  perfidy  and  overbearing  conduct  of  Napoleon,  made 
peace  with  Russia.     Sweden  preferred  the  Czar,  who  had 
just  plundered  her  of  Finland,  to  Napoleon,  who  had  encour- 
aged and  sanctioned   that  act,  and   it  was  the  same  with 
Turkey,  in  regard  to  Moldavia  and  Wallachia.    The  French 
Emperor,  in  permitting  Alexander  to  rob  right  and  left, 
thought  that  he  was  accomplishing  a  clever  political  stroke, 
and  creating  for  Russia  two  implacable  enemies,  one  on  each 
flank,  and  lo,  both  Sweden  and  Turkey  turned  against  him. 
Napoleon  was  more  successful  with  Austria  and  Prussia, 
who  signed  treaties  with  him,  against  their  will,  it  is  true. 
Austria  promised  a  contingent  of  30,000  men,  who  were  not 
to  be  employed  in  Spain  ;  and  Prussia,  several  of  whose  for- 
tresses were  to  be  occupied  by  the  French  in  case  of  hostilities 
with   Russia,  promised  20,000  men.      Lanfrey  points  out 
that  Russia  had  no  objection  to   this  arrangement,  being 
well  aware  that  when  the  right  moment  came  she  would  be 
able  to  count  upon  the  courts  of  Vienna  and  Berlin,  who 
would  be  better  able  to  help  her  afterwards,  if  not  at  once 
exposed  to  the  wrath  of  Napoleon,  especially  as  the  Czar 
had  made  up  his  mind  to  draw  the  French  into  the  heart 
of  Russia. 

Before  war  was  openly  declared,  the  Emperor,  wishing 
to  approach  the  scene  of  action,  set  out  for  Dresden,  where 
he  was  met  by  the  Emperor  of  Austria,  the  Kings  of 
Saxony  and  Bavaria,  and  a  crowd  of  princes  who  were  all 
more  or  less  his  vassals.  He  was  now  at  the  head  of  an 
army  of  640,000  men,  60,000  horses,  and  1,200  guns. 
Under  his  standards  were  arrayed  men  of  nearly  every 
nation  in  Europe,  even  men  belonging  to  countries  with 
which  he  was  at  war — Spaniards  and  Portuguese.    The  fifth 


CHARLES  XII.  AND  NAPOLEON.        137 

corps  of  the  Grand  Army  was  composed  of  Poles,  and  was 
commanded  by  Prince  Poniatowski ;  the  sixth  corps  was 
composed  of  Bavarians,  the  eighth  corps  of  Westphalians. 
Other  countries  furnished  divisions  or  brigades,  while  the 
National  Guard  was  organised  into  Legions  and  Cohorts 
for  home  service. 

It  is  impossible,  even  at  this  distant  date,  to  read  about 
the  horrors  of  the  Russian  campaign  without  a  shudder. 
As  Southey  says  : — 

"  The  Emperor  Nap  he  would  set  -off 
On  a  summer  excursion  to  Moscow. 
The  fields  were  green,  and  the  sky  was  blue. 

Morbleu  !     Parbleu  1 
What  a  pleasant  excursion  to  Moscow." 

It  would  have  been  more  true  to  have  said  the  Emperor 
Nap.  allowed  himself  to  be  lured  on  to  Moscow  and 
destruction.  Before  taking  the  field,  he  had  called  for,  and 
no  doubt  studied,  the  campaigns  of  Charles  XII.  If  so, 
the  lessons  of  the  past  were  useless.  He  must  have  read 
such  warnings  as  this,  which  we  take  from  the  pages  of 
Lardner  : — 

"  The  advance  of  the  Swedes  was  soon  marked  by  a  suc- 
cession of  triumphs  ;  and  Peter,  finding  that  Charles  was 
resolved  to  pursue  him,  and  that  the  invader  had  but  500 
miles  to  traverse  to  the  capital,  an  interval  unprotected  by 
any  places  of  consequence,  with  the  exception  of  Smo- 
lensko,  conceived  a  masterly  plan  for  drawing  him  into  a 
part  of  the  country  where  he  could  obtain  neither  maga- 
zines nor  subsistence  for  his  army,  nor,  in  case  of  necessity, 
secure  a  safe  retreat.  .  .  .  Charles,  heated  with  victories, 
and  panting  for  further  acquisitions,  surveyed  the  vast 
empire,  upon  the  borders  of  which  he  now  hung  like  a 
cloud,  as  if  it  were  already  within  his  grasp  ;  while  Peter, 
more  wary  and  self-possessed,  conscious  of  the  magnitude 
of  the  stake  for  which  he  fought,  and  aware  of  the  great 
difficulties  of  his  situation,  occupied  himself  in  making 
provision  against  the  worst." 


138     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Charles,  finding  the  whole  country  laid  waste,  paused  at 
Smolensko,  beyond  which  place  Napoleon's  marshals  in 
vain  urged  him  not  to  venture.  Charles  turned  off  into  the 
Ukraine  ;  Napoleon  went  on  to  Moscow  :  the  same  fate 
befell  both  conquerors.  The  same  policy  adopted  by 
Peter,  and  then  by  Alexander,  succeeded  as  far  as  the 
total  destruction  of  their  enemies  was  concerned. 

The  Russians  attributed  the  overthrow  of  Napoleon  to 
Providence,  and  so  did  many  eminent  Englishmen,  such  as 
Dr.  Arnold.  If  so,  a  million  of  men  perished,  most  of 
them  after  the  most  horrible  sufferings,  in  order  that 
Napoleon  might  be  punished,  and  in  18 13  he  was  him- 
self thanking  the  Almighty  for  the  victories  of  Lutzen, 
Bautzen,  and  Wurschen,  and  having  Te  Deums  sung 
through  the  length  and  breadth  of  France.  We  have 
known  more  than  one  survivor  of  the  terrible  retreat 
from  Moscow,  the  details  of  which  make  the  gorge  rise. 
Nor  have  the  Russians  forgotten  those  days  of  trial.  The 
peasants,  especially  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Moscow,  still 
talk  of  the  invasion  of  1812,  and,  with  terrified  faces,  speak 
of  the  French  as  of  an  army  of  giants  which  suddenly  came 
and  devastated  the  country. 

We  shall  find  Napoleon  leaving  his  army,  or  the  remains 
of  it,  at  Smorgoni,  on  the  5th  December,  as  he  left  his  army 
in  Egypt,  and  for  the  same  reasons.  His  presence  was 
necessary  in  Paris.  This  was  perhaps  true ;  a  Colonel 
Malet,  during  the  absence  of  news  from  the  army,  by 
spreading  a  report  of  the  Emperor's  death,  had  almost 
managed  to. upset  the  regency.  Then  again  it  was  neces- 
sary for  Napoleon  to  keep  a  sharp  look-out  upon  Prussia 
and  Austria,  and  by  re-organising  a  new  army,  to  frighten 
them  into  being  faithful  to  the  alliance  as  long  as  possible. 
When  the  year  ended,  Napoleon  had  not  yet  heard  that  the 
Prussian,  General  York,  who  was  acting  with  Macdonald, 
had  gone  over  to  the  Russians. 

In  181 2  Napoleon  had  not  much  time  to  occupy  himself 
with  Spanish  affairs,  where,  at  the  beginning  of  the  year, 


FRENCH    HUSSARS    SURPRISED.  139 

matters  assumed  a  very  sombre  hue  for  the  French. 
Marshal  Victor  was  repulsed  at  Tariffa.  Wellington 
took  Ciudad  Rodrigo,  and  Badajos,  and  gained  the 
battle  of  Salamanca,  which  opened  the  gates  of  Madrid 
for  him.  Soult  was  obliged  to  abandon  Cadiz,  the  seat  of 
the  national  government,  which  had  been  blockaded  by 
land  for  four  years  ;  and  the  French,  too,  were  driven  out 
of  Seville.  Towards  the  close  of  the  year,  however, 
Wellington,  for  want  of  siege  guns,  failed  in  his  attack 
upon  Burgos,  and  had  to  fall  back  from  the  Spanish 
capital.  As  Napoleon  learned  the  result  of  the  battle  of 
Trafalgar  just  before  Austerlitz,  so  he  learned  that  of 
Salamanca  on  the  eve  of  Borodino. 

There  was  not  much  time  left  for  theological  discussion 
in  181 2.  The  Pope  was  transferred  for  safe  keeping  to 
Fontainebleau,  until  the  Emperor  could  find  time  to  take 
up  the  thread  of  the  Concordat,  and  insist  on  due  respect 
being  paid  to  the  liberties  of  the  Galican  Church. 


No  letters  appear  to  have  been  written  upon  the  1st 
January,  but  on  the  2nd  the  Emperor  wrote  thus  to 
Marshal  Berthier — 

"I  beg  that  you  will  send  me  a  report,  destined  for 
publication,  on  the  affair  of  General  Girard.  It  appears 
that  General  Briche  was  posted  on  the  side  on  which  the 
enemy  advanced,  and  that  he  was  completely  surprised, 
not  having  bivouacked,  but  having  slept  in  a  good  house, 
an'd  that  the  hussars  had  unsaddled  their  horses.  My 
object  is  to  make  an  impression  on  the  minds  of  the 
generals  and  colonels  in  command  of  the  light  troops,  and 
to  remind  them,  in  principle,  that  a  colonel  of  chasseurs 
or  hussars,  who,  instead  of  passing  the  night  in  his  bivouac 
in  continual  correspondence  with  his  outposts,  goes  to 
bed,  deserves  death.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 


140     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Lord  Londonderry  gives  this  description  of  the  affair 
in  question — "Lord  Hill  passed  the  night  of  the  21st  at 
Malpartida,  where  he  obtained  information  which  induced 
him  to  hope  that  he  might  overtake  the  enemy  and  bring 
him  to  action.  On  the  evening  of  the  27th,  unobserved 
by  Girard,  he  reached  Alcuerca.  _  He  was.  now  within  a 
short  league  of  Arroyo  del  M.olinos,  the  village  where 
Girard's  corps  was  to  pass  the  night,  and  the  enemy  re- 
mained in  utter  ignorance  of  his  proximity  until  they 
found  themselves  attacked  on  the  morning  of  the  28th. 
Taken  by  surprise,  they  offered,  as  might  be  expected,  no 
resolute  resistance ;  and  Lord  Hill's  success  was  so  com- 
plete that  out  of  2,500  infantry,  and  600  cavalry,  of  which 
the  French  corps  originally  consisted,  scarcely  500  escaped. 
General  Girard  was  wounded,  and  his  artillery  taken." 
A  foot  note  says  that  when  the  71st  and  92nd  Highlanders 
dashed  in  upon  the  astonished  Frenchmen,  their  bagpipes 
struck  up  "  Hey  Johnny  Cope,  are  ye  wakin'  yet,"  which 
must  have  increased  the  confusion  caused  by  a  howling 
storm,  musketry  and  artillery  fire,  and  charges  of 
cavalry. 

To  MARSHAL  BERTHIER. 

"Paris,  6th  January,  1812. 
"  In  the  Rkveries  of  Marshal  Saxe,  amid  a  great  many 
things  extremely  mediocre,  there  are  some  ideas  on  the 
way  of  raising  contributions  in  the  enemy's  country  with- 
out fatiguing  the  army,  which  appear  to  me  to  be  good. 
Read  them  and  put  the  substance  in  instructions  destined 

for  my  generals  in  Spain. 

"  Napoleon." 

According  to  Marshal  Saxe,  the  best  way  to  obtain 
provisions  in  a  hostile  country,  without  fatiguing  the  troops, 
is  to  send  out  circulars  saying  that  at  such  a  date  parties 
will  be  despatched  to  collect  receipts,  and  to  set  fire  to 
the   houses  of  those  who   cannot   produce  them.     These 


THE    REVERIES    OF    MARSHAL    SAXE.  I4I 

parties  to  consist  of  thirty  men,  to  march  at  night,  and, 
on  pain  of  death,  to  do  no  damage.  Before  returning  to 
their  quarters,  the  various  parties  to  be  mustered  and 
searched,  and  any  man  found  to  have  robbed  the  smallest 
thing  to  be  hung  without  pity.  In  this  way  the  marshal 
says  that  the  country  for  100  leagues  round  will  furnish 
provisions  and  money,  for  none  of  the  inhabitants  will  be 
able  to  sleep  in  peace  without  having  sent  in  their 
contributions. 

The  next  day  we  find  his  Majesty  obliged  to  send 
2,000,000  francs  to  Spain  ;  so  much  to  the  king ;  to  the 
armies  of  the  north,  the  centre,  of  Portugal ;  the  garrison 
of  Santona,  &c. 

The  want  of  sugar  was  so  severely  felt  in  France  at  this 
period  that  there  appeared  a  caricature  in  Paris  of  the 
Emperor  trying  to  sweeten  his  coffee  with  beetroot,  and 
giving  the  little  King  of  Rome  a  piece  of  beetroot,  saying, 
"  Suck,  suck,  my  child,  it  is  sugar." 

On  the  13th  January,  Napoleon  wrote  along  note  upon, 
the  continental  blockade.  In  the  note  in  question  he 
pointed  out  that  whereas  sugar  had  reached  an  exorbi- 
tant] price  in  Italy,  Naples  and  France,  it  was  much 
cheaper  in  the  States  of  the  Confederation,  which  proved 
that  while  the  laws  were  observed  in  the  three  countries 
above  named,  they  were  violated  by  the  Confederation. 
He  said  that  Italy  and  Naples  were  both  aware"  that  if 
they  did  not  execute  the  laws  of  the  empire  they  would 
■  be  annexed. 

The  Emperor,  after  dwelling  on  the  amount  of  sugar 
consumed  in  France,  went  on  to  say  that  he  had  granted 
licences  for  the  importation  of  45,000,000  lbs.  of  raw 
sugar  into  France,  the  duty  upon  which  would  produce 
70,000,000  francs,  and  that  the  same  system  would  be 
applied  to  tea,  coffee,  indigo,  raw  cotton,  and  other 
articles. 

The  destroyer  of  colonial  produce  was  jubilant  over  the 
great  activity  which  this  measure  would  produce  in  France, 


I42     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

and  the  amount  of  duty  which  would  be  levied,  and  he 
artfully  explained  that  his  concession  would  do  England 
no  good.     He  wrote — 

"  If,  after  having  taken  this  system  into  consideration, 
England  adheres  to  it,  she  will  experience  great  damage 
and  annoyance,  as  well  as  the  disappointment  of  seeing 
that  the  activity  of  our  manufactures,  and  the  increased 
production  of  our  customs  more  than  compensate  for  this 
relaxation  of  the  continental  system.  His  Majesty  does  not 
consider  this  as  a  change  of  system,  but  as  the  consequence 
of  the  system.     The  system  was  war,  the  result  is  victory. 

"  In  fact  did  we  ever  say  that  we  would  never  receive 
any  more  sugar,  coffee  or  indigo  ?  No,  for  we  were  satis- 
fied with  placing  a  duty  on  those  articles.  It  was  for 
England  to  furnish  us,  and  we  never  thought  that  our 
navigation  and  our  prizes  could  supply  us;  but  we  said 
that  we  would  receive  these  goods  only  against  the  produce 
of  French  soil,  with  a  high  duty,  that  we  would  permit 
them  to  arrive  on  board  our  ships  and  with  our  licences 
only. 

"  It  is  evident  that  the  system  which  has  just  been 
established  is  a  permanent  system,  which  may  be  per- 
petual ;  we  can  always  give  bur  wine  and  our  silks  in 
exchange  for  articles  which  we  have  not  got ;  give  them, 
not  after  the  manner  of  the  disadvantageous  treaty  of 
Versailles  which  took  into  no  account  the  difference 
between  the  consumption  of  30,000,000  and  of  10,000,000 
inhabitants,  but  on  a  calculation  by  which  the  value  is 
multiplied  by  the  quantity,  and  not  based  upon  one  of 
those  elements  only.  .  .  . 

"  Therefore  we  shall  no  doubt  do  good  to  England,  but 
a  good  which  we  cannot  help,  and  in  return  for  which  we 
shall  receive  three-fold.  It  would  be  a  bad  combination 
to  refuse  three  for  one." 

Having  thus  excused  himself  in  a  manner  worthy  of 
one  of  those  Jesuit  fathers  described  by  Pascal  in  his 
Provincial  Letters,   his   Majesty  went  on  to  explain  the 


CONFIDENTIAL    EXPLANATIONS.  1 43 

nature  of  his  licences,  the  conditions  upon  which  they 
would  be  granted,  the  harbours  which  would  be  thrown 
open  in  France,  Italy,  Naples,  Prussia,  Austria,  Hamburg, 
Dantsic,  &c,  and  the  kind  of  goods  to  be  imported  and 
transported. 

And  yet  on  the  10th  January,  the  Emperor  ordered 
M.  Maret  to  draw  up  a  note  explaining  the  motives 
which  had  determined  him  to  occupy  Swedish  Pomerania, 
"  where  not  only  English  smuggling  is  tolerated,  but 
recent  facts  show  that  Sweden  takes  an  active  part  in  it." 

To  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"  Paris,  i^th  January,  1812. 
"  You  have  given  the  command  of  the  department  of 
the  Apennines  to  Adjutant  Commander  Bourmont,  that  is 
to  say  to  an  old  Chouan  leader.  This  measure  is  ridiculous. 
That  officer  should  not  be  employed,  or  employed  only  in 
such  a  way  as  to  be  under  supervision.  What  would  my 
troops  think  on  seeing  themselves  commanded  by  such  a 

man  ? 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  25th  January,  Napoleon  wrote  a  letter  to  General 
Lacuee,  which  was  to  be  kept  secret,  saying  that  as  soon 
as  war  was  declared  he  intended  raising  120,000  men  who 
would  be  obliged  to  serve  as  long  as  the  war  lasted,  but 
who  would  not  be  sent  out  of  the  country.  They  were  to 
protect  the  interior. 

Two  days  later  the  Emperor  thus  explained  the  situation 
to  brother  Jerome,  King  of  Westphalia. 

"  Some  time  since,  various  indications  made  me  fear  that 
the  Emperor  of  Russia  no  longer  entertained  the  same 
opinions  as  at  Tilsit.  A  ukase  published  in  December, 
1 8 10,  essentially  damaged  the  interests  of  France  and  the 
Confederation,  and  was  advantageous  for  England.  How- 
ever I  refrained  from  making  any  complaints,  confining 


144    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

myself  to  friendly  representations.  In  the  month  of 
April  the  Emperor  of  Russia  sent  a  protest  relative  to  the 
Oldenburg  affair  to  the  various  courts.  I  was  all  the 
more  astonished  at  this  singular  step  because,  foreseeing 
the  wishes  of  Russia,  I  had  from  the  first  offered  a 
suitable  indemnity  to  the  Duke  of  Oldenburg.  Russia 
not  appearing  to  accept  the  indemnity  proposed,  I  pressed 
her  to  know  what  she  required.  In  fact  I  did  everything 
possible  to  repair  the  consequences  of  an  act  calculated 
to  excite  distrust  between  the  two  courts.  Instead  of 
explaining  herself,  Russia  weakened  her  army  on  the 
Danube,  evacuated  the  right  bank  of  that  river,  withdrew 
a  portion  of  her  troops  from  Finland,  and  concentrated 
all  her  disposable  forces  on  the  frontiers  of  the  Duchy  of 
Warsaw. 

"  The  territory  of  the  Confederation  was  thus  threatened 
to  such  an  extent  that  I  was  obliged  to  order  the  troops 
of  the  Duchy  to  fall  back  upon  the  Vistula  so  that  I  might 
be  able  to  aid  them  in  the  event  of  a  sudden  attack. 
From  the  commencement  of  these  movements  on  the  part 
of  Russia  my  first  care  was  to  provide  for  the  defence  of 
Dantsic,  which  is  one  of  the  bulwarks  of  the  Confederation. 
This  led  me  to  ask  for  a  portion  of  the  contingents  and  to 
write  to  that  effect  to  your  Majesty,  who  sent  one  of  your 
regiments  to  that  place. 

"A  short  time  afterwards  an  ambassador  from  Brazil, 
conveyed  by  an  English  frigate,  was  received  at  St.  Peters- 
burg as  the  minister  of  a  friendly  power,  although,  in 
virtue  of  the  treaty  of  Tilsit  Russia  should  be  at  war  with 
the  House  of  Braganza.  I  desired  peace;  I  was  interested 
in  preserving  it  because  a  portion  of  my  army  was  em- 
ployed in  Spain ;  but  when  Russia  supported  the  violation 
of  treaties  by  arming  I  also  was  obliged  to  arm.  This 
precaution  is  more  than  justified  to-day  by  the  extra- 
ordinary levy  ordered  by  Russia. 

"  I  have  been  obliged  to  concentrate  my  armies  and  to 
replenish  my  war  material.  These  preparations  have  taken 


LETTER    TO    JEROME.  1 45 

a  year.  Now  300,000  men  are  about  to  cross  through 
Germany,  and  to  march  on  the  frontiers  of  the  Confedera- 
tion, not  with  hostile  intentions,  but  in  order  that  my 
armies  may  be  as  near  to  the  Vistula  as  the  Russian 
armies. 

"When  the  time  comes,  I  will  instruct  my  Minister  for 
Foreign  Affairs  to  reply  to  the  protest  relative  to  Olden- 
burg, that  the  affairs  of  that  country  are  really  foreign  to 
Russia  ;  that  the  duke,  called  upon  during  the  last  war  to 
furnish  his  contingent,  did  not  do  so  ;  that  not  having 
fulfilled  his  duties,  as  a  confederate  he  lost  all  the  rights  of 
one ;  that,  through  love  of  peace,  however,  I  offered  him  a 
suitable  indemnity,  and  that  I  am  still  ready  to  grant  him 
one. 

"  While  agreeing  to  this  in  principle,  Russia  has  not  said 
what  she  desires,  and  I  am  obliged  to  suppose  that  she 
intends  asking  for  Dantsic  or  some  other  portion  of  the 
territory  of  the  Confederation.  If,  in  fact,  she  had  proposi- 
tions to  make  which  are  not  contrary  to  the  treaty  of  Tilsit 
and  to  my  principles,  would  she  have  armed  and  would  she 
have  refused  to  explain  herself?  However,  I  am  far  from 
having  lost  all  hope  of  peace.  But  since  the  Russians  admit 
the  fatal  proceeding  of  negotiating  with  me'at  the  head  of  a 
powerful  army,  it  concerns  my  honour  to  do  the  same.  I 
do  not  wish  to  commence  hostilities,  but  I  shall  place 
myself  in  a  position  to  repel  them.  I  do  not  wish  to 
violate  Russian  territory,  but  I  wish  to  be  ready  to  make 
any  one  repent  of  a  violation  of  the  territory  of  the 
Confederation. 

"I  desire  your  Majesty  in  consequence  to  assemble 
your  contingent  so  that  it  may  be  prepared  to  take  the 
field  on  the  15th  February  next.  ,  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

The  above  is  very  similar  to  the  letter  which  the 
Emperor  wrote  to  Jerome  excusing  the  war  with  Austria 
in  1 809  and  calling  upon  him  for  assistance. 

VOL.  III.  L 


146  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  MARSHAL  DAVOUST. 

"  Paris,  7.8th  January,  1812. 
"I  await  with  impatience  your  report  upon  the  colonial 
merchandise  which  you  have  found  in  Pomerania.  You 
have,  no  doubt,  sent  a  detachment  of  custom-house  officers 
there.  ...  As  you  are  going  to  enter  Pomerania  it  will 
be  necessary  to  close  hermetically  all  the  passages  between 
Sweden  and  the  Continent,  and  that,  without  doing  any- 
thing ostensibly,  you  lay  a  kind  of  embargo,  so  that 
nothing  may  enter  or  leave  the  country,  with  the  ex- 
ception of  the  cabinet  couriers  which  the  Swedish 
Government  may  wish  to  send  to  France  ;  no  commercial 
goods  must  be  allowed  to  pass. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  ADMIRAL  DECRES. 

"  Paris,  tjh  February,  181 2. 
"  The  reports  from  Toulon,  as  well  as  accounts  from  Eng- 
land, show  that  my  squadron  manoeuvred  badly,  and  that  it 
ought  to  have  captured  two  English  frigates  which  were 
allowed  to  escape.  Express  my  dissatisfaction  to  Rear- 
Admiral  Baudin,  and  ask  for  the  names  of  the  captains  who 
were  the  most  in  advance  in  this  affair.  Tell  Vice- 
Admiral  Emeriau  that  the  government  ought  to  know 
everything ;  that  this  manner  of  disguising  facts  is  most 
reprehensible.  You  can  order  that  officer  to  return  on 
board.  Tell  him  that  I  hope  he  will  redouble  his  zeal ; 
that  I  shall  be  at  Toulon  when  I  am  least  expected.  .  . 

"  NAPOLEON." 

James,  in  his  Naval  History  (vol.  v.  p.  331),  thus  refers  to 
this  affair  : — ■ 

"  Is  it  not  a  little  surprising  that,  out  of  upwards  of  fifty-six 
sail  of  the  line  in  commission  at  the  different  ports  of  the 
French  Empire  not  one  squadron,  nay,  not  one  line-of-battle 
ship  should  have  ventured  out  of  sight  of  her  own  harbour? 


INSTRUCTIONS    TO    MARMONT.  147 

What  prevented  Vice-Admiral  Emeriau  going  fairly  to  sea 
on  the  20th  November  ?  Where  were  the  Duguay-Trouins, 
the  De  Grasses,  and  the  Suffrens,  when,  on  the  6th  Decem- 
ber, 18 1 1,  a  French  admiral  with  sixteen  sail  of  the  line 
allowed  himself  to  be  driven  back  into  port  by  a  British 
admiral  with  twelve  ? " 

To  M.  MARET. 

"  Paris,  16th  February,  1812. 
"  M  .  .  is  not  fit  for  the  Foreign  Office.  He  is  said  to 
be  imbued  with  English  customs  and  tastes,  and  that  he 
likes  and  prefers  the  individuals  of  that  nation  to  other 
people.  This,  in  a  French  agent,  is  very  inconvenient. 
M.  .  .  .  does  not  suit;  he  lives  at  Copenhagen  with  a 
mistress  ;  he  is  extremely  miserly,  and  is  not  fit  for  that 
mission.  .  .   . 

"  Napoleon." 
to  marshal  berthier. 

"PARIS,  iZtk  February,  181 2. 
"  I  beg  that  you  will  repeat  my  instructions  to  Marshal 
Marmont  in  the  following  terms. 

"  Napoleon." 

The  terms  were  :  "  The  Emperor  is  not  satisfied  with 
•the  turn  which  you  have  given  to  the  war.  You  have  a 
superiority  over  the  enemy,  and  instead  of  taking  the 
initiative  you  receive  it.  You  knock  your  troops  about 
and  fatigue  them.  That  is  not  the  art  of  war.  Should 
General  Hill  march  upon  the  army  of  the  south  that  will 
be  the  most  fortunate  thing  that  can  happen  ;  that  army 
is  strong  and  well  enough  organised  to  fear  nothing  from 
the  English,  even  should  they  unite  four  or  five  divisions." 

Then  followed  instructions  for  keeping  Hill  in  the  south 
and  preventing  him  from  joining  Wellington,  and — 

"The  capture  of  Ciudad  Rodrigo  was  a  check  for  you, 
but   the  English  are  sufficiently  acquainted  with  French 

L  2 


I48     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

honour  to  know  that  this  success  can  become  dangerous  for 
them  ;  it  places  them  under  the  obligation  of  defending 
that  fortress,  and  in  this  way  they  leave  you  master  to 
select  your  field  of  battle,  for  they  will  be  forced  to  march 
to  the  relief  of  that  place  and  to  fight  in  a  position  at  a 
distance  from  the  sea. 

"  The  result  of  this  advantage  can  be  delayed  until  after 
the  harvest.  Then  you  will  be  in  a  position  to  besiege 
Ciudad  Rodrigo :  the  enemy  will  have  to  fight  or  to 
submit  to  the  disgrace  of  seeing  you  take  that  place." 

Marmont  was  then  directed  to  take  up  his  head-quarters 
at  Salamanca,  to  fortify  that  town,  and  to  threaten  the 
enemy  in  all  directions.  He  was  told  that  Soult  would  be 
at  hand  to  hold  Hill  in  check,  and  that  it  would  be  madness 
on  the  part  of  Lord  Wellington  to  recall  Hill  as  long  as 
Soult  continued  to  make  demonstrations.  The  instructions 
went  on  to  say  : — 

"  Lord  Wellington  can  therefore  attack  you  with  his 
corps  only,  and  should  he  march  upon  you,  you  must  unite 
seven  divisions  at  Salamanca  with  all  your  artillery  and 
cavalry ;  that  will  give  you  a  force  of  50,000  men.  Leaning 
upon  Salamanca,  having  all  the  artillery  and  ammunition 
you  require,  your  army  50,000  strong  is  inattackable, 
even  should  General  Hill  form  his  junction  with  Lord 
Wellington.  It  would  be  inattackable,  not  for  35,000 
Englishmen,  which  is  the  total  strength  of  the  English  in 
Portugal  without  counting  the  Portuguese,  but  for  70,000 
Englishmen.  A  camp  selected,  a  retreat  secured,  guns  and 
ammunition  in  abundance,  are  advantages  which  you  know 
well  how  to  appreciate. 

"  However,  while  you  are  observing  the  enemy,  I 
will  suppose  that  Hill  has  joined  Wellington,  and  that 
Wellington  is  much  stronger  than  he  is  ;  in  that  case 
the  cavalry  and  two  divisions  can  be  called  upv  from 
the  army  of  the  north  ;  you  can  reinforce  yourself  in  a 
day,  and  victory  will  be  assured.  But  once  a  resolution 
adopted   you   must  stick  to   it ;    you   must  choose  your 


INSTRUCTIONS    TO    MARMONT.  149 

position  in  front  of  Salamanca,  and  be  a  conqueror, 
or  perish  with  the  French  army  on  the  field  of  battle 
selected  by  yourself.  .  .  . 

"  When  you  assumed  the  command  of  your  army  it  had 
just  experienced  a  check  by  its  retreat  from  Portugal ;  that 
country  was  ravaged,  the  hospitals  and  magazines  of  the 
enemy  were  at  Lisbon ;  your  troops  were  fatigued,  dis- 
gusted with  forced  marches,  without  artillery,  without 
military  train  ;  Badajoz  was  attacked;  a  battle  in  the  south 
had  not  caused  the  siege  of  that  place  to  be  raised.  .  .  ." 

Marmont  was  then  complimented  for  having  marched 
on  Badajoz,  and  having  forced  the  enemy  to  raise  the 
siege,  and  to  re-enter  Portugal.     The  instructions  added — 

"  Since  then,  marshal,  you  have  returned  to  the  north, 
Lord  Wellington  has  fallen  back  upon  the  real  point  of 
defence  of  the  country,  and  you  are  in  presence  of  each 
other. 

"At  the  present  moment  your  position  is  simple  and 
clear,  and  consequently  does  not  require  any  mental  com- 
binations. Place  your  army  in  such  a  manner  that  in  four 
marches  your  troops  can  be  concentrated  at  Salamanca.  .  .  . 
Should  Lord  Wellington  march  upon  Badajoz,  let  him  go 
there ;  immediately  concentrate  your  army  and  march 
straight  upon  Ameida  ;  send  out  parties  in  the  direction 
of  Coimbra,  and  be  assured  that  Wellington  will  soon 
turn  to  meet  you.  But  the  English  know  too  well  what 
they  are  about  to  commit  such  a  fault.  .  .  .  By  following 
these  directions,  and  executing  them  with  rapidity,  you 
will  hold  the  enemy  in  check ;  London  itself  will  tremble 
at  the  prospect  of  a  battle  and  the  invasion  of  Portugal, 
so  feared  by  the  English  ;  and  then,  at  harvest-time,  you 
will  find  yourself  in  a  position  to  besiege  Ciudad  Rodrigo, 
and  to  take  that  place  in  the  teeth  of  the  English,  or  to 
deliver  battle,  which  is  desirable,  as  they  are  far  from  the 
sea,  and  if  beaten,  will  be  ruined  and  will  lose  Portugal." 

The  above  instructions  extend  over  seven  closely-printed 
pages. 


150  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  the  EMPEROR  OF  RUSSIA. 

"  Paris,  i^th  February,  18 12. 
"  Sir,  my  Brother, — After  the  arrival  of  the  courier 
which  Comte  Lauriston  despatched  on  the  6th,  I  made  up 
my  mind  to  talk  over  the  unfortunate  matters  which  have 
occurred  within  the  last  fortnight  with  Colonel  Czer- 
nitchef.  It  remains  with  your  Majesty  to  bring  this  affair 
to  an  end.  I  beg  of  your  Majesty  never  to  doubt 
&c,  &c. 

"  Napoleon." 

We  shall  see  presently  to  what  this  letter  referred. 

NOTE  FOR  M.  BARBIER. 

"  Paris,  26th  February,  1812. 
"  The  Emperor  wishes  to  replace  the  novels  and  most  of 
the  poetry  in  his  library  by  historical  works.  M.  Barbier 
is  to  make  a  selection  of  these  works,  and  in  the  meantime 
to  procure  Pelly's  History  of  France,  which  his  Majesty 
desires  to  read." 

To  COMTE  DARU. 

"Paris,  27  th February,  1812. 
"  I  send  you  the  papers  of  the  committee  of  inquiry  [on 
the  capitulation  of  Dupont  at  Baylen],  I  beg  that  you 
will  read  them  with  care  and  draw  up  a  report.  You 
must  join  to  the  report  a  demand  on  the  part  of  Comte 
Regnaud  for  the  convocation  of  the  High  Court.  .  .  . 
You  must  lay  this  before  me  so  that  I  may  adopt  a 
definitive  decree. 

"  Napoleon." 

In  a  second  letter  to  Comte  Daru,  of  the  same  date,  his 
Majesty  said : — 

"  I  have  a  great  many  Spaniards ;  the  fact  is  that  in 
the   middle   of  Germany    they    are    more   French    than 


CZERNITCHEF   AFFAIR.  151 

German.  I  have  no  fault  to  find  with  the  Portuguese  in 
my  service,  and  I  hear  nothing  but  good  of  the  Spaniards 
who  have  been  for  a  year  past  in  Italy  and  in  Germany." 

The  Emperor,  after  going  into  details  of  organisation, 
expressed  the.  conviction  that  through  these  men  he  would 
be  able  to  gain  the  affection  of  the  population  of  Spain. 

In  another  letter  to  Comte  Daru,  of  the  1st  March,  the 
Emperor  asked  for  a  list  of  what  men  Prussia  was  to  furnish 
to  the  Grand  Army. 

To  M.  MARET. 

"  PARIS,  7.nd  March,  1812. 
"It  will  be  necessary  to  send  a  courier  to  Comte 
Lauriston  to-day.  Do  not  speak  to  him  about  the  es- 
pionage of  Czernitchef,  of  which  you  are  supposed  to 
know  nothing  at  present.  Explain  clearly  to  Lauriston 
that  in  no  case  must  he  enter  into  an  engagement  on  the 
subject  of  an  interview  [like  those  of  Tilsit  and  Erfurth]  ; 
that  I  shall  have  pleasure  in  seeing  negotiations  opened 
once  my  troops  are  on  the  Oder  or  the  Vistula ;  that  I  do 
not  wish  for  an  interview  ;  that  an  interview  is  a  matter  of 
which  he  can  make  use,  but  that  he  must  always  leave  me 
free  to  elude  it. 

"  Napoleon." 

And  the  next  day  the  Emperor  dictated  a  letter  to 
Prince  Kourakine,  in  which  he  bitterly  complained  to  the 
Russian  ambassador  of  the  conduct  of  Colonel  Czernitchef, 
who,  though  not  a  political  agent,  but  an  aide-de-camp  of 
the  Czar,  had  taken  advantage  of  his  position  to  violate 
what  was  most  sacred  among  men.  The  colonel,  in  fact, 
had  employed'  the  concierge  of  the  Russian  embassy  to 
obtain  from  a  clerk  in  the  War  Office  certain  information 
on  the  subject  of  the  preparations  of  the  Emperor  for  a 
campaign-  against  Russia.  The  papers  thus  procured 
rendered  any  further  doubt  in  the  mind  of  the  Czar  as 
to  the  intentions  of  Napoleon  impossible. 


152  THE   CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  COMTE  BIGOT. 

"Paris,  yd  March,  1812. 

"  It  is  time  to  finish  with  this  scandal  of  the  Sisters  of 

Charity  who  have  revolted  against  the  Superioresses.     It 

is  my  intention  to   suppress  the  convents  which,  within 

twenty-four  hours  after  being  warned,  have  not  submitted. 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  same  day  Prince  Eugene  was  rated  for  having 
allowed  the  Rivoli  to  leave  harbour  before  making  sure 
that  the  coast  was  clear,  and  that  there  was  no  English 
vessel  in  the  Adriatic.  The  result  of  this  negligence  was 
that  the  Rivoli  got  snapped  up  by  a  British  cruiser,  and 
the  French  and  Italian  admirals  reverted  to  their  old  plan 
of  keeping  ships  in  harbour  for  English  squadrons  to 
blockade  them. 

Captain  Talbot,  in  his  report  of  the  capture  of  the 
Rivoli  74  by  the  Victorious  74,  wrote  : — "  I  feel  great 
satisfaction  in  saying  that  the  conduct  of  Commodore 
Barre  during  the  whole  of  the  action,  convinced  me  that 
I  had  to  deal  with  a  most  gallant  man,  and  in  the 
manoeuvring  of  his  ship  a  most  skilful  and  experienced 
officer.  He  did  not  surrender  until  nearly  two  hours  after 
his  ship  had  been  rendered  unmanageable,  and  had  400 
killed  and  wounded." 

To  MARSHAL  BERTHIER. 

"  Paris,  12th  March,  1812. 
"  Send  an  aide-de-camp  to  Marmont,  saying  that  you 
have  laid  his  last  letter  before  me  ;  that  he  has  not 
concentrated  forces  sufficient  at  Salamanca  to  accomplish 
his  object ;  that  he  must  throw  a  bridge  across  the  Agueda, 
and  that  if  the  enemy  leave  less  than  five  divisions  on  the 
right  bank  of  the  Tagus,  he  should  march  on  Coa  and 
Almeida  and  ravage  the  whole  north  of  Portugal ;  that  if 
Badajos  be  taken  by  two  simple  English  divisions,  and  that 


MARMONT    RECALLED.  I  53 

he,  Due  de  Raguse,  has  detained  five  English  divisions  on 
the  right  bank  of  the  Tagus,  the  capture  of  Badajos  will 
not  be  imputed  to  him,  but  will  fall  entirely  upon  the  army 
of  the  south ;  that  if,  on  the  contrary,  the  enemy  should 
weaken  himself  and  leave  only  two,  three,  or  four  divisions 
on  the  right  bank,  it  will  be  the  fault  of  the  army  of 
Portugal  if  it  does  not  march  against  the  enemy,  invest 
Almeida,  and  ravage  the  whole  north  of  Portugal ;  that 
the  principal  duty  of  the  army  of  Portugal  is  to  hold  five 
divisions  of  the  English  army  in  check,  to  take  the  offensive 
in  the  north,  or,  if  circumstances  permit,  to  march  upon 
Almarez,  so  as  to  relieve  Badajos,  with  as  many  divisions 
as  employed  by  Lord  Wellington." 

Four  days  after  this  letter  was  written  Badajos  was 
invested  by  the  English. 

To  GENERAL  LACU^E. 

"Paris,  15M  March,  1812. 

"  I  do  not  wish  to  buy  any  eau-de-vie  at  Vienna  ;  but  I 
authorise  you  to  ask  my  ambassador,  Comte  Otto,  to 
negotiate  with  a  contractor  for  the  purchase  of  two  million 
bottles  of  Hungarian  wine  on  condition  of  being  delivered 
at  Warsaw  at  $d,  a  bottle. 

"  Napoleon." 

Before  taking  the  field  against  Russia  another  change 
was  made  in  Spain,  where  Marmont  was  getting  on  worse 
than  Massena  had  done.  Hence  the  following  letter  to 
Berthier,  who  was  once  more,  however,  the  major-general 
or  chief  of  the  staff  of  the  Grand  Army. 

"  Paris,  16th  March,  1812. 

"  Inform  the  King  of  Spain  by  a  courier,  who  must  start 
to-night,  that  I  confide  the  command  of  all  my  armies  in 


154     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Spain  to  him,  and  that  Marshal  Jourdan  [whom  Joseph 
had  been  so  sorry  to  part  with]  is  to  perform  the  functions 
of  chief  of  the  staff.    .    .    . 

"  Napoleon." 

In  another  letter  of  the  same  date  Berthier  was  told  to 
"  communicate  to  Oudinot  the  extracts  from  the  treaty 
with  Prussia  relative  to  the  non-occupation  of  Potsdam. 
He  must  therefore  march  upon  Brandenburg  by  some 
other  road.  Also  he  must  occupy  neither  the  palace  of 
Charlottenburg  nor  the  king's  palace  at  Berlin.    ..." 

To  M.  MARET. 

"  Paris,  28M  March,  1812. 
"  I  send  you  a  report  on  the  Russian  army  furnished  by 
the  Prussians.     Ask  Prince  Schwartzenberg  to  communi- 
cate to  you  the  ideas  of  Vienna  upon  it.     It  seems  to  me 
that  this  report  gives  three  divisions  too  many. 

"  Napoleon." 

to  marshal  berthier. 

"  Paris,  10th  March,  181 2. 
"  Inform  Marshal  Davoust  that  I  do  not  suppose  that 
the  Russians  will  move ;  they  must  be  aware  that  Austria, 
Prussia,  and  probably  Sweden  are  with  me ;  that  the 
Turks  are  about  to  make  fresh  efforts,  that  the  Sultan  is 
going  to  place  himself  at  the  head  of  the  army,  and  that 
all  this  is  calculated  to  hinder  them  from  braving  me.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  3rd  April  Napoleon  wrote  another  long  letter  to 
Berthier  on  the  subject  of  affairs  in  Spain.  Among  other 
things  he  said,  "  Tell  the  King  of  Spain  that  he  can 
dispose  of  the  division  of  his  guard  and  the  division  of 
dragoons,  which  forces,  united  to  those  of  Soult,  will 
assure  the  failure  of  the  operations  of  the  English.  .  .  . 
There  is  now  nothing  in  Spain  but  the  English  army  ;  you 


BOURMONT    EMPLOYED.  1 55 

must  therefore  assume  the  initiative  by  organising  the 
defence  of  Salamanca  and  carrying  on  the  war  in  the  north 
of  Portugal.    .    .    ." 


To  FRANCIS  II.,  Emperor  of  Austria. 

"St.  Cloud,  3rd  April,  1812. 
"  The  letter  of  your  Imperial  Majesty,  handed  to  me  by 
Prince  Schwartzenberg,  contains  assurances  of  a  friend- 
ship always  dear  to  me.  To  multiply  and  draw  closer  the 
bonds  which  attach  me  to  your  Majesty  is  one  of  my  most 
ardent  and  constant  wishes,  and  it  is  with  real  satisfaction 
that  I  have  seen  the  relations  existing  between  us  produce 
an  analogous  feeling  between  our  subjects,  and  establish 
between  them  a  union  which  time,  far  from  diminishing, 
will  increase.  Your  Majesty  will  find  me  alwaysready  to 
join  you  in  cementing  this  friendship,  &c.    .    .    . 

"  Napoleon." 

to  marshal  berthier. 

"  St.  Cloud,  4th  April,  1812. 
"  The  Commandant  Bourmont  should  not  be  employed 
at  the  head-quarters'  staff :  he  can  be  attached  to  that  of 
General  Junot. 

"  Napoleon." 

We  shall  find  Bourmont  during  the  Russian  campaign 
commanding  the  Spanish  regiment  Joseph-Napoleon,  which 
appears  to  have  distinguished  itself  on  more  than  one 
occasion. 

To  MARSHAL  BERTHIER. 

"  St.  Cloud,  6th  April,  1812. 

"  I  return  you  the  letters  of  your  brother.     Reply  that 

cacao,  sugar,  and  coffee  are  not  English  merchandise,  and 

ought  not  to  be  burned.     What  ought  to  be  burned  are 

articles   of  English   manufacture.      But   as   there  are  no 


156  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

custom-houses  in  Corsica,  there  will  be  no  harm  in 
allowing  coffee  and  sugar  to  enter,  without,  however, 
permitting  it,  but  in  closing  your  eyes. 

"  Napoleon." 


And  on  the  10th  April  Berthierwas  instructed  to  inform 
the  Duke  of  Dantsic  (Marshal  Lefebvre)  that  the  Emperor 
had  given  him  the  command  of  the  division  of  the  Old 
Guard,  and  that  he  was  to  set  out  at  once  for  Dresden 
with  his  horses  and  baggage.  And  on  the  same  day,  in  a 
letter  to  King  Jerome,  the  Emperor  said,  "  My  Guard  has 
marched.  I  do  not  think  that  the  Russians  will  stir.  The 
last  news  from  St.  Petersburg,  of  the  29th  March,  is  that 
they  are  moving,  but  that  they  continue  to  declare  that 
they  will  not  attack." 

To  PRINCE  EUGENE,  at  Milan. 

"St.  Cloud,  14A&  April,  1812. 
"  My  Son, — Organise  Italy  as  you  did  before  the  last 
campaign  .  .  .  and  afterwards  come  to  Paris  as  speedily 
as  possible.  After  remaining  there  three  or  four  days  you 
must  repair  with  all  diligence  to  join  your  army  corps  at 
Glogau. 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  17th  April  the  Emperor  dictated  a  letter  which 
M.  Maret  was  to  write  to  Lord  Castlereagh.  His  lordship 
was  to  be  assured  that  Napoleon  continued  to  be  animated 
with  sentiments  of  peace  and  moderation,  and  therefore 
desired  to  make  a  "  new,  authentic,  and  solemn  attempt  to 
put  an  end  to  the  misfortunes  of  war."  After  recapitulating 
what  had  occurred  since  the  peace  of  Amiens,  M.  Maret  was 
to  say,  "  The  affairs  of  the  Peninsula  and  of  the  two  Sicilies 
seem  to  be  the  matters  the  most  difficult  to  conciliate. 
I  am  authorised  to  propose  an  arrangement  upon  the 
following    bases :     '  The    integrity    of    Spain    shall    be 


UNACCEPTABLE   PROPOSITIONS.  I  57 

guarenteed  ;  France  shall  renounce  all  extension  of  her 
limits  on  the  side  of  the  Pyrenees  ;  the  present  dynasty 
shall  be  declared  independent,  and  Spain  shall  be 
governed  by  a  national  constitution  of  the  Cortes. 

" '  The  independence  of  Portugal  shall  also  be  guaran- 
teed, and  the  House  of  Braganza  shall  reign.' " 

Murat  was  to  remain  King  of  Naples,  and  the  kingdom 
of  Sicily  was  to  be  guaranteed  to  "the  present  House  of 
Sicily."  Spain,  Portugal,  and  Sicily  were  to  be  evacuated 
by  French  and  English  troops,  and  if  England  did  not 
accept  this  arrangement,  she  was  to  be  held  responsible 
for  all  the  bloodshed  which  would  ensue. 

On  the  26th  the  Emperor  wrote  a  long  letter  to  Berthier 
in  which  he  was  informed  that  his  Majesty  had  given 
Marshal  Victor  the  command  of  Berlin,  and  of  the  garrisons 
of  Stettin,  Kustrin,  Glogau,  &c,  and  that  it  was  his  inten- 
tion to  occupy  Spandau  and  Pillau.  Potsdam  was  not  to 
be  occupied,  but  Napoleon  said — "  However,  it  will  be  well 
to  accustom  the  people  of  Potsdam  to  the  sight  of  French 
uniforms,  and  for  a  good  number  of  officers  to  go  and 
sleep  there  in  order  to  see  the  town.  If  curiosity  does 
not  induce  them  to  visit  the  place  it  will  be  necessary  to 
persuade  them.  ..."  Prussia  was  to  be  bound  hand  and 
foot  before  the  French  plunged  into  Russia. 

To  the  EMPEROR  OF  RUSSIA. 

"St.  Cloud,  21th  April,  181 2. 

"  Having,  reason  to  think  that  your  Majesty  has  left 
St.  Petersburg,  and  that  Comte  Lauriston  is  no  longer  with 
you,  I  entrust  my  aide-de-camp  Comte  Narbonne  with 
this  letter.  He  will  at  the  same  time  be  the  bearer  of 
important  communications  to  M.  Roman  zof.  They  will 
prove  to  your  Majesty  my  desire  to  avoid  war,  and  my 
constant  adhesion  to  the  sentiments  of  Tilsit  and  Erfurth. 
However,  your  Majesty  will  permit  me  to  assure  you  that 
if  the  fatality  of  war  should  become  inevitable  between  us, 


I.58  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF   NAPOLEON. 

that  will  in  nothing  change  those  sentiments  with  which 
your  Majesty  has  inspired  me,  and  which  are  secure  from 
all  vicissitudes  and  all  change. 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  9th  May  the  Emperor  left  St.  Cloud,  and  on  the 
17th  he  reached  Dresden,  from  which  place  he  wrote  the 
following  letter  to  his  brother-in-law,  Prince  Borghese. 

"  I  have  been  here  for  the  last  two  days  with  the 
Empress,  and  the  Emperor  and  Empress  of  Austria.  I 
propose  remaining  here  a  few  days  longer.  All  my  army 
is  on  the  Vistula.  There  is  nothing  new.  Hostilities  have 
not  commenced. 

"  Having  learned  that  there  are  English  vessels  off 
Savona,  I  think  that  it  will  be  necessary  to  place  the 
Pope  in  safety.  In  consequence,  you  will  direct  the  prefect 
and  the  commander  of  the  gendarmerie  to  make  the  Pope 
leave  with  his  attendants  in  two  carriages.  His  holiness 
will  have  his  doctor  in  his  carriage.  Precautions  must  be 
taken  so  that  he  may  pass  through  Turin  during  the  night, 
that  he  does  not  stop  till  he  reaches  Mont  Cenis,  that  he 
may  pass  through  Chambery  and  Lyons  during  the  night, 
and  be  thus  taken  to  Fontainebleau  where  orders  have 
been  given  for  his  reception.  I  commend  everything  to 
your  prudence.  .  .  The  Pope  must  not  travel  in  his  ponti- 
fical robes,  but  in  the  dress  of  an  ecclesiastic.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

After  the  above  letter  follow  pages  of  instructions  in 
unbroken  array,  filled  with  military  details  preparatory  to 
taking  the  field,  and  then  this — 

To  the  COMTESSE  DE  MONTESQUIOU. 

"  Kcenigsberg,  idth  June,  1812. 
"  I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  6th  June.     I  can  but 
evince  my  satisfaction  at  the  care  which  you  take  of  the 


FRENCH    SHIPS    DRIVEN    ASHORE.  1 59 

king.  I  hope  that  you  will  soon  inform  me  that  he  has 
cut  his  four  last  teeth.  I  have  granted  the  nurse  all 
you  asked. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  ADMIRAL  DECRES. 

"Kcenigsberg,  \tth  June,  18 12. 
"  The  conduct  of  the  post  captain  who  was  at  Lorient 
is  sharply  criticised  ;  it  is  said  that  he  might  have  suc- 
coured the  two  frigates.  Similar  suspicions  attach  to  the 
conduct  of  the  captain  of  the  Danae'  who  might  have 
helped  the  Rivoli.     Make  a  report  on  these  two  affairs. 

"  Napoleon." 

The  two  frigates  were  the  Ariane  and  L'Andromaque, 
who  with  a  brig  were  run  ashore  to  escape  capture,  and 
were  blown  up. 

James  in  narrating  this  affair  says — "  A  fine  French  two- 
decker,  with  sails  bent  and  top-gallant  yards  across,  in  the 
harbour  of  Lorient,  lay  a  mortified  spectator  of  this  gallant 
achievement,  by  which  two  French  forty-gun  frigates  and 
a  sixteen-gun  brig  were  driven  ashore,  and  destroyed  under 
the  fire  of  a  heavy  coast  battery,  by  a  British  seventy- 
four  and  a  gun  brig.  Mortified  indeed,  for  in  the  state  of 
the  wind  the  commanding  officer  of  the  port  could  do  no 
more  than  send  boats  to  assist  in  removing  the  crews" 
(vol.  v.  p.  51).- 

To  MARSHAL  BERTHIER. 

"Kcenigsberg,  16th  June,  1812. 
"  Write  to  Marshal    Ney   that   his    corps  is  diverging 
from  the  route  traced  out  for  it,  and  commits  devastation 
everywhere.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

And  on  the  20th  June  Berthier  was  told  to  write  to 
Prince  Schwartzenberg  saying  that  as  his  funds  had  not 


l6o    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

arrived  from  Vienna  the  French  paymaster-general  had 
been  directed  to  place  20,000/,  at  his  disposal.  The  prince 
was  then  co-operating  with  General  Regnier  with  the  view 
of  covering  Warsaw. 

On  the  20th  June  Napoleon  issued  his  first  bulletin  to 
the  Grand  Army,  at  Gumbinnen.  He  said  that — "  Towards 
the  close  of  18 10  Russia  changed  her  political  system; 
the  English  esprit  regained  its  influence  ;  the  commercial 
ukase  was  the  first  symptom.  In  February,  181 1,  five 
divisions  of  the  Russian  army  left  the  Danube  and  hurried 
to  Poland  by  forced  marches,  sacrificing  Wallachia  and 
Moldavia. 

"When  the  Russian  armies  were  concentrated,  there 
appeared  a  protest  against  France  [reason  of  protest  not 
given]  which  was  sent  to  all.  the  cabinets.  Russia  thereby 
announced  that  she  would  not  preserve  even  appearances. 

"  Every  method  of  conciliation  was  employed  by  France, 
but  all  was  useless. 

"  At  the  close  of  181 1  France  saw  that  this  must  end  in 
war,  and  she  prepared  to  take  the  field.  .  .  . 

"In  March,  1812,  a  treaty  of  alliance  was  concluded 
with  Austria;  a  month  previously  a  treaty  had  been 
concluded  with  Prussia.  ... 

"  On  the  22nd  April  the  Emperor  of  Russia  assumed 
the  command  of  his  army  and  left  St  Petersburg.  .  .  . 

"  The  Emperor  left  St.  Cloud  on  the  9th  May,  passed 
the  Rhine  on  the  13th,  the  Elbe  on  the  29th,  and  the 
Vistula  on  the  6th  June." 

And  two  days  afterwards  came  this  stirring  proclamation 
to  the  immense  host  which  was  on  the  road  to  Moscow — 

PROCLAMATION  TO  THE  GRAND  ARMY. 

"  Imperial  Head-Quarters,  Wilkowyszki, 
2nd  yune,  1812. 

"  SOLDIERS, — The  second  war  of  Poland  has  com- 
menced ;  the  first  was  terminated  at  Friedland  and 
Tilsit.     At  Tilsit  Russia  swore  an  eternal  alliance  with 


LETTER    TO    THE    CZAR.  1 6"  I 

France,  and  war  with  England.  To-day  she  violates  her 
oaths.  She  refuses  any  explanation  of  her  strange  con- 
duct until  the  French  eagles  have  repassed  the  Rhine, 
thus  leaving  our  allies  at  her  discretion.  Russia  is  carried 
away  by  fatality ;  her  destinies  must  be  accomplished. 
Does  she  believe  that  we  have  degenerated  ?  That  we 
are  no  longer  the  soldiers  of  Austerlitz  ?  She  places  us 
between  dishonour  and  war ;  the  choice  cannot  be  doubtful. 
Then  let  us  march  forward  ;  let  us  pass  the  Niemen,  and 
let  us  carry  the  war  into  her  territory.  The  second  Polish 
war  will  be  as  glorious  for  the  French  arms  as  the  first. 
But  the  peace  which  we  shall  conclude  shall  put  an  end 
to  the  baneful  influence  exercised  by  Russia  upon  the 
affairs  of  Europe  during  the  last  fifty  years. 

"  Napoleon." 

In  a  letter  to  Berthier  of  the  same  date  occurs  this 
passage — "  Place  General  Vedel  in  command  of  Wilkowyszki 
until  further  orders,  this  point  being  important.  .  .  ."  It 
will  be  remembered  that  General  Vedel  was  one  of  the 
"  cowards  "  implicated  in  the  Baylen  capitulation. 

On  the  ist  July  Napoleon  addressed  a  long  letter  to  the 
Czar  from  Wilna  in  his  usual  style,  showing  the  purity  of 
his  intentions,  and  his  love  of  peace,  and  laying  all  the 
blame  of  the  war  on  Alexander.  He  complained  that  the 
Czar  had  refused  to  enter  into  any  explanations  until  he 
(Napoleon)  had  evacuated  Prussian  territory,  "  Thus  de- 
priving Prussia  of  that  independence  which  you  professedly 
wish  to  guarantee,  while  at  the  same  time  you  would  oblige 
me  to  pass  under  the  Candine  Forks.  I  pity  the  wicked- 
ness of  those  who  gave  your  Majesty  such  bad  advice. 
No  matter  what  may  happen,  Russia  can  never  be  per- 
mitted to  hold  such  language  to  France  ;  it  is  at  most  that 
which  the  Empress  Catherine  might  have  addressed  to 
the  last  King  of  Poland. 

"War  is  thus  declared  between  us.  God  Himself  cannot 
cause  that  which  has  been  not  to  have  been.     But  my  ears 

VOL.   III.  M 


1 62  THE    CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

shall  be  always  open  to  negotiations  for  peace,  and  when 
your  Majesty  wishes  to  shake  off  the  influence  of  the 
enemies  of  your  family,  of  your  glory  and  of  your  Empire, 
you  will  find  me  always  animated  with  the  truest  feelings 
of  friendship.  A  day  will  come  when  your  Majesty  will 
acknowledge  that  if,  towards  the  end  of  1810,  you  had  not 
changed  but  had  entered  into  loyal  negotiation  for  the 
modification  of  the  treaty  of  Tilsit,  you  would  have  had 
one  of  the  most  glorious  reigns  in  Russia.  After  startling 
and  reiterated  disasters,  by  the  wisdom  of  your  policy  you 
healed  the  wounds  of  the  State;  united  immense  provinces 
to  your  Empire,  Finland,  and  the  mouths  of  the  Danube. 
But  I  also  should  have  gained  much  ;  the  affairs  of  Spain 
would  have  been  terminated  in  181 1,  and  probably  peace 
would  before  this  have  been  concluded  with  England. 
Your  Majesty  was  wanting  in  perseverance,  in  confidence, 
and,  allow  me  to  add,  in  sincerity  ;  you  have  destroyed 
your  future.  Before  passing  the  Niemen  I  should  have 
sent  an  aide-de-camp  to  your  Majesty,  as  in  previous 
campaigns,  if  the  persons  who  have  the  direction  of  the 
war,  and  who  appear  to  me,  in  spite  of  the  lessons  of 
experience,  so  anxious  to  fight,  had  not  found  fault 
with  the  mission  of  the  Comte  de  Narbonne.  .  .  ." 

To  MARSHAL  BERTHIER. 

"  Wilna,  i,th  July,  1812. 
"  Write  to  Marshal  Ney  that  the  situation  of  his  army 
corps  seems  to  me  very  alarming  as  regards  his  artillery. 
Without  artillery  his  corps  would  be  greatly  compromised. 
.  .  .  Tell  him  to  send  out  detachments  of  cavalry  to  make' 
the  stragglers  join  ;  a  great  many  men  who  commit  crimes 
will  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  Cossacks.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

And  on  the  9th  July — "  Reply  to  Prince  Poniatowski 
that  you  have  laid  his  letter  before  me,  and  that  I  am  very 
dissatisfied  to  learn  that  he  speaks  of  pay  and  of  bread 


THE    HETMAN    PLATOFF.  1 63 

when  it  is  a  question  of  pursuing  the  enemy  ;  that  I  am 
all  the  more  surprised  at  this  because  he  is  alone  on  his 
side,  with  a  small  force,  and  when  the  Guard  of  the 
Emperor  which  came  from  Paris  by  forced  marches, 
instead  of  having  a  half  ration,  are  without  bread,  have 
only  meat,  and  do  not  murmur ;  that  the  Emperor  sees 
with  pain  that  the  Poles-  are  such  bad  soldiers,  and  have 
such  bad  feeling  as  to  complain  of  such  privations ;  that 
his  Majesty  hopes  he  will  hear  no  more  of  this." 

On  the  same  day  the  Emperor  dictated  some  instructions 
for  Marshal  Macdonald.  In  these  he  said — "  The  Hetman 
Platoff,  with  his  Cossacks  and  the  corps  of  Bagration 
which  wished  to  march  upon  Minsk,  have  been  cut  off 
from  that  town,-  and  are  being  pursued  by  the  King  of 
Westphalia  (Jerome).  The  Viceroy  (Prince  Eugene)  is 
marching  on  the  upper  Dvina.  The  Guard  and  the  head- 
quarters will  leave  here  in  a  few  days.  It  is  the  intention 
of  the  Emperor  to  march  upon  Moscow  and  St.  Peters- 
burg, and  to  free  all  Courland  and  Livonia  of  the  army 
which  is  at  Dinabourg.  .  .   ." 

And  writing  to  Davoust  the  Emperor  said — <r  It  is  pro- 
bable that  I  shall  march  with  my  Guard  and  the  4th  and 
6th  corps  on  Vitebsk,  thereby  threatening  St.  Petersburg 
and  Moscow,  having  you  on  my  right,  and  you  having  on 
your  right  King  Jerome  and  Schwartzenberg  (with  his 
Austrians)."  The  Emperor  then  expressed  the  opinion 
that  his  manoeuvres  would  force  the  Russians  to  retreat  in 
order  to  cover  St.  Petersburg.  The  King  of  Naples  was 
to  pass  the  Drowya  with  the  2nd  and  3rd  corps,  and  was 
to  follow  the  enemy. 

On  the  10th  July  Napoleon  instructed  Berthier  to  send 
a  brigade  of  gendarmerie  to  Voronovo,  "to  arrest  the 
pillagers  of  the  33rd,  who  are  committing  horrible  devasta- 
tions in  that  country.  .  .  .  Write  to  the  viceroy  to  leave  a 
patrol  and  some  officers  to  prevent  any  of  Marshal 
Davoust's  men  from  passing  Soletchniki ;  these  men,  under 
the  pretence  of   looking  for   the    1st    corps,  which  is  at 

M    2 


1 64     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Minsk,  go  to  Lida  to  pillage  that  valley,  which  is 
superb.  .  .  ." 

On  the  14th  July  the  Emperor,  in  reply  to  the  deputies 
of  the  Polish  Confederation,  said — 

"  I  have  heard  with  interest  what  you  came  to  say. 

"  Poles,  I  should  think  and  act  like  you ;  I  should  have 
voted  as  you  did  in  the  assembly  of  Warsaw.  The  love  of 
country  is  the  greatest  virtue  of  civilised  man. 

"  In  my  position  I  have  a  great  many  interests  to  con- 
ciliate, and  a  great  many  duties  to  fulfil.  Had  I  reigned 
at  the  time  of  the  first,  the  second;  or  the  third  partition 
of  Poland,  I  should  have  armed  my  whole  people  to 
support  you. 

"As  soon  as  victory  permitted  me  to  restore  your 
ancient  laws,  your  capital,  and  a  portion  of  your  provinces, 
I  did  so'without  loss  of  time,  without,  however,  prolong- 
ing a  war  which  would  have  required  the  shedding  of 
more  blood  on  the  part  of  my  soldiers. 

"  I  love  your  nation.  For  the  -last  sixteen  years  I  have 
seen  your  soldiers  at  my  side  in  the  battles  of  Italy  as  in 
those  of  Spain.  ...  I  may  add  here  that  I  have  guaran- 
teed to  Austria  the  integrity  of  her  states,  and  that  I 
cannot  authorise  anything  which  will  tend  to  trouble  her 
in  the  peaceful  possession  of  what  remains  to  her  of 
her  Polish  provinces.  .  .  ." 

Amid  all  the  turmoil  of  war  Napoleon  found  time  to 
write  the  following  letter  to  Comte  Collier  de  Sussy,  his 
minister  of  manufactures  and  commerce—"  I  see  with 
pleasure  that  the  bad  times  have  passed  ;  we  have  gained 
some  cruel  experience,  which  I  owe,  in  a  great  measure,  to 
the  false  information  furnished  by  the  Minister  of  the 
Interior.  If  I  had  listened  to  him  I  should  have  again 
delayed  forbidding  the  exportation  of  corn,  and  we  should 
have  no  longer  been  masters  of  the  crisis.  It  is  of  great 
interest  that  you  should  take  measures  for  ascertaining  our 
resources  exactly  so  that  we  may  know  when  to  permit 
and  when  to  prohibit  exportation.     This  is  for  the  future, 


.     POLES    AND    TURKS.  1 65 

because  for  the  next  two  years,  no  matter  how  abundant 
the  harvests  may  be,  we  shall  require  corn  to  replenish  our 
magazines.  ...  I  intend  employing  29,000,0.00  francs  in 
the  way  of  magazines  at  Orleans,  Cambrai,  and  near  all 
the  large  towns  of  France.  .  .  .  Some  years  ago  I  ordered 
the  construction  of  a  magazine  close  to  the  arsenal,1  and 
I  know  not  by  what  fatality  this  building  gets  on  so 
slowly.  I  beg  that  you  will  see  the  Minister  of  the 
Interior  in  order  to  hurry  on  the  works.  The  Arc  de 
Triomphe,  the  bridge  of  Jena,  the  Temple  of  Glory,  the 
slaughter  houses,  can  be  delayed  for  two  or  three  years 
without  inconvenience,  while  it  is  of  the  greatest  import- 
ance that  the  storehouses  should  be  finished.  .  .  ." 

The  Emperor  during  the  march  upon  Moscow  installed 
his  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs  at  Wilna.  On  the  19th 
July  he  wrote  a  despatch  to  him,  in  which  he  said — "  I 
suppose  that  I  need  not  tell  you  to  send  couriers  two 
or  three  times  a  week  to  Constantinople  with  bulletins 
and  all  the  news  possible.  If  I  were  obliged  to  enter 
into  such  details  with  you,  you  would  be  seconding  my 
intentions  very  badly.  The  Turks  must  make  haste  to 
enter  Moldavia  and  Wallachia,  and  to  threaten  the  Crimea 
with  their  fleet.  .  .  .  Make  the  Polish  Confederation  send 
an  embassy  to  Constantinople  to  ask  for  the  guarantee 
of  Turkey.  You  will  see  how  important  this  step  is ;  I 
have  always  had  it  in  my  head,  and  I  do  not  know 
how  I  came  to  forget  giving  you  orders  on  the  subject 
sooner.  Let  this  deputation,  with  a  letter  from  the 
Confederation  to  the  Grand  Seignor,  start  before  a  week, 
and  go  '  full  flight '  to  Constantinople." 

In  a  letter  to  Berthier  of  the  22nd  July,  the  Emperor, 
while  telling  him  to  write  to  General  Regnier  that  an 
attack  upon  Warsaw  was  not  to  be  feared,  added — "  The 

1  This  huge  building,  known  as  the  Grenier  d'Abondance,  was  not 
finished  until  1817  ;  it  was  capable  of  containing  45,000  sacks  of  meal, 
or  sufficient  to  feed  Paris  for  a  month.  For  some  unknown  reason 
this  storehouse  was  burnt  down  by  the  communists  in  1871. 


1 66     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

pretended  forces  arriving  for  the  Crimea  are  myths.  Tell 
him  that  the  Grand  Seignor  has  refused  to  ratify  the 
treaty  of  peace,  and  that  on  the  contrary  the  Russians 
will  be  obliged  to  send  fresh  troops  into  Moldavia  and 
Wallachia.  .  .  .  Tell  him  that  we  are  at  Mohilef,  that 
we  have  crossed  the  Borysthenes,  and  that  we  are 
marching  on  Vitebsk  and  perhaps  on  Smolensko." 


To  M.  MARET. 

"  BlECHENKOVITCHI,  2$th  July,  1812. 
"  Marshal  Davoust  had  a  battle  on  the  23rd  at  Mohilef; 
I  have  not  yet  learned  the  details.  Bagration  wished  to 
.trample  over  him  and  was  defeated.  A  note,  written 
at  six  in  the  evening,  on  the  field  of  battle,  said  that 
the  enemy  had  been  defeated.  To-day  we  had  an  affair 
with  his  advanced  guard,  and  captured  eight  guns  and 
700  men.  The  Russian  army  is  at  Vitebsk.  I  tell  you 
this  for  your  information,  but  you  need  not  write  anything 
about  it.     We  are  on  the  ,eve  of  great  events.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 


To  the  QUEEN  HORTENSE,  at  Paris. 

"Vitebsk,  29th  July,  1812. 
"  My  Daughter, — I  saw  with  pain,  by  your  letter  of 
the  ;i  1  th,  that  Napoleon  has  been  ill,  and  I  learned  with 
pleasure  by  that  of  the  14th  that  he  is  out  of  danger. 
I  expected  this  prompt  cure,  knowing  how  easily  a  mother 
is  alarmed. 

"  Napoleon."  " 

To  m.  maret. 

"Vitebsk,  31st  July,  1812. 
"  I  regret  to  see  that  there  are  3,000  sick  men  at  Wilna 
who  are  in  great  destitution,  and  have  not  even  straw ;  and 
that  the  magazines  contain  no  stores  of  any  kind.  .  .  .  Let 


LIGHT    LITERATURE.  l6j 

the  Archbishop  of  Malines  (the  Abbe  Pradt)  know  that  I 
am  not  satisfied  with  what  he  wrote  to  Prince  Schwartzen- 
berg  on  the  subject  of  military  operations.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  CPMTE  LAPLACE. 

"Vitebsk,  \st  August,  1812. 
"  I  have  received  your  Calculation  of  Probabilities  with 
pleasure.  There  was  a  time  when  I  should  have  read  it 
with  interest ;  to-day  I  must  confine  myself  to  expressing 
the  satisfaction  which  I  experience  every  time  that  I  see 
you  bring  out  new  works.  .  .  .  The  advancement  and 
perfection  of  mathematics  is  intimately  connected  with 
the  prosperity  of  the  State. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  M.  BARBIER,  at  Paris. 

"Vitebsk,  r/th  August,  1812. 
"  The  Emperor  desires  to  have  some  amusing  books.  If 
there  be  any  new  novels  which  are  good,  or  older  ones 
which  he  does  not  know,  or  memoirs  of  light  reading,  you 
will  do  well  to  send  them,  for  we  have  -leisure  moments 
here  which  are  difficult  to  fill  up." 

A  few  days  later,  on  the  10th  August,  we  find  Napoleon 
writing  no  less  than  seventeen  long  dispatches,  which 
occupy  more  than  fourteen  closely  printed  pages.  The 
above  letter  would  hardly  have  flattered  Comte  Laplace 
had  he  seen  it. 

To  M.  MARET. 

"  Vitebsk,  7th  August,  1812. 
"  I  beg  that  you  will  see  if  the  two  or  three  hundred 
carts  left  behind  at  Wilna,  exposed  to  the  air,  have  been 
placed  under  cover  in  a  church  or  an  arsenal.     If  that  has 
not  yet  been  done  the  governor  should  see  to  it. 

"  Napoleon." 


1 68     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

A  note  in  The  Correspondence  informs  us  that  immediately 
after  having  dictated  the  following  letter  Napoleon  threw 
himself  on  his  bed  without  signing  it,  probably  overcome 
by  fatigue  : — 

To  M.  MARET. 

"Smolensko,  iZth  August,  1812. 

"  I  have  this  instant  returned  to  my  quarters  ;  the  heat  is 
excessive,  and  there  is  a  great  deal  of  dust,  which  fatigues 
us  a  little.  We  had  the  whole  Russian  army  here ;  it 
received  orders  to  deliver  battle,  and  did  not  dare.  We 
carried  Smolensko  by  assault.  It  is  a  very  large  town, 
with  a  wall  and  respectable  fortifications.  We  have  killed 
3,000  or  4,000  of  the  enemy,  wounded  the  triple,  and  found 
here  a  large  number  of  guns  ;  several  generals  of  divisions 
were  killed,  so  it  is  said,  here.  The  Russian  army  is 
marching  in  the  direction  of  Moscow,  very  much  dis- 
satisfied and  discouraged.  Schwartzenberg  and  Regnier 
united  have  beaten  ■  the  Russians." 

The  fact  is  that  Smolensko  was  held  by  the  Russian 
rear  guard,  30,000  strong,  and  resisted  all  the  efforts  of 
Napoleon,  who  attacked  the  town  with  70,000  men,  the 
remainder  of  the  army  being  held  in  reserve.  Towards 
evening,  after  a  most  sanguinary  conflict,  the  French 
howitzers  set  fire  to  the  place,  but  the  Russians  still 
holding  out,  Napoleon  was  obliged  to  withdraw  his 
troops.  The  next  morning  one  of  Davoust's  patrols 
scaled  the  walls  and  found  Smolensko  deserted,  not  only 
by  the  Russian  troops  but  by  the  inhabitants.  The  French 
are  said  to  have  lost  15,000  men  in  these  fruitless  assaults, 
and  the  Russians  10,000.  There  is  nothing  in  The  Corre- 
spondence on  the  subject  on  the  check  experienced  by 
Murat's  advanced  guard  under  Sebastiani,  on  the  8th, 
when  Platoff,  with  his  Cossacks,  defeated  6,000  horse, 
and  took  500  prisoners.      It  was  this  little  reverse  which 


PRINCE    SCHWARTZENBERG.  1 69 

made  Napoleon  concentrate  and  knock  his  head  against 
the  ramparts  of  Smolensko,  out  of  which  the  Russians 
might  have  been  manoeuvred. 


To  THE  COMTESSE  DE  MONTESQUIOU. 

"Smolensko,  2yd August,  1812. 

"  I  have  received  the  portrait  of  the  King,  and  find  it 
very  like  him.  It  furnishes  me  with  an  opportunity,  of 
which  I  avail  myself  with  pleasure,  of  expressing  my 
satisfaction  with  the  care  you  take  of  him. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  the  EMPEROR  OF  AUSTRIA. 

"  Smolensko,  242$  August,  1812. 

"  Allow  me  to  express  to  your  Majesty  my  satisfaction 
with  the  conduct  of  the  corps  commanded  by  Prince 
Schwartzenberg,  who  cannot  have  failed  to  send  you  a 
report  on  the  success  which  he  recently  gained.  .  .  . 
Having  placed  the  corps  of  General  Regnier  under  the 
command  of  Prince  Schwartzenberg,  and  as  I  may  confide 
other  corps  to  him,  I  beg  that  your  Majesty  will  accord 
him  the  rank  of  Field  Marshal. 

"  I  take  this  opportunity  of  thanking  your  Majesty  for 
all  you  did  for  the  Empress  during  her  stay  in  Bohemia. 
She  is  now  at  St.  Cloud,  where  every  one  finds  that  she  is 
quite  well,  and  has  grown  much  stouter. 

"  I  start  to-night  for  my  advanced  guard,  which  is  twenty 
leagues  on  the  road  to  Moscow.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

Nothing  is  said  about  an  attack  made  by  Ney  on  the 
Russian  rear  guard  at  Valtelina,  in  which  there  was  some 
desperate  fighting,  and  in  which  the  Russians,  with  an  in- 
ferior force,  repulsed  the  enemy  with  the  loss  of  8,coo  men, 
and  then  continued  their  retreat  on  Moscow. 


\JO  THE   CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  M.  MARET. 

"  DOROGSBOUJE,  26th  August,  l8l2. 

"  The  enemy,  after  having  constructed  fortifications, 
raised  batteries  and  redoubts,  and  announced  their  inten- 
tion of  making  a  stand  here,  as  usual,  failed  in  resolution. 
We  entered  this  town,  which  is  considerable  enough,  as  it 
has  eight  or  ten  steeples.  The  country  is  good,  and  we  are 
assured  that  it  remains  so  as  far  as  Moscow.  The  heat 
which  we  experience  is  excessive.  The  weather  continues 
to  be  very  fine.  It  is  said  that  the  enemy  are  determined 
to  wait  for  us  at  Viazma.  In  a  few  days  we  shall  be  half 
way  between  Smolensko  and  Moscow,  and,  I  think,  at  forty 
leagues  from  Moscow.  Should  the  enemy  be  beaten  there, 
nothing  will  protect  that  great  capital,  which  I  shall  enter 
on  the  6th  September. 

"  Napoleon." 


The  country  through  which  the  French  were  advancing 
was  a  perfect  desert ;  it  had  been  laid  waste  by  the  Russian 
columns ;  there  were  hardly  any  brooks,  the  springs  were 
dried  up,  and  the  sufferings  of  the  French  troops  were 
such  that  they  lost  38,000  men  between  Smolensko  and 
Moskwa. 

To  M.  MARET. 

"Viazma,  29th  August,  1812. 

"  We  have  reached  Viazma.  The  enemy  continue  their 
retreat  upon  Moscow.  I  am  waiting  for  news  as  to  the 
march  of  the  16th  and  22nd  Russian  divisions,  which  are 
coming  from  Moldavia.  I  have  written  to  the  Emperor  of 
Austria,  begging  him  to  reinforce  the  cavalry  corps  of 
Prince  Schwartzenberg  by  3,000  men,  in  order  to  make 
good  his  losses.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 


BARCLAY    DE     TOLLY    REPLACED.  171 

To  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"Ghjatsh,  2nd  September,  18 12. 

"  I  have  received  the  report  of  Marshal  Marmont  on  the 
battle  of  Salamanca.  It  is  impossible  to  read  anything 
more  paltry ;  there  is  more  noise  and  more  clatter  in  it 
than  in  a  clock,  and  not  a  word  to  explain  the  real  state 
of  affairs. 

"  Here  is  the  view  which  I  take  of  the  matter,  and  the 
course  which  you  should  pursue. 

"  You  must  wait  until  Marshal  Marmont. has  arrived,  and 
has  been  nearly  cured  of  his  wound.  You  will  then  ask 
him  to  reply  categorically  to  these  questions  : 

"  Why  did  he  deliver  battle  without  the  orders  of  his 
general-in-chief  ?  [King  Joseph.] 

"  Placed  by  the  general  dispositions  of  the  army  at 
Salamanca,  it  was  all  very  well  to  defend  himself  if  he  were 
attacked,  but  since  he  had  evacuated  Salamanca,  and  was 
several  marches  away,  why  did  he  not  inform  his  general- 
in-chief  ? 

"  Why  did  he  not  ask  for  orders  as  to  the  course  he 
should  pursue  in  connection  with  the  general  system  of 
my  armies  in  Spain  ? 

"  This  is  a  case  of  insubordination  which  is  the  cause  of 
all  the  misfortune.  .  .  . 

"  How  came  he  to  assume  the  offensive  while  waiting  for 
the  division  of  dragoons,  the  thirty  guns,  and  the  15,000 
men  which  the  King  had  in  hand,  to  come  up  ?  .  .  .  . 

"  At  the  proper  time  you  must  let  Marshal  Marmont 
know  how  indignant  I.  am  with  his  inexplicable 
conduct.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  the  great  joy  of  the  Russian  nation  the  command 
of  the  army  was  now  transferred  from  the  hands  of 
Barclay  de  Tolly,  who  had  conducted  the  retreat  from 
Smolensko    in    the    most    masterly    style,    to    those   of 


172  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

Kutusof,  who  at  that  moment  was  labouring  under  a 
slight  cloud  at  St.  Petersburg.  The  change  was  hailed 
with  delight  in  Russia,  by  the  army  and  population 
generally,  because  Kutusof  was  a  pure  Russian,  whereas 
Barclay  de  Tolly  was  the  descendant  of  an  old  Scotch 
family,  who  had  fought  his  way  up  to  the  highest 
rank  without  intrigue  or  favour.  At  Borodino  Kutusof 
determined  to  show  fight. 

PROCLAMATION. 

"The  Imperial  Camp  on  the  Heights  of  Borodino, 
"Tth  September,  1812.  2  a.m. 
"  Soldiers,  here  is  the  battle  which  you  have  so  long 
desired !  Henceforth  the  victory  depends  upon  you ;  it 
is  necessary  for  us.  It  will  give  you  abundance,  good 
winter  quarters,  and  a  speedy  return  to  the  country ! 
Behave  as  you  did  at  Austerlitz,  at  Friedland,  at  Vitebsk, 
at  Smolensko,  and  the  most  remote  posterity  will  quote 
with  pride  your  conduct  on  this  day  ;  let  it  say  of  you — 
He  was  at  the  great  battle  under  the  walls  of  Moscow." 

Two  days  afterwards  Napoleon  wrote  as  follows  to 
his  brother  "and  very  dear  father-in-law,  the  Emperor  of 
Austria  : — 

"  I  hasten  to  announce  to  your  Imperial  Majesty  the 
happy  issue  of  the  battle  of  Moskowa,  which  took  place 
on  the  7th  at  the  village  of  Borodino.  Knowing  the  per- 
sonal interest  which  your  Majesty  is  good  enough  to  bear 
me,  I  have  thought  it  my  duty  to  announce  myself  this 
memorable  event,  and  the  good  state  of  my  health.  I  set 
down  the  loss  of  the  enemy  at  from  40,000  to  50,000  men  ; 
they  had  from  120,000  to  130,000  men  engaged.  I  have 
lost  between  8,000  and  10,000  men  in  killed  and  wounded.  I 
have  captured  sixty  guns  and  a  large  number  of  prisoners. 
My  advanced  guard  is  six  leagues  to  the  front. 


BORODINO.  I73 

"  I  again  beg  that  your  Majesty  will  reinforce  Prince 
Schwartzenberg,  so  that  he  may  sustain  the  honour  of  the 
Austrian  arms  as  he  has  already  done.  .  .  . 

"Napoleon." 

It  appears  tolerably  certain  that  although  the  French 
won  the  day  the  losses  were  very  evenly  balanced,  and 
that  the  captured  guns  and  the  prisoners  existed  only  in 
the  fertile  imagination  of  the  Emperor. 

To  M.  MARET. 

"Mojaisk,  \oth  September,  181 2. 
"  It  is  supposed  that  Wittgenstein  has  left  the  Drissa  in 
in  order  to  take  up  a  position  between  Moscow  and  St. 
Petersburg.  Should  this  turn  out  to  be  true,  write  to 
Marshal  St.  Cyr  to  pursue  him,  and  to  arrive  at  the  same 
time  as  the  enemy,  in  order  to  cover  my  flank.  .  .  .  Write 
to  Prince  Schwartzenberg  that  the  enemy  has  done  all  in 
his  power  to  prevent  us  from  reaching  Moscow,  and  that 
they  will  do  all  they  can  to  drive  us  out;1  that  I  am 
certain  that  the  troops  which  were  at  Kief  and  Mozyr  are 

1  The  Russians  may  have  done  their  best  to  prevent  the  French 
from  reaching  .Moscow,  but  once  the  enemy  in  the  city  they  tried  to 
detain  them  there  till  the  winter  season  arrived.  At  a  council  of  war, 
held  after  Borodino,  Barclay  de  Tolly  and  Kutusof  both  expressed  them- 
selves in  favour  of  not  defending  Moscow,  on  the  ground  that  it  would 
lead  the  enemy  into  a  snare,  where  his  destruction  would  be  certain. 
The  Russian  army,  too,  was  far  inferior  in  numbers  to  the  Grand 
Army.  The  best  policy,  therefore,  was  to  abandon  Moscow  without 
risking  another  battle,  and  to  await  events.  When  the  divisions  from 
Moldavia  and  Finland  arrived  the  position  of  Napoleon  would  become 
most  critical.  Of  course,  had  the  Russians  been  aware  that  the  French 
had  not  ammunition  enough  to  fight  a  second  battle  they  would  have 
adopted  a  bolder  plan. 

The  Grand  Army  little  expected,  when  it  came  in  sight  of  the  old 
Muscovy  capital,  and  when,  struck  by  the  splendour  of  the  spectacle, 
the  men  broke  from  the  ranks,  shouting  "  Moscow  !  Moscow!"  that 
the  city  before  them  was  a  snare,  and  that  so  few  of  them  would 
return  home  to  say  that  they  had  gazed  on  its  minarets. 


174  THE   CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

marching  on  Moscow ;  that  he  must  follow  the  movement 
of  the  enemy  actively,  and  not  allow  himself  to  be  de- 
ceived ;  that  if  the  enemy  who  are  in  front  of  him  fall 
upon  me,  he  must  follow  and  fall  upon  them.  .  .  .  Hence- 
forth the  enemy,  wounded  in  the  heart,  think  only  of  the 
heart  and  take  no  notice  of  the  extremities. 

"  Napoleon." 

circular  to  the  bishops. 

"MOJAISK,  loth  September,  1812. 
"  Bishop  of  .  .  .  ., — The  passage  of  the  Niemen,  the 
Dvina,  the  Borysthenes,  the  engagements  of  Mohilef,  of 
Drissa,  of  Potolsk,  of  Dstrovno,  of  Smolensko,  and,  finally, 
the  battle  of  Moskova,  are  so  many  reasons  for  rendering 
thanks  to  the  God  of  Armies.  It  is  therefore  my  desire 
that  you  should  assemble  my  people  in  the  churches  to 
sing  prayers  according  to  custom  and  to  the  rules  of  the 
Church  under  similar  circumstances. 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  15th  September  Napoleon  was  dictating  his 
orders  from  Moscow,  arid  on  the  18th  he  wrote  to  his 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  :  "  We  are  following  the  enemy, 
who  are  falling  back  beyond  the  Volga.  We  have  found 
an  immense  quantity  of  things  in  Moscow,  which  was  a 
very  beautiful  city.  It  will  take  Russia  200  years  to 
recover  from  the  loss  which  she  has  sustained.  It  is  not 
an  exaggeration  to  set  it  down  at  40,000,000/." 

A  large  amount  of  provisions  was  found  in  the  cellars 
at  Moscow,  but  these  stores  did  not  last  very  long,  and 
before  many  weeks  had  passed  the  French  troops,  laden 
with  spoil  and  covered  with  the  richest  silks  and  jewels, 
were  half  starving. 

To  the  EMPEROR  OF  RUSSIA. 

"  Moscow,  igt/i  September,  1812. 
"  Having  been  informed  that  the  brother  of  the  minister 
of  your  Imperial  Majesty  at  Cassel  was  at  Moscow,   I 


BURNING    OF    MOSCOW.  I  75 

sent  for  him,  and  we  had  some  conversation  together.  I 
recommended  him  to  go  to  your  Majesty  and  to  acquaint 
you  with  my  opinions.  The  beautiful  and  superb  city  of 
Moscow  no  longer  exists.  Rostoptchin  had  it  burned. 
Four  hundred  incendiaries  were  caught  in  the  act  ;  they 
all  declared  that  they  were  setting  fire  to  the  city  by 
orders  of  the  Governor  and  of  the  Minister  of  Police : 
they  have  been  shot.  The  fire  now  appears  to  be  ex- 
tinguished. Three-quarters  of  the  houses  are  burned 
down.  This  atrocious  conduct  is  without  aim.  Is  its 
object  to  deprive  us  of  some  resources?  But  these  re- 
sources were  in  the  cellars,  which  the  flames  did  not 
reach.  Besides,  why  destroy  one  of  the  finest  cities  in 
the  world,  the  work  of  centuries,  to  attain  so  feeble  an 
end  ?  It  is  the  conduct  which  has  been  pursued  ever 
since  Smolensko,  and  which  has  reduced  600,000  families 
to  mendicity.  The  pumps  of  the  city  were  broken  or 
taken  away ;  a  portion  of  the  arms  in  the  arsenal  were 
given  to  the  malefactors,  and  we  were  obliged  to  fire  some 
rounds  into  the  Kremlin  in  order  to  drive  them  out. 
Humanity,  the  interests  of  your  Majesty  and  of  this  great 
city,  demanded  that  it  should  be  confided  to  me  as  a  deposit, 
since  the  Russian  army  did  not  defend  it.  The  adminis- 
tration, the  magistrates,  and  the  civil  guards  shouldhave 
remained.  This  is  what  was  done  twice  at  Vienna,  at  Berlin, 
and  at  Madrid.  It  is  thus  that  we  acted  at  Milan  when 
Suwarrow  entered  that  city.  Conflagrations  authorise 
pillage,  in  which  the  soldier  indulges  to  dispute  what  re- 
mains with  the  flames.  But  I  hold  it  to^  be  impossible, 
with  your  principles,  your  heart,  the  correctness  of  your 
ideas,  that  you  should  have  authorised  similar  excesses 
unworthy  of  a  great  sovereign  and  of  a  great  nation. 
While  carrying  away  the  fire-engines  from  Moscow,  150 
field-pieces,  60,000  new  muskets,  1,600,000  cartridges,  with 
powder,  saltpetre,  sulphur,  &c,  were  left  behind. 

"  I  wage  war  against  your  Majesty  without  animosity ;  a 
note  from  you  before  or  after  the  last  battle  would  have 


176     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

stopped  my  march,  and  I  should  even  have  liked  to  have 
sacrificed  the  advantage  of  entering  Moscow.  If  your 
Majesty  retains  some  remains  of  your  former  sentiments, 
you  will  take  this  letter  in  good  part.  At  all  events  you 
will  thank  me  for  giving  you  an  account  of  what  is 
passing  at  Moscow. 

"  Napoleon." 

After  Borodino  the  Czar,  foreseeing  the  fate  of  Moscow, 
sent  for  the  English  ambassador,  Lord  Cathcart,  and  told 
him  to  inform  his  government  that  twenty  such  catas- 
trophes would  not  induce  him  to  abandon  the  struggle.1 

The  tremendous  losses  experienced  during  the  cam- 
paign— losses  which  the  Czar  in  his  proclamation  of  the 
20th  October  set  down  at  150,000  men— were  beginning  to 
be  severely  felt,  especially  as  the  Russians  were  receiving 
reinforcements  from  the  Danube,  and  as  recruits  were 
thronging  from  all  parts  of  the  empire  with  the  greatest 
enthusiasm. 

On  the  23rd  September  Napoleon  wrote  to  M.  Maret 
from  the  Kremlin — "I  have  just  raised  a  conscription  of 
140,000  men  in  France,  and  in  Italy  one  of  30,000.  It  is 
only  in  the  Grand  Duchy  of  Warsaw  that  nothing  has 
been  done.  As  many  recruits  as  possible  must  be  raised,  as 
some  of  the  regiments  are  in  great  need  of  men.  Hurry 
on  this  levy  so  that  it  may  take  place  at  once.  Horses, 
too,  must  be  sent  in  order  to  remount  the  Polish  cavalry 
and  artillery.  Write  to  Saxony  for  recruits,  and  also  to 
all  the  courts  of  the  Confederation  of  the  Rhine.  The 
battle  of  Borodino  and  the  entry  into  Moscow  should  not 
weaken  the  zeal  nor  send  the  allies  to  sleep.  .  .  ." 

Another  letter  to  M.  Maret,  dated  the  24th,  shows  that 
the  Emperor  was  obliged  to  send  to  France  for  hand-mills 
to  grind  corn  for  his  troops  ;  and  on  the  28th  the  Minister 
of  Foreign  Affairs,  still  at  Wilna,  was  written  to  by  the 
Emperor,  who  said — "  I  receive  no  news  from  Warsaw, 
1  Alison's  History  of  Europe,  vol.  xi.  p.  104. 


DANGERS    THREATEN.  I  77 

very  little  from  Vienna,  and  none  from  Constantinople. 
Nor  do  I  hear  anything  about  America,  and  yet  it  is 
urgent  to  do  something  in  that  quarter." 

The  next  day  his  Majesty  wrote  again  thus  :  "  I  stand 
in  the  greatest  need  of  14,000  horses.  I  have  sent  General 
Bourcier  to  Wilna,  and  have  placed  160,000/.  at  his 
disposal.  Purchases  should  be  made  in  Hanover,  at 
Berlin,  Sec.  ...  In  the  province  of  Mohilef  there  are 
Jews  immensely  rich  ;  send  for  the  chief  ones  and  see  if 
you  cannot  deal  with  them  by  paying  ready  money.  .  .  ." 
And  on  the  30th — "  I  send  you  the  treaty  between  Russia 
and  the  Porte,  which  was  found  here  in  the  Moscow 
papers.  It  appears  that  you  have  not  yet  received  it  from 
Constantinople,  as  you  have  not  sent  it  to  me."  The  same 
day  M.  Barbier  was  written  to  for  more  books. 

From  the  above  letters  it  is  evident  that  Napoleon  was 
becoming  painfully  aware  of  the  dangers  of  his  position. 
However,  he  still  entertained  hopes  of  being  able  to 
conclude  an  advantageous  peace,  for  he  was  as  confident 
in  the  charms  of  his  diplomacy  as  in  the  strength  of  his 
arm.  In  the  meantime  100,000  men  from  the  shores  of 
the  Baltic  and  the  banks  of  the  Danube  were  converging 
in  order  to  cut  off  his  retreat. 

In  the  beginning  of  October,  while  the  weather  was  still 
"  as  fine  as  that  at  Fontainebleau  in  September,"  the 
Emperor  wrote  a  series  of  notes  which  show  how  clearly 
he  appreciated  the  difficulties  of  his  situation.  He 
said : — 

"  The  enemy  are  marching  on  the  road  from  Kieff ;  their 
object  is  evident ;  they  are  expecting  reinforcements  from 
the  army  of  Moldavia.  To  march  against  them  would  be 
to  march  in  the  direction  of  their  succours,  and  to  find 
ourselves  deprived  of  any  points  d'appui  during  winter 
cantonments.  Moscow  having  been  burned  and  deserted 
by  its  inhabitants  must  not  be  taken  into  account;  that 
city  cannot  contain  our  sick  and  wounded ;  the  resources 
found  there,  once  exhausted,  no  more  will  be  forthcoming. 

VOL.  III.  N 


178     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

....  Should  the  army  fall  back  upon  Smolensko,  would 
it  be  wise  to  go  in  quest  of  the  enemy,  and  to  expose 
ourselves  to  lose,  in  a  march  which  would  resemble  a 
retreat,  several  thousand  men  in  presence  of  an  enemy 
acquainted  with  the  country,  having  a  large  number  of 
secret  agents  and  a  numerous  light  cavalry  ?  Although 
the  French  army  is  victorious,  it  would  find  itself  placed 
at  a  disadvantage  by  this  movement,  and  would  suffer 
serious  losses." 

After  considering  whether  it  would  be  well  to  return  by 
the  same  road  that  he  had  reached  Moscow  the  Emperor 
asked  himself: — 

"What  is  the  object  to  be  fulfilled?  1st,  to  place  the 
Emperor  as  near  France  as  possible,  and  to  give  the 
country  confidence  that  the  Emperor  during  his  winter 
cantonments  is  in  the  midst  of  his  people  ;  2nd,  to  quarter 
the  army  in  a  friendly  country,  close  to  its  magazines  ; 
3rd,  to  place  ourselves  in  a  position  to  back  up  the 
Emperor's  negotiations  for  peace  by  threatening  St. 
Petersburg ;  4th,  to  sustain  the  honour  of  our  arms  at 
the  height  to  which  it  has  been  raised  by  this  glorious 
campaign." 

The  Emperor  then  indicated  a  series  of  movements 
calculated  to  fulfil  the  above  desiderata,  and  came  to  the 
conclusion  that  the  enemy,  upon  finding  St.  Petersburg 
menaced,  would  sue  for  peace.  For  the  moment  he  con- 
sidered it  feasible  to  form  a  junction  with  Macdonald's 
corps  at  Riga  and  to  march  on  the  capital. 

On  the  10th  October,  M.  de  Montalivet  having  asked 
leave  to  prohibit  the  publication  of  a  work  attacking  the 
reputation  of  a  member  of  the  Royal  Family  of  England, 
the  Emperor  decided  that  no  works  should  be  prohibited 
but  those  which  were  obscene  or  calculated  to  disturb  the 
tranquillity  of  the  State. 

Three  days  after  writing  the  above  instructions  there 
was  a  light  fall  of  -  snow,  which  showed  that  the  fine 
weather  was  at  last   going  to   break  up.     On  the  same 


LETTER    TO    KUTUSOFF.  I  79 

day  (13th  October)  his  Majesty  was  greatly  mortified  to 
hear  Kutusoff's  artillery  firing  salutes  in  honour  of  the 
capture  of  Madrid  by  the  English. 

To  THE  COMTESSE  DE  MONTESQUIEU. 

"  Moscow,  16th  October,  181 2. 
"  I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  27th  September,  and 
thank  you  for  the  feelings  you  express.  It  is  I  who  am 
indebted  to  you  for  the  excellent  care  which  you  take 
of  the  little  king;  I  am  exceedingly  grateful  for  it.  It 
affords  me  pleasure  to  hear  you  speak  of  the  promise 
he  gives. 

"  Napoleon." 

to  general  kutusoff. 

"Moscow,  \%th  October,  18 12. 
"  General  Lauriston  has  been  directed  to  propose  to 
your  Highness  arrangements  with  the  view  of  giving  the 
war  a  character  in  conformity  with  established  rules,  and 
for  taking  measures  so  that  the  country  shall  support  only 
such  evils  as  are  inseparable  from  a  state  of  war.  In  fact 
the  devastation  of  your  own  country  is  as  damaging  to 
Russia  as  it  is  painful  to  the  Emperor.  Your  Highness 
will  easily  understand  how  anxious  I  am  to  know  the 
final  decision  of  your  Government  upon  this  matter." 

Marshal  Berthier  signed  the  above  appeal,  "by  order 
of  the  Emperor" — an  appeal  which  was  in  fact  an  attempt 
to  open  up  negotiations  with  the  Russian  commander-in- 
chief.  Some  correspondence  had  passed  between  Murat 
and  Beningsen  on  the  subject  of  outposts,  and  the  Czar 
had  severely  reprimanded  the  Russian  general,  and  had 
issued  strict  orders  that  no  shadow  of  an  attempt  should 
be  made  to  negotiate  with  the  French.  Murat,  too,  had 
just  been  successfully  attacked  at  Winkowo,  where  the 
French  lost  1,500  men,  thirty-eight  guns,  and  a  consider- 
able amount  of  baggage. 

N     2 


l8o  THE   CORR*SPCMS[DENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

On  the  1 8th  October  Napoleon  wrote  to  Berthier, 
telling  him  to  inform  the  Due  de  Trevise  (Marshal 
Mortier)  that  he  was  going  to  leave  Moscow  the  next 
morning  in  order  to  pursue  the  enemy.  Mortier  was  to 
take  up  his  quarters  at  the  Kremlin,  and  was  to  hold  the 
city  with  4,000  cavalry  on  foot  (so  many  horses  having 
died)  and  other  troops.  The  Kremlin  was  to  be  fortified, 
and  the  sick  were  to  be  transported  to  the  Foundling 
Hospital.  His  Majesty  added — "  To-morrow,  after  the 
departure  of  the  army,  he  must  cause  the  municipality  to 
issue  a  proclamation  warning  the  inhabitants  that  the 
rumours  of  an  evacuation  are  false ;  that  the  army  is 
marching  upon  Kalonga,  Toula,  and  Briansk,  to  seize 
upon  those  important  points,  and  the  manufactory  of 
arms.  .  .  ." 

On  the  19th,  before  leaving  Moscow,  the  Emperor  wrote 
three  letters.  In  the  first,  to  M.  Maret,  he  said — "  General 
Sebastiani,  posted  a  league  to  the  left  of  Murat,  with  the 
advanced  guard,  allowed  himself  to  be  surprised  by  a  horde 
of  Cossacks  yesterday ;  he  lost  six  guns.  The  enemy's 
infantry  then  attacked  the  King  of  Naples,  who,  at  the 
head  of  his  carabineers  and  cuirassiers,  broke  it  and  cut 
it  to  pieces.  General  Dery,  the  king's  aide-de-camp,  was 
killed.  .  .  .  The  army  is  on  the  march.  It  has  been 
decided  to  blow  up  the  Kremlin,  and  to  pass  by  Kalonga 
and  by  Viazma,  so  as  to  be  able  to  go  into  winter 
quarters  before  the  hard  weather  sets  in.  Everything  is 
going  on  well." 

The  two  other  letters  were  addressed  to  Berthier.  In 
the  first,  the  Chief  of  the  Staff  was  told  to  inform  Murat 
that  the  army  was  getting  into  motion  at  5  A.M. ;  that  he 
was  to  hold  the  enemy  in  check,  and  that  the  Prince  of. 
Hohenzollern  had  just  arrived!  In  the  second  letter, 
Napoleon  estimated  at  a  thousand  the  number  of  sick 
and  wounded  he  was  leaving  behind  him.  He  then  gave 
directions  for  the  transport  of  those  who  were  to  accom- 
pany the  army.     Every  kind  of  vehicle  was  to  be  placed 


RETREAT    BEGINS.  l8l 

at  the  disposal  of  the  staff,  with  these  exceptions— one 
carriage  for  the  Emperor,  one  for  Berthier,  one  for  the 
Secretary  of  State,  one  for  each  marshal  or  commander  of 
an  army  corps,  one  for  the  Quartermaster-General. 

Napoleon  left  Moscow  with  106,000  men,  but  already 
there  was  a  great  lack  of  horses  and  much  difficulty 
in  carrying  away  sick  and  wounded,  plunder,  ammuni- 
tion, &c. 

Hardly  had  the  French  left  Moscow  when  they  were 
obliged  to  cut  their  way  through  the  enemy  at  Malo- 
Jaroslawitz,  and  that  was  not  accomplished  without 
tremendous  slaughter.  The  victory  remained-  with  the 
French,  but  still  the  results  were  disastrous,  for  they  were 
obliged  to  fall  back  by  the  Smolensko  road — a  line  of 
retreat  which  was  not  contemplated,  and  whiqh  had 
been  laid  waste  already. 


To  MARSHAL  BERTHIER. 

"Troitskoie,  10th  October,  18 12. 

"...  On  the  22nd  or  23rd  Marshal  Mortier  must  set 
fire  to  the  eau-de-vie  stores,  the  barracks,  and  to  the  public 
establishments,  with  the  exception  of  the  Foundling 
Hospital.  [The  French  sick  and  wounded  were  not  to 
be  burned.]  He  must  set  fire  to  the  palace  of  the 
Kremlin.  He  must  take  care  to  have  the  muskets  broken 
in  pieces,  and  powder  placed  under  the  towers  of  the 
Kremlin ;  all  the  gun  carriages  must  be  broken,  as  well 
as  the  wheels  of  the  ammunition  waggons. 

"  Having  accomplished  these  things,  and  when  fire  has 
been  set  to  the  Kremlin  in  several  places,  Marshal  Mortier 
must  leave  it  and  take  the  road  to  Mojaisk.  On  the  road 
he  must  burn  all  the  vehicles  left  behind,  bury  the  dead  as 
far  as  possible,  and  break  all  the  muskets.  On  arriving  at 
the  Galitzin  palace  he  must  pick  up  Adjutant  Bourmont 
with  the  Spaniards  and  Bavarians  who  are  there.  .  .  .  He 


1 82     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

must  remain  in  Moscow  until  he  has  seen  the  Kremlin 
blown  up.  He  will  take  care  to  set  fire  to  the  house  of 
the  ex-governor  and  to  that  of  Razoumovsky. 

"  Napoleon." 

It  is  interesting  to  read  these  instructions  following  so 
closely  on  uthe  pathetic  letter  to  the  Czar,  and  the  pro- 
posals submitted  to  Kutusofif.  One.  finds  in  Alison's 
History  of  Europe x  that  when  the  Russians  abandoned 
their  capital,  Count  Rostopchin  had  already  set  the 
example  of  devotion  by  setting  fire  to  his  country  palace, 
applying  the  torch  with  his  own  hands  to  his  nuptial  bed  ; 
to  the  gates  he  had  affixed  the  following  inscription : — 
"  During  eight  years  I  have  embellished  this  country  seat  and 
lived  happily  in  it,  in  the  bosom  of  my  family.  The  inhabi- 
tants of  this  estate,  to  the  number  of  7,000,  leave  it  at  your 
approach.  Frenchmen  at  Moscow,  I  have  abandoned  to 
you  my  two  houses ;  here  you  will  find  nothing  but  ashes." 

On  the  2  ist,  in  a  despatch  to  Berthier,  the  Emperor 
said  : — 

"I  cannot  too  strongly  recommend  Marshal  Mortier 
to  place  the  men  still  in  hospital  in  the  waggons  of  the 
Young  Guard  and  in  those  of  the  cavalry  on  foot.  The 
Romans  gave  civic  crowns  to  those  who  saved  citizens. 
Marshal  Mortier  will  deserve  one  for  every  soldier  he  saves. 
Write  to  him  that  he  must  let  them  ride  on  his  horses 
and  on  those  of  every  one  else ;  that  this  was  what  the 
Emperor  did  at  St.  Jean  d'Acre.  ..." 

On  the  23rd  December,  in  his  twenty-sixth  bulletin 
to  the  army,  Napoleon  thus  explained  the  Sebastiani 
affair : — 

"  General  Lauriston  having  gone  to  Russian  head- 
quarters on  the  5th  October,  communications  were  opened 
between  our  outposts  and  those  of  the  enemy,  and  it  was 
agreed  between  them  that  no  attack  should  be  made 
without  three  hours'  notice  being  given ;  but  on  the  18th, 
1  Vol.  xi.  p.  92, 


REMAINS    OF    MOSCOW.  1 83 

at  7  A.M.,  4,000  Cossacks  issued  from  a  wood  at  half  a 
cannon  shot  from  General  Sebastiani.  .  .  .  They  made  a 
'  houra '  on  this  light  cavalry  while  it  was  dismounted  and 
while  meal  was  being  served  out.  This  light  cavalry  was 
able  to  form  only  a  quarter  of  a  league  further  on. 
However,  the  enemy  penetrating  by  this  interval,  took 
twelve  guns  and  sixty-five  ammunition-  and  baggage- 
waggons." 

Then  followed  a  description  of  how  Murat  finally 
repulsed  the  enemy,  "who  not  only  suffered  a  loss 
superior  to  ours,  but  disgraced  themselves  by  violating  an 
outpost  truce." 

The  Emperor  then  manifested  his  intention  of  marching 
on  the  Dwina,  and  taking  up  a  position  which  would  bring 
him  within  eighty  leagues  of  St.  Petersburg  and  of  Wilna, 
which,  he  said,  would  offer  him  a  double  advantage,  and 
place  him  at  about  twenty  marches  from  "  his  means  and 
his  objective." 

Referring  then  to  the  damage  done  to  Moscow,  he 
said : — 

"  Out  of  4,000  stone  houses  only  200  remain,  and  of 
8,000  in  wood  only  500.  It  was  proposed  to  the  Emperor 
to  burn  the  rest  of  the  city,  and  the  2,000  villages  and 
country  houses  by  which  it  is  surrounded,  so  as  to  teach 
the  Russians  to  make  war  according  to  rules  and  not  like 
Tartars.  The  Emperor  refused  to  sanction  these  measures, 
which  would  have  so  greatly  aggravated  the  misfortunes  of 
that  population.  .  .  ." 

And  his  Majesty,  after  saying  that  he  could  not  think 
of  punishing  thousands  of  innocent  people  for  the  fault  of 
a  few  wretches,  went  on  to  remark  that  "  The  inhabitants  of 
Russia  are  lost  in  astonishment  at  the  fine  weather  of  the 
last  twenty  days.1  We  have  the  sun  and  the  lovely  days  of 
Fontainebleau.  The  army  is  in  a  country  which  is  extremely 

1  The  winter  set  in  so  much  later  than  usual  that  the  Russians 
began  to  fear  that  the  Almighty  was  in  favour  of  the  invader.  If  the 
country  were  rich  it  yielded  little  or  nothing  to  the  French. 


184    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

fertile,  and  which  can  vie  with    the    richest   portions  of 
France  or  Germany." 

To  MARSHAL  BERTHIER. 

"Vereya,  iWi  October,  1812. 
"  Reiterate  the  order  to  General  Marchand  to  pick  up  all 
the  sick  and  wounded  at  the  abbey  of  Mojafsk,  making 
use  for  this  purpose  of  all  the  carriages  and  carts  without 
distinction.  Give  orders  to  this  effect  to  the  staff.  I  have 
ordered  my  grand  equerry  to  take  at  least  100  of  my 
baggage-waggons. 

"Napoleon." 

On  the  2nd  November  Napoleon,  who  had  already 
reached  Viazona,  sent  a  despatch  to  M.  Maret,  saying  : — 

"  Write  to  Baron  Reinhard  to  show  the  king  (Jerome) 
how  ridiculous  it  is  to  transform  the  principal  Protestant 
church  at  Cassel  into  a  Roman  Catholic  chapel ;  that  it  is 
very  dangerous  to  meddle  with  religious  affairs,  which  only 
embitters  the  feeling  of  the  people  ;  that  Cassel  being  a 
Protestant  town  he  should  leave  the  Protestants  tranquil. 
If  words  do  not  prove  sufficient,  Baron  Reinhard  must 
hand  him  a  note  stating  how  dissatisfied  I  am  with  a 
measure  which  is  as  rash  as  it  is  contrary  to  sound 
policy." 

On  the  2nd  November  the  French  rear-guard  was 
attacked  at  Wiazma,  where  the  Russians  inflicted  upon 
it  a  loss  of  6,000  men  and  twenty-seven  guns.  Since 
the  retreat  began  the  corps  of  Davoust  had  lost  10,000 
men  by  fatigue  or  desertion,  and  it  was  calculated  that  the 
Grand  Army,  since  leaving  Moscow,  had  lost  43,000 
men.  No  less  than  240,000  men  of  the  main  body,  under 
the  immediate  command  of  the  Emperor,  had  perished 
before  a  fall  of  snow  took  place.  The  corps  of  Davoust 
suffered  so  severely  at  Wiazma  that  it  had  to  be  replaced 
by  that  of  Ney. 

On  the  5th  November,  after  issuing  various  orders  show- 


SMOLENSKO.  1 85 

ing  that  he  was  being  hard  pressed  by  the  enemy  in  his 
retreat,  Napoleon  wrote  to  General  Clarke  at  Paris  saying 
that  he  regretted  to  see  that  the  frontier  of  the  Pyrenees 
had  been  insulted  by  Spanish  brigands. 

On  the  7th  November  Berthier  was  instructed  to  write 
to  Marshal  Victor,  who  was  to  come  to  the  rescue  of  the 
Grand  Army : — 

"  In  a  few  days  your  rear  may  be  inundated  with 
Cossacks  ;  the  army  of  the  Emperor  will  reach  Smolensko 
to-morrow,  but  worn  out  after  a  march  of  120  leagues  with- 
out stopping.  Assume  the  offensive.  The  safety  of  the  two 
armies  depends  upon  this  ;  every  day's  delay  is  a  calamity. 
The  cavalry  are  on  foot,  the  cold  has  killed  all  the  horses. 
March ;  this  is  the  order  of  the  Emperor  and  is  a  matter 
of  necessity." 

And  on  the  12th,  the  army  being  still  at  Smolensko, 
Berthier  received  orders  to  reply  to  General  Bourcier, 
who  had  been  sent  to  Warsaw  for  horses,  that  30,000 
animals  were  required. 

On  the  15th,  17th,  and  18th  there  was  much  desperate 
fighting  at  Krasnoi,  during  which  Marshal  Ney  and  his 
corps  got  separated  from  the  main  body.  -During  these 
three  days  the  Russians  captured  26,000  prisoners,  most  of 
them  half-starved  wretches  who  could  offer  no  resistance. 
In  addition  to  this  10,000  men  were  killed,  while  112  guns 
were  abandoned  at  Smolensko,  and  116  were  captured  in 
the  field. 

On  the  19th  the  French  reached  Orcha,1  from  which 
place  the  Emperor  wrote  to  M.  Maret,  saying : — 

"I  am  moving  in  the  direction  of  Borisof  in  order  to 

1  When  the  Grand  Army  reached  Orcha  it  was  but  a  skeleton.  Of 
the  guard  that  had  crossed  the  Niemen  five  months  before  43,000 
strong  only  6,000  men  remained  ;  Davoust's  corps  had  been  reduced 
from  70,000  to  4,000  men ;  Prince  Eugene's  corps  from  42,000  to 
1,800  men;  Ney's  corps  from  40,000  to  1,500  men.  Such  was  the 
condition  of  the  Grand  Army  when  Marshal  Victor  met  it  on  the 
23rd  November  ;  and  the  Beresina  had  still  to  be  passed. 


1 86 


THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 


march  upon  Minsk,  or,  if  the  enemy  be  too  strong,  on 
Wilsika  and  Wilna.  .  ..  Write  confidentially  to  the  Minister 
of  Police  that  I  am  in  good  health.  I  have  no  news  of 
Marshal  Ney,  and  I  despair  of  him.  .  .  .  Inform  Prince 
Schwartzenberg  that  I  am  marching  upon  Minsk,  and 
that  I   count   upon  him." 

In  the  evening  of  the  same  day  the  Emperor,  in  a  second 
letter  to  his  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs,  was  able  to 
announce  that  Marshal  Ney  had  rejoined  the  army. 

On  the  22nd  the  Emperor  issued  orders  that  a  con- 
siderable reduction  was  to  be  made  in  the  number  of 
baggage-waggons— waggons  to  be  burned,  and  the  horses 
handed  over  to  the  artillery. 

On  the  25th  November  the  Emperor  instructed  Berthier 
to  "  inform  the  generals  that  I  intend  forcing  the  passage 
of  the  Beresina  to-morrow  night  with  the  2nd  corps,  the 
9th  corps,  and  the  Imperial  Guard,  successively  supported 
by  Marshal  Ney  and  the  other  corps ;  that  as  soon  as  the 
passage  has  been  forced  I  shall  send  orders  for  them  to 
come  to  the  bridges ;  that  I  intend,  with  the  three  first  corps 
above  named  to  attack  the  enemy  upon  the  right  bank." 

Napoleon,  who  had  successfully  concealed  his  intentions 
from  the  enemy,  managed  with  great  skill,  and,  thanks  to 
the  devotion  and  intrepidity  of  his  engineers,  to  cross  the 
Beresina  on  the  26th.  The  passage,  however,  was  not 
effected  without  great  slaughter  and  the  most  harrowing 
scenes,  for  the  Russian  generals,  coming  from  Moscow, 
from  Finland,  and  from  the  Danube,  were  now  harassing 
the  French  army,  which  had  become  little  but  a  mob.  It 
is  estimated,  in  fact,  that  the  loss  sustained  by  the  Grand 
Army  in  crossing  the  Beresina  amounted  to  12,000  men 
killed,  16,000  prisoners,  and  twenty-five  guns. 

To  M.  MARET. 

"Studienka,  -2.7th  November,  1812. 
"  I  have  just  passed  the  Beresina,  but  the  ice  floating 
down  that  river  makes  the  bridges  very  unstable.     The 


MAKING   FOR    WILNA.  1 87 

army  which  was  opposed  to  Schwartzenberg  wished  to 
dispute  the  passage ;  to-night  it  is  concentrated  on  the 
right  bank  of  the  river  at  Borisoff.  The  cold  is  intense, 
and  the  army  greatly  fatigued.  I  shall  not  lose  a  moment 
in  getting  to  Wilna,  in  order  to  recuperate  a  little.  .  .  . 
Have  a  large  quantity  of  biscuit  prepared.  I  suppose  that 
you  have  continually  sent  news  of  us  to  Paris.  .  .  .  What 
is  Prince  Schwartzenberg  doing  ? 

"Napoleon." 


M.  Maret  did  send  news  to  Paris,  in  which  facts  were  so 
skilfully  disguised  that  no  one  had  any  idea  of  the  terrible 
disaster  which  had  befallen  the  Grand  Army  until  the 
publication  of  the  twenty-ninth  bulletin  on  the  17th 
December. 

To  M.  MARET. 

"  Right  Bank  of  the  Beresina, 
"  2giA  November,  181 2. 

"  I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  25th,  in  which  you 
say  nothing  about  France,  and  give  me  no  news  of  Spain. 
And  yet  for  the  last  fortnight  I  have  received  no  news,  no 
estafette,  and  I  am  in  the  dark  as  concerns  everything. 

"  Yesterday  we  had  a  very  warm  affair  against  Admiral 
Tchitchakof  and  Wittgenstein.  We  beat  the  first  who 
attacked  us  on  the  right  bank.  The  second,  who  wished 
to  force  the  bridges  over  the  Beresina,  was  held  in 
check.  We  took  6,000  prisoners,  but  we  have  to  lament 
the  loss  of  General  Partouneaux's  brigade,  which,  having 
missed  its  way,  was  captured.  Marshal  Oudinot  and 
several  generals  were  wounded. 

"  The  army  is  numerous,  but  disbanded  to  a  fearful 
extent.  It  would  require  a  fortnight  to  get  the  men 
back  to  their  colours,  and  this  fortnight  where  can  we 
find  it  ?  Cold  and  privations  have  disbanded  this  army. 
Shall  we  be  able  to  hold  Wilna  ?  Yes,  if  we  can  hold  out 
for  a  week  ;  but  if  we  .are  attacked  at  once,  it  is  doubtful 


1 88    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

if  we  shall  be  able  to  remain  there.  Provisions !  provi- 
sions !  provisions !  Without  that  there  is  no  knowing  to 
what  horrors  this  undisciplined  mass  will  not  proceed. 
Perhaps  the  army  will  be  able  to  rally  only  behind  the 
Niemen.  In  this  state  of  affairs  I  think  my  presence  in 
Paris  necessary  for  France,  for  the  empire,  and  even  for 
the  army. 

"  Several  estafettes  must  have  been  captured,  if  you  have 
received  no  news  from  me  since  the  nth. 

"  You  must  allow  no  foreign  agent  to  remain  at  Wilna, 
for  our  army  is  not  fit  to  be  seen  to-day.  You  can  send 
those  who  are  there  to  Warsaw,  saying  that  you  are  going 
to  that  city,  and  that  I  am  marching  there. 

"  Napoleon." 

And  the  next  day,  in  another  letter,  Napoleon  called 
upon  M.  Maret  to  send  forward  provisions  to  meet  him  on 
the  road.  He  said  that  he  had  over  40,000  stragglers,  who 
were  marching  "  like  vagabonds,  or  rather  like  brigands," 
adding — "If  you  cannot  furnish  us  with  100,000  rations,  I 
pity  Wilna."  And— "The  army  is  terribly  fatigued,  after 
a  march  of  forty-five  days.  .  .  .  Prince  Schwartzenberg  has 
cruelly  compromised  me.  .  .  .  The  operation  of  the 
enemy  on  Minsk,  and  the  shameful  inaction  of  Marshal 
Victor,  who  did  not  attack  them,  has  done  us  terrible  harm. 
....  You  say  nothing  about  Paris.  I  have  had  no  news 
of  Paris  for  the  last  twenty  days.  Where  are  the  eighteen 
estafettes  who  are  missing  ?     How  is  the  Empress  ? " 

On  the  2nd  December  the  Emperor  gave  the  following 
instructions : — 

"  M.  de  Montesquieu  must  start  to-morrow  for  Paris,  and 
hand  the  inclosed  letter  to  the  Empress.1     When  passing 

1  Comte  Anatole  de  Montesquieu  was  just  going  to  cross  over  the 
Rhine  to  Mayence  in  a  boat  when  an  outrider,  in  the  name  of  the 
Due  de  Vicence  (Caulaincourt),  demanded  it.  The  count,  on  the  ground 
that  he  was  charged  with  an  important  mission,  and  was  the  bearer  of 


THE    TWENTY-NINTH    BULLETIN.  1 89 

through  Wilna  he  must  see  the  Due  de  Bassano  (M.  Maret) 
and  point  out  the  necessity  of  taking  measures  to  stop  the 
stragglers,  and  to  feed  them,  and  also  of  having  abundance 
of  provisions  ready.  He  must  announce  the  arrival  of 
10,000  Russian  prisoners,  and  the  victory  gained  at  the 
Beresina.  He  must  also  announce  at  Kovno,  Konigsberg, 
and  at  Berlin,  and  have  put  in  the  Gazettes,  '  M.  de  Mon- 
tesquieu, aide-de-camp  of  the  Prince  de  Neuchatel,  has 
passed,  bringing  news  of  the  victory  of  the  Beresina 
gained  by  the  Emperor ;  he  is  carrying  to  Paris  eight 
standards  captured  from  the  Russians,  who  lost  6,000 
prisoners   and   twelve    guns.      When  this  officer  left   the 

Emperor   was  at    Wilna,    in    good    health '  M.  de 

Montesquieu  must  travel  as  quickly  as  possible  so  as  to 
contradict  the  false  reports  which  may  have  been  spread. 
....  On  reaching  Paris  he  will  be  in  a  position  to  give 
the  Empress  good  news  of  the  health  of  the  Emperor,  and 
the  condition  of  the  army. 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  3rd  December  was  issued  the  famous  twenty- 
ninth  bulletin,  which  created  so  great  an  impression  wher- 
ever it  was  read,  and  filled  the  French  mind  with  gloomy 
forebodings.  It  was,  in  fact,  an  official  acknowledgment 
of  the  terrible  disaster  which  had  overtaken  the  Grand 
Army.     It  was  to  this  effect : — 

"The  cold  set  in  on  the  7th  November,  and  we  lost 
hundreds  of  horses  every  night.  .  .  .  The  Emperor  learned 
at  Smolensko  that  a  change  had  been  made  in  the  line  of 
operations,  owing  to  the  arrival  of  the  Russian  army  of 
Volhyjnia  on  our  right.     No  matter  how  hard  it  was  to 

letters  to  the  Empress,  refused  to  cede  his  bark.  At  this  moment  the 
Emperor  himself  approached  in  the  dusk,  and  taking  M.  de  Montes- 
quieu affectionately  by  the  hand,  said — "  Come,  come,  don't  be  angry, 
we  can  cross  over  together."  The  young  officer  wished  to  excuse 
himself  for  not  having  been  able  to  travel  faster,  but  Napoleon  was 
highly  pleased  at  the  idea  of  reaching  the  Tuileries  unexpectedly. 


190    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

move  in  such  cruel  weather  it  was  necessary  to  do  so.  The 
Emperor  hoped  to  reach  Minsk,  or  at  least  the  Beresina,  be- 
fore the  enemy.  He  left  Smolensko  on  the  15th,  and  on  the 
16th  he  slept  at  Krasnol;  the  cold  suddenly  increased,  and 
the  horses  perished,  not  by  hundreds,  but  by  thousands. 
....  This  army,  so  fine  on  the  6th  November,  was  very 
different  on  the  14th — without  cavalry,  without  artillery, 
without  transport ;  it  was  necessary  to  march  on,  in  order 
to  avoid  a  battle.  .  .  .  Our  columns  were  enveloped  by  Cos- 
sacks, who,  like  the  Arabs  of  the  desert,  snapped  up  every 
man  or  cart  that  strayed  ;  this  despicable  cavalry,  which 
makes  only  a  noise,  and  is  not  capable  of  breaking  a  company 
of  Voltigeurs,  favoured  by  circumstances,  became  redoubt- 
able.1 ....  Marshal  Ney,  who  with  3,000  men  formed  the 
rear-guard,  blew  up  the  ramparts  of  Smolensko.  He  was 
surrounded,  and  found  himself  in  a  critical  position  ;  he 
escaped  from  it  with  that  intrepidity  which  distinguishes 
him." 

Referring  afterwards  to  the  passage  of  the  Beresina,  the 
bulletin  said .: — ■ 

"  On  the  26th  at  daybreak,  the  Emperor,  having  deceived 
the  enemy  by  various  movements  made  on  the  25th, 
marched  on  the  village  of  Studzianca,  and  at  once,  in 
spite  of  the  presence  of  a  division  of  the  enemy,  had  two 
bridges  thrown  across  the  river.  Marshal  Oudinot  passed, 
attacked  and  repulsed  the  enemy,  who  fell  back  on 
Borioff." 

The  bulletin,  after  briefly  touching  upon  the  fighting  at 
the  Beresina,  and  the  further  suffering  of  the  French  army 
during  its  retreat,  added — 

1  At  Gorodina  the  Emperor,  while  reconnoitring,  was  suddenly 
attacked  by  10,000  Cossacks,  under  Platoff,  who  were  sweeping  down 
upon  a  park  of  forty  pieces  of  artillery.  Several  of  the  Emperor's 
escort  were  killed,  General  Rapp  was  unhorsed,  and  but  for  the 
anxiety  of  the  Cossacks  to  secure  the  guns,  and  their  ignorance  of  the 
splendid  prey  within  their  grasp,  Napoleon  would  have  been  captured. 
Hence  his  irritation  against  the  Cossacks,  twenty-two  regiments  of 
whom  served  under  their  famous  Hetman. 


THE   CASTLE   OF    BURGOS.  191 

"  During  all  these  movements  the  Emperor  marched  in 
the  midst  of  his  guard,  the  cavalry  commanded  by  Marshal 
Bessieres,  and  the  infantry  commanded  by  Marshal 
Lefebvre.  .  .  .  Our  cavalry  was  so  dismounted  that  it  was 
only  possible  to  form  four  squadrons  150  strong,  composed 
of  officers  who  had  still  a  horse  remaining.  The  generals 
served  as  captains,  the  colonels  as  subalterns.  The 
'  sacred  squadron,'  under  the  orders  of  the  King  of  Naples, 
and  commanded  by  General  Grouchy,  never  lost  sight  of 
the  Emperor. 

"  The  health  of  his  Majesty  was  never  better." 

To  M.  MARET. 

"  Molodetchna,  yd  December,  18 12. 
" .  .  .  .  We  are  terribly  fatigued  and  half  starved. 
Send  bread,  meat,  and  brandy  to  meet  us.  I  have 
100,000  stragglers  who  are  trying  to  live,  and  who  are 
no  longer  under  the  colours.  This  causes  us  to  run  hor- 
rible dangers.  My  Old  Guard  alone  maintains  its  ranks, 
but  hunger  is  gaining  it.  My  heavy  baggage  started  last 
night  for  Wilna.  Hold  yourself  in  readiness  to  come  and 
meet  me  at  Ochmiana.  .  .  .  Speak  with  confidence,  and 
do  not  let  anything  transpire.  Ten  days'  repose,  and 
provisions  in  abundance  will  re-establish  discipline.  .   .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  M.  MARET. 

"Molodetchna,  $th  December,  1812. 
"I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  2nd  December.  I 
see  nothing  very  important  in  the  Moniteur  on  the  subject 
of  Spain.  The  resistance  of  the  castle  of  Burgos  is  a  fine 
military  affair,  but  it  simply  proves  that  forts  are  not  to 
be  taken  without  siege  guns.  Lord  Wellington  has  retired 
to  operate  against  the  army  of  Andalusia.  Should  we  lose 
a  battle  in  that  quarter,  a  serious  crisis  will  ensue.  If  the 
news  of  the  battle  of  Hill  be  confirmed,  it  will  be  a  great 
and  good  piece  of  news ;  but  this  news  is  not  worthy  of 


192     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

belief.  It  is  impossible  to  suppose  that  the  English  should 
have  lost  their  judgment  to  such  an  extent  as  to  fight  a 
battle  with  Marshal  Soult  before  having  united  their 
forces. 

"  I  wish  you  to  come  and  meet  me  at  Smorgoni.  .  .  . 
Send  the  American,  the  Prussian,  and  the  other  ministers 
to  Warsaw.  .  .  . 

"  The  army,  worn  out  with  fatigue  and  hunger,  is  at  the 
last  extremity.  It  is  impossible  for  it  to  do  anything  even 
if  it  were  a  question  of  defending  Paris.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  5th  December  the  Emperor  wrote  to  Cambaceres 
with  his  own  hand,  saying,  "  The  quarrels  between  the 
ministers  of  police  and  of  war  are  ridiculous  ;  I  fear  that 
the  Minister  of  Police  is  in  the  wrong.  You  shall  soon 
have  further  details  respecting  this  affair." 1 

Having  made  up  his  mind  to  leave  the  Grand  Army,  or 
what  remained  of  it,  the  Emperor  gave  these  instructions 
to  Marshal  Berthier — "  Two  or  three  days  after  my  depar- 
ture the  subjoined  decree  must  be  put  in  the  orders  of  the 
day.  The  report  must  be  spread  that  I  have  gone  to 
Warsaw  with  the  Austrians  and  the  7th  corps.  Five  or 
six  days  afterwards  the  King  of  Naples  must  inform  the 
army  that  having  been  obliged  to  leave  for  Paris  I  have 
confided  the  command  to  him  ;  that  I  hope  the  army  will 
give  him  its  confidence.  .  .  ."2 

1  The  Malet  conspiracy. 

5  Baron  Paul  de  Bourgoing  has  left  an  interesting  narrative  of  the 
Emperor's  journey  from  Smorgoni  to  Paris,  which  he  had  from  Comte 
Dunin  Wonsowicz,  the  Polish  officer  who  accompanied  his  Majesty. 
The  departure  took  place  at  8  p.m.  on  the  5th  December.  In  the  first 
carriage  was  the  Emperor,  with  General  Caulaincourt ;  the  Mamluke 
Roustan  was  on  the  box.  In  the  second  carriage  was  Marshal  Duroc 
and  Comte  Lobeau  ;  in  the  third  Lieutenant-General  Lefebvre-Des- 
nouettes  and  three  valets  !  In  a  sledge  was  Comte  Wonsowicz  and  an 
outrider  named  Amodru.  The  escort  was  formed  of  thirty  chasseurs  a 
cheval  of  the  Guard.  In  the  middle  of  the  night  the  party  reached 
Oszimana,  about  eight  leagues  from  Smorgoni,  and  found  the  garrison 


SMORGONI    TO    PARIS.  1 93 

To  GENERAL  COMTE  DE  NARBONNE. 

"  SMORGONI,  $th  December,  1812. 

"  You  must  go  to  Berlin,  and  before  leaving  Wilna  let 

me  know  how  things  are  looking.  .  .  .  You  will  find  at 

Berlin  a  letter  for  the  King  of  Prussia,  and  my  instructions 

for  yourself.     You  must  wait  at  Berlin  for  orders  and  write 

to  me  every  day. 

"  Napoleon." 

under  arms,  expecting  to  be  attacked.  Two  detachments  of  Polish 
light  cavalry  had  just  arrived,  on  their  way  to  reinforce  the  Grand  Army. 
Napoleon  was  fast  asleep  when  they  arrived  at  Oszimana,  and  was  in 
no  way  disturbed  when  he  was  aroused  and  informed  of  the  presence 
of  the  enemy.  In  spite  of  the  remonstrances  of  his  generals  he  deter- 
mined to  push  on  at  once ;  266  Polish  lancers  formed  his  escort.  General 
Lefebvre-Desnouettes  and  Comte  Wousowicz  now  took  their  seats  on 
the  box  of  the  Emperor's  carriage  ;  they  held  pistols  in  their  hands, 
and  received  strict  orders  from  Napoleon  to  kill  him  sooner  than 
allow  him  to  be  taken  prisoner.  The  party  left  Oszimana  at  one  o'clock 
in  the  morning ;  they  could  see  the  camp  fires  of  the  Cossacks,  and 
hear  the  voices  of  the  sentinels.  The  night  was  so  bitterly  cold  that 
before  they  had  accomplished  many  leagues  of  the  road  only  fifty 
lancers  remained.  The  same  cold  which  killed  them  kept  the  enemy 
in  their  quarters,  and  enabled  Napoleon  to  escape  the  Hetman's 
Cossacks,  as,  returning  from  Egypt,  he  escaped  the  British  cruisers. 
When  the  military  post  of  Rownopole  was  reached  at  daybreak,  only 
thirty-six  lancers  remained.  They  were  replaced  by  a  detachment  of 
the  Neapolitan  guard,  commanded  by  the  Duke  of  Rocca-Romana, 
who  had  his  hands  frost-bitten.  The  thermometer  had  descended 
to  28°  Rdaumur.  The  Emperor  reached  the  third  relay,  at  the 
town  of  Miedniki,  without  encountering  any  obstacle,  and  there  met 
M.  Maret,  his  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  who  replaced  General 
Caulaincourt  in  the  Emperors  carriage,  and  informed  him  of  the 
state  of  Europe.  Wilna  was  soon  afterwards  reached  in  safety,  but 
the  Emperor  considered  it  prudent  only  to  skirt  the  ancient  capital 
of  Lithuania,  in  which  the  enemy  had  many  friends.  All  danger  was 
not  yet  over,  for  at  Kowno,  close  to  the  Niemen,  the  party  narrowly 
escaped  falling  in  with  a  detachment  of  Cossacks,  to  which  no  resist- 
ance could  have  been  offered.  At  Gragow  Napoleon  was  able  to 
procure  a  more  commodious  vehicle,  which  was  placed  upon  skates 
like  a  sledge,  and  in  this,  with  Caulaincourt  and  Wousowicz  inside, 
and  Roustan  on  the  box,  he  travelled  to  Warsaw.  As  soon  as  the 
VOL.  III.  O 


194    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Prince  Eugene  having  made  some  objections  against 
serving  under  Murat,  his  Majesty,  before  leaving  Smorgoni, 
wrote — 

"  My  Son, — I  have  received  your  letter.  Do  your 
duty,  and  have  confidence  in  me.  I  remain  the  same  for 
you,  and  know  what  is  good  for  you.  Do  not  doubt  my 
paternal  sentiments." 

After  this  brief  epistle  there  are  no  more  letters  until 
the  nth,  when  his  Majesty  wrote  thus  to  M.  Maret  at 
Warsaw  from  Kutno — 

"  Inform  the  diplomatic  body  that  I  am  going  to  Paris. 
Announce  this  by  courier  at  Vienna  and  Berlin.  Austria 
must  send  an  able  minister  to  Paris.  Prince  Schwartzen- 
berg  can  keep  the  title  of  ambassador.  Let  M.  Otto  try 
so  that  the  30,000  men  in  Transylvania  and  in  Hungary 
may  assume .  the  offensive  in  Volhynia. 

"  I  was  greatly  astonished  by  all  the  ridiculous  things 
said  during  an  hour  by  the  Abbe  de  Pradt.  I  did  not 
make  him  feel  this.     He  has  none  of  the  qualities  requisite 

carriage  had  crossed  over  the  Praga  bridge,  Napoleon  got  out,  and  walked 
to  the  Hotel  d'Angleterre,  where  an  apartment  had  been  prepared  for 
him.  Here  he  had  his  interview  with  the  Abbe"  de  Pradt,  Archbishop 
of  Malines,  his  ambassador.  The  Emperor  left  Warsaw  on  the  10th 
December,  and  arrived  on  the  14th  at  Dresden,  where  he  had  a 
touching  interview  with  his  old  ally  the  King  of  Saxony.  From 
Dresden  the  Emperor  hurried  on  to  Leipsic,  where,  in  addition  to 
French  and  foreign  journals,  he  purchased  some  volumes  of  "frivolous 
literature."  Napoleon  journeyed  thence  to  Mayence,  and  on  to 
Verdun,  where  he  bought  some  sugar  plums  for  the  Empress  and  for 
the  King  of  Rome.  Cn  the  18th  he  dined  at  Chateau  Thierry,  and 
donned  his  uniform  of  the  grenadiers  of  the  guard.  He  counted  upon 
arriving  at  the  Tuileries  by  midnight,  but  his  carriage  broke  down,  and 
he  was  obliged  to  re-enter  his  capital  in  a  miserable  post-chaise.  It 
was  half-past  one  in  the  morning  when  the  Emperor  reached  the  gate 
of  the  Carrousel,  and  it  was  not  without  some  difficulty  that  he 
obtained  admittance,  for  the  sentry  had  read  only  the  day  before,  in 
the  Moniteur,  that  Napoleon  was  at  Smolensko.  The  distance 
between  Smorgoni  and  Paris  had  been  accomplished  in  twelve  days. 


THE   ABBE    DE    PRADT    AND    THE    GOD    MARS.       1 95 

for  the  post  he  fills.  This  abbe  is  clever  only  at  writing 
books.  You  can  recall  him  at  once,  or  on  arriving  in  Paris, 
and  send  him  back  to  his  diocese." 

The  abbe  in  the  history  of  his  embassy  at  Warsaw  has 
left  an  interesting  if  rather  jaunty  and  unchurchman-like 
account  of  his  interview  with  the  god  Mars  on  that  occasion. 
The  Emperor  exhibited  great  volubility,  and  said,  among 
other  things — 

"Bah  !  the  army  is  superb.  I  have  120,000  men.  I  have 
always  beaten  the  Russians.  .  .  .  We  shall  maintain  our 
position  at  Wilna.  ...  I  shall  fight  two  or  three  battles  on 
the  Oder,  and  in  six  months  I  shall  be  once  more  on  the 
Niemen.  ...  I  left  the  troops  with  regret,  but  it  was 
necessary  to  watch  over  Austria  and  Prussia.  What  has 
happened  is  nothing,  it  was  all  the  effect  of  the  climate. 
I  shall  beat  the  enemy  wherever  I  meet  them.  They 
thought  to  cut  me  off  at  the  Beresina  ;  but  I  soon  got  quit 
of  that  fool  of  an  admiral  (I  never  could  pronounce  his 
name).1  .  .  .  Perhaps  they  may  say  that  I  lingered  too  long 
at  Moscow.  Possibly  so ;  but  the  weather  was  fine,  and  I 
expected  peace  ;  the  winter  set  in  before  its  usual  time. 
I  sent  for  Lauriston  on  the  5th  October  to  negotiate  for 
peace  ;  I  thought  of  going  to  St.  Petersburg.  I  had  time 
to  winter  there  or  in  the  south  of  Russia.  The  King  of 
Naples  will  maintain  himself  at  Wilna.  Politics  are  a 
great  drama ;  he  who  ventures  nothing  will  win  nothing. 
There  is  but  a  step  from  the  subline  to  the  ridiculous.  .  .  . 
Who  would  have  thought  that  they  would  have  burned 
Moscow.  .  .  It  was  worthy  of  ancient  Rome  {vide  letter 
to  the  Czar  of  19th  September).  I  shall  not  go  through 
Silesia — ah  !  ah  !  Prussia." 

And  so  on    for   three   hours,  says  the    abbe,   who  was 
almost  frozen. 

1  "  And  last  of  all  an  admiral  came  : 
A  terrible  man  with  a  terrible  name, 
A  name  which  you  all  know  by  sight  very  well, 
But  which  no  one  can  speak,  and  no  one  can  spell." 

O   2 


196  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  THE  EMPEROR  OF  AUSTRIA. 

"Dresden,  14M  December,  1812. 
"  I  remain  a  moment  at  Dresden  in  order  to  write  to 
your  Majesty.  In  spite  of  great  fatigue  my  health  never 
was  better.  I  started  on  the  4th.  after  the  battle  of 
Beresina,  from  Lithuania,  leaving  the  Grand  Army  under 
the  orders  of  the  King  of  Naples.  In  four  days  I  shall 
reach  Paris,  where  I  shall  pass  the  winter  months  in  order 
to  attend  to  the  most  important  affairs.  Perhaps  your 
Majesty  will  deem  it  useful  to  send  some  one  there  in 
the  absence  of  your  ambassador  (Prince  Schwartzenberg) 
whose  presence  is  so  necessary  to  the  army. 

"The  various  bulletins  which  the  Due  de  Bassano  has 
not  failed  to  forward  to  M.  Otto  will  have  acquainted  your 
Majesty  with  all  that  has  happened  since  I  left  Moscow. 
It  will  be  important  under  these  circumstances  for  your 
Majesty  to  mobilise  a  corps  in  Gallicia  and  in  Transyl- 
vania, and  to  raise  your  forces  to  60,000  men  [just  double 
the  number  imposed  by  treaty]. 

"  I  have  full  confidence  in  the  sentiments  of  your 
Majesty.  The  alliance  which  we  have  contracted  forms  a 
permanent  system  from  which  our  subjects  derive  such 
great  benefits  that  I  think  your  Majesty  will  do  all 
that  you  promised  me  at  Dresden,  so  as  to  insure  the 
triumph  of  the  common  cause,  and  to  conduct  us  promptly 
to  a  suitable  peace.  You  may  be  persuaded  that  upon  my 
side  you  will  find  me  always  ready  to  do  everything  that 
can  be  agreeable  to  you,  and  to  convince  you  of  the 
importance  which  I  attach  to  our  present  relations.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

It  is  possible,  when  the  Emperor  wrote  the  above 
letter  to  his  "  very  dear  father-in-law,"  that  the  prophetic 
warnings  of  his  brother  Jerome  and  of  Marshal  Davoust 
may  have  flashed  across  his  memory.     They  both  warned 


CONDITION    OF    THE    FRENCH    ARMY.  1 97 

him  that  in  the  event  of  experiencing  a  reverse  in  Russia 
the  whole  of  Germany  would  rise  against  him. 

On  the  1 8th  December  Napoleon,  after  accomplishing 
the  journey  from  Smorgoni  in  twelve  days,  arrived  quite 
unexpectedly  at  the  Tuileries  in  the  middle  of  the  night ; 
in  consequence  of  his  carriage  having  broken  down  on  the 
road  he  had  to  accomplish  the  last  part  of  his  journey  in  a 
country  cart.  This  was  anything  but  a  triumphal  entry. 
He  at  once  wrote  to  Marshal  Berthier  with  his  own  hand, 
saying — 

"  I  regret  to  see  that  you  did  not  remain  a  week  at 
Wilna  so  as  to  clothe  and  to  rally  the  army  a  little.  I 
hope  that  you  have  taken  up  a  position  on  the  Pregel ;  it 
is  impossible  to  find  so  many  resources  on  any  other  line 
as  upon  that  of  Kcenigsberg.  I  hope  that  Schwartzenberg 
and  Regnier  have  covered  Warsaw.  Prussia  is  preparing 
to  send  reinforcements  to  cover  her  territory. 

"  Napoleon." 

On  leaving  Smorgoni  the  French  rear  was  totally  de- 
stroyed, and  lost  twenty-five  guns  and  3,000  prisoners  ; 
the  new  rear  suffered  the  same  fate,  and  lost  sixty-one 
guns  and  4,000  prisoners  ;  at  Medniki  sixteen  guns  and 
1,300  prisoners  were  captured  by  the  Russians,  who,  on  the 
road  to  Wilna,  took  thirty-one  more  guns,  and  penetrated 
into  the  town  almost  at  the  same  time  as  the  French 
Platoff  and  his  Cossacks,  too,  cut  off  a  column  of  1,000 
men,  and  captured  twenty-eight  guns.  The  French  were 
unable  to  make"  any  stand  at  Wilna,  in  which  town  the 
enemy  found  14,000  men  and  250  officers,  who  were  in- 
capable of  going  any  further,  besides  immense  magazines. 

The  next  day  his  Majesty  wrote  thus  to  Murat : — 

"I  have  arrived  in  Paris,  and  am  extremely  satisfied 
with  the  feeling  of  the  country,  which  is  disposed  to  make 
all  kinds  of  sacrifices,  and  I  am  occupying  myself  without 


1 98    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

cessation  in  preparing  all  my  means.  I  have  already  an 
army  of  40,000  men  at  Berlin  and  on  the  Oder.  The  King 
of  Prussia  proposes  to  send  reinforcements  to  his  army  and 
to  recomplete  his  cavalry  without  loss  of  time  ;  the  King 
of  Saxony  has  similar  intentions.  Koenigsberg  and  the 
Pregel  will  offer  you  resources. 

"  The  Russians  boast  of  all  the  interviews  you  have  had 
with  the  outposts  and  disfigure  them.  They  have  the 
impudence  to  declare  that  all  this  was  to  deceive  and  to 
lull  you  to  sleep. 

"  Napoleon." 

Having  received  an  address  from  the  Senate  on  the  20th, 
the  Emperor  replied  in  these  terms  : — 

"  What  you  say  to  me  is  most  agreeable.  I  have  at 
heart  the  glory  and  power  of  France  ;  but  my  first 
thoughts  are  for  all  that  can  perpetuate  internal  tran- 
quillity and  for- ever  shelter  our  people  from  the  'rending' 
of  factions  and  the  horrors  of  anarchy.  .  .  . 

"  Timid  and  cowardly  soldiers  lose  the  independence  of 
nations,  but  pusillanimous  magistrates  destroy  the  empire 
of  the  laws,  the  rights  of  the  throne,  and  social  order 
itself.1 

"  The  most  noble  death  would  be  that  of  a  soldier 
perishing  on  the  field  of  battle,  if  the  death  of  a  magis- 
trate perishing  in  the  defence  of  his  sovereign,  the  throne, 
and  the  laws,  were  not  still  more  noble. 

"  When  I  undertook  the  regeneration  of  France,  I  asked 
Providence  to  grant  me  a  certain  number  of  years.  It  is 
possible  to  destroy  in  a  moment,  but  it  requires  time  to 
rebuild.  The  greatest  necessity  for  a  State  is  to  have 
courageous  magistrates. 

"  Our  fathers  had  for  rallying  cry  :  The  king  is  dead, 
long  live  the  king  !  These  few  words  contain  the  principal 
advantages  of  the  monarchy.  .  .  . 

"  The  war  which  I  am  waging  against  Russia  is  a 
1  Allusion  to  the  Malet  conspiracy. 


OVERTURES    TO   THE    POPE.  1 99 

political  war ;  I  have  waged  it  without  animosity.  I 
should  have  wished  to  have  averted  the  misfortunes  it 
has  caused.  I  might  have  armed  the  greater  portion  of 
the  population  against  itself  by  declaring  the  independence 
of  the  serfs ;  a  great  number  of  villages  asked  me  to  do 
this  ;  but,  when  I  became  aware  of  the  ignorance  of  that 
numerous  class  of  the  Russian  people,  I  refused  a  measure 
which  would  have  devoted  to  death,  to  devastation,  and 
to  the  most  horrible  tortures,  a  great  number  of  families. 
My  army  has  experienced  losses  due  to  the  premature 
rigour  of  the  season." 

While  busy  reorganising  the  army  which  was  to  take 
the  field  as  early  as  possible  in  18 13,  Napoleon  found  time 
to  turn  his  attention  once  more  to  his  venerable  prisoner 
of  Fontainebleau. 

To  POPE  PIUS  VII. 

"  Paris,  i<^th  December,  18 12. 
"  Most  Holy  Father, — I  hasten  to  send  you  an 
officer  of  my  household  to  express  to  your  Holiness  the 
satisfaction  I  feel  with  what  the  Bishop  of  Nantes  tells 
me  concerning  the  state  of  your  health,  for  I  was  very 
much  alarmed  for  a  moment,  this  summer,  when  I  learned 
that  you  were  very  unwell.  The  new  residence  of  your 
Holiness  will  allow  you  to  see  us,  and  I  greatly  desire  to 
assure  you  that,  in  spite  of  all  the  events  which  have  taken 
place,  I  have  always  preserved  the  same  friendship  for 
your  person.  Perhaps  we  shall  be  able  to  arrive  at  the 
long-wished-fqr  end,  and  to  settle  all  the  differences  which 
divide  the  Church  and  State.  On  my  side  I  am  anxious 
to    accomplish  this,  and  it  will   depend  entirely  upon  your 

Holiness.  .  .  . 

"Napoleon." 


On  the  30th  the  Emperor  wrote  to  the  King  of  Naples, 
at  Kcenigsberg,  saying  : — "  I  have  received  your  letter  of 


200    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

the  20th.  I  am  sorry  to  see  that  the  cold  is  so  intense. 
I  am  very  anxious  to  learn  the  real  condition  of  the 
army." 

To  MARSHAL  BERTHIER,  at  Kcenigsberg. 

"  Paris,  ^oth  December,  1812. 
"  I  have  received  your  note  upon  the  real  losses,  over 
which  I  shall  think  seriously.  .  .  I  have  just  raised  15,000 
cavalry  and  8,000  artillery  horses,  in  addition  to  4,000 
animals  for  the  military  train.  .  .  There  is  a  good  deal 
of  war  material  in  ■  Prussia,  in  Dantsic,  and  the  other 
places.  Eble'  should  pay  attention  to  this.  The  conscrip- 
tion is  excellent  this  year.  On  Sunday  I  had  a  parade  of 
about  30,000  men. 

"  Napoleon." 

As  for  the  real  losses,  it  appears  from  official  returns  that 
out  of  the  610,000  men  who  crossed  the  Niemen  in  June, 
only  18,800  Frenchmen,  and  23,000  allies,  recrossed  that 
river.  Marshal  Ney  was  the  last  to  recross,  and  it  is 
related  that,  upon  being  asked  who  he  was,  he  replied, 
"  I  am  the  rear  guard  of  the  Grand  Army." 


CHAPTER  IV. 

THE    YEAR     1813. 

The  year  181 3  was  another  year  of  battles  and  blood- 
shed. When  it  opened,  the  remnant  of  the  Grand  Army 
had  not  yet  made  good  its  escape.  It  repassed  the  Niemen 
on  the  30th  December,  1812  ;  but  from  the  Niemen  it  was 
driven  back  on  the  Vistula,  from  the  Vistula  to  the  Oder, 
and  from  the  Oder  to  the  Elbe.  The  sixth  coalition  was 
now  formed,  and  France,  with  her  allies,  such  as  Italy,  the 
Confederation  of  the  Rhine,  and  Denmark,  found  herself 
confronted  by  Russia,  England,  Prussia,  Spain,  and  Sweden. 
Austria  for  a  time  held  aloof,  playing  the  mediator  and 
preparing  for  war  at  the  same  time.  She  had  suffered 
so  severely  from  miscalculating  the  resources  of  France 
and  the  genius  of  Napoleon  on  previous  occasions 
that  she  long  hesitated.  Then  she  feared  and  doubted 
Russia.  What  if  she  were  to  join  the  allies,  and  France 
and  Russia  were  to  come  to  terms,  as  France  and  Russia 
had  come  to  terms  after  Friedland  to  the  detriment  of 
Prussia  ?  The  relations  between  Austria  and  Russia  had 
not  been  friendly  for  some  time.  After  Austerlitz,  Austria 
had  concluded  a  separate  peace  with  France.  During  the 
campaign  of  1807,  Austria  held  aloof  while  Napoleon  was 
fighting  with  the  Czar  in  Poland.  In  1809  Russia  sided 
with  France  against  Austria,  and  in  18 10  came  the  matri- 
monial alliance,  which  meant  an  understanding  between 


2  02  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

France  and  Austria  and  war  with  Russia.  In  1812  Austria 
furnished  a  corps  of  30,000  men  to  France.  The  court  of 
Vienna  had  therefore  good  reason  to  fear  that  Napoleon 
might  turn  the  past  to  account  and  sow  dissension  between 
his  father-in-law  and  the  Czar  in  the  event  of  Austria 
casting  in  her  lot  with  the  allies.  He  attempted  this  when 
Austria  at  last  declared  against  him,  but  the  illusions  of 
Tilsit  and  Erfurth  had  vanished.  There  was  Moscow  to 
be  revenged,  and  when  Caulaincourt  was  sent  to  negotiate 
with  the  Czar  in  secret,  Alexander  received  him  in  pre- 
sence of  the  King  of  Prussia  and  the  ambassadors  of 
England,  Prussia,  and  Austria.  It  may  be  said  that 
during  the  Wagram  campaign  the  Russians  gave  Napo- 
leon but  little  support,  and  that  during  the  march  to 
Moscow  and  back  the  Austrians  helped  the  French  as 
little  as  possible.  Still  a  good  deal  of  distrust  existed 
between  Vienna  and  St.  Petersburg,  and  it  was  not  until 
August,  that  is  to  say,  after  Lutzen,  Bautzen,  and  Wur- 
schen  had  been  fought,  that  Austria  threw  off  the  mask 
and  joined  the  sixth  coalition.  After  the  three  battles 
above-named,  which  were  all  favourable  to  the  French 
arms,  an  armistice  was  concluded  at  Pleiswitz  which 
brought  about  a  congress,  or  the  semblance  of  a  congress, 
at  Prague.  Several  French  historians  have  blamed  Napo- 
leon for  allowing  his  enemies  time  to  breathe  and  to  bring 
up  reinforcements.  But  the  armistice  was  as  necessary  to 
the  French  as  to  the  allies ;  their  successes  had  been  dearly 
purchased  ;  they  were  sadly  deficient  in  cavalry ;  and,  as 
Napoleon  said  himself,  he  could  not  follow  up  his  victories, 
and  he  was  paralysed  by  the  dubious  attitude  of  Austria. 

The  armistice  having  been  denounced,  hostilities  were 
resumed  on  the  17th  August.  The  Emperor  Napoleon 
threatened  at  the  same  time  Berlin,  Breslau,  and  Prague, 
which  weakened  his  centre.  However,  he  foiled  the  allies 
in  a  rash  and  sanguinary  attack  upon  Dresden,  where 
Moreau  fell  mortally  wounded.  The  strategy  of  the  allies 
now  consisted  in  refusing  to  accept  battle  where  Napoleon 


FRANCE    INVADED.  203 

commanded  in  person,  and  in  attacking  his  lieutenants, 
and  this  plan  was  crowned  with  success.  Macdonald  was 
beaten  at  Katzbach,  Vandamme  at  Kulm,  Oudinot  at 
Gross-Beeren  on  his  road  to  Berlin,  and  Ney  at  Denne- 
witz,  while  Davoust  was  obliged  to  fall  back  behind  the 
Elbe.  Bavaria  now  went  over  to  the  allies,  and  was 
shortly  afterwards  followed  by  Baden  and  Wirtemberg. 
Then  came  Leipsic,  during  which  the  Saxons  went  over 
to  the  enemy— all  but  their  old  king.  The  disaster  of 
Leipsic  brought  the  campaign  of  1813,  but  not  the  war,  to 
a  close.  Not  more  than  a  fifth  of  the  French  army  re- 
crossed  the  Rhine,  while  120,000  men  were  left  in  the 
fortresses  along  the  Elbe,  the  Oder,  and  the  Vistula. 
Rapp  was  shut  up  at  Dantsic,  Davoust  at  Hamburg,  Du 
Tailly  at  Torgau,  Lemarois  at  Magdeburg,  Lapoye  at 
Wittenberg,  Grandeau  at  Stettin,  d'Albe  at  Custrin,  and 
Laplane  at  Glogau.  On  the  9th  November  Napoleon 
returned  to  Paris,  and  when  the  year  closed  the  allies 
were  crossing  the  Rhine  and  invading  the  northern 
departments  of  France. 

In  Spain  matters  went  very  badly  with  the  French. 
"  In  May  the  British  army,"  as  Lord  Londonderry  says, 
"was  lying  between  the  Agueda  and  the  Tagus,  observed 
by  a  greatly  superior  force,  and  master  only  of  Portugal, 
from  which  it  seemed  competent  for  an  enemy,  with  a 
little  skill  and  determination,  to  drive  it.  The  month  of 
December  beheld  the  English  troops  victors  in  five  pitched 
battles,  after  having  swept  the  whole  armed  power  of  France 
over  broad  and  rapid  rivers,  across  wide  and  fertile  plains, 
through  the  passes  of  the  Pyrenees,  and  back  into  the 
hitherto  unviolated  territory  of  la  belle  France.  .  .  .  Never 
was  such  a  series  of  brilliant  successes  accomplished  by  a 
British  army  as  was  achieved  by  Lord  Wellington  and  his 
companions  in  the  course  of  that  campaign.  The  strong- 
holds of  Burgos,  Pampeluna,  and  St.  Sebastian  were 
incapable  of  arresting  their  triumphs.  The  first  was 
abandoned  and  blown  up  ;  the  second  yielded  to  the  slow 


204     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

but  sure  process  of  blockade ;  and  the  third,  in  spite  of 
Soult's  best  efforts,  was  carried  by  assault  in  open  day." 

The  great  victory,  however,  was  that  of  Vittoria,  the  news 
of  which  was  hailed  with  delight  in  Germany,  revived  the 
drooping  spirits  of  the  allies,  and  was  so  severely  felt  by 
Napoleon  that  he  at  once  sent  Soult  back  to  Spain  as 
his  lieutenant-general ;  but  Soult  was  unable  to  stop  the 
British,  who  crossed  the  Bidassoa,  and  gained  the  battles 
of  the  Nive  and  the  Nivelle. 

Austria,  as  we  have  remarked,  was  for  some  time  de- 
terred from  joining  the  coalition  lest  Russia  should 
conclude  a  separate  peace  with  Napoleon.  Lord  London- 
derry, after  describing  the  battle  of  Vittoria,  says  :  "  It 
does  not  appear  to  have  formed  any  part  of  Lord  Wel- 
lington's plan  at  this  period  of  the  war  to  carry  his 
victorious  arms  into  the  south  of  France.  He  felt  that 
an  accommodation  between  Napoleon,  the  Emperor  of 
Russia,  and  the  King  of  Prussia,  which  seemed  then 
not  unlikely,  might  occur,  and  that  would  render  it 
impossible  for  him  to  maintain  himself  beyond  the 
Pyrenees." 

The  reign  of  King  Joseph  naturally  came  to  an  end 
with  the  events  above  referred  to.  Forced  to  take  refuge 
in  France,  he  was  soon  afterwards  ordered  by  his  brother 
to  leave  the  frontier  and  to  repair  to  Mortfontaine.  The 
Emperor  was  about  to  reopen  negotiations  with  his 
captive,  Ferdinand  VII. 

When  hostilities  broke  out,  the  King  of  Saxony,  dis- 
tracted between  his  engagements  with  Napoleon  and  the 
increasing  enthusiasm  of  his  army  and  his  people  for  the 
cause  of  the  allies,  was  doubtful  which  side  to  take. 
Napoleon,  however,  after  entering  Dresden,  informed  his 
Majesty  that  if  he  did  not  at  once  return  to  his  capital 
he  would  lose  his  crown. 

On  the  13th  March  a  treaty  was  concluded  with  Sweden, 
by  which  that  Power  was  to  furnish  30,000  men  to  the 
coalition,   and    was   to   receive    1,000,000/.   a    year   from 


SOULT    RECALLED.  205 

England,  and  the  island  of  Guadaloupe.  A  promise  of 
Norway  was  also  held  out  in  the  event  of  Denmark 
refusing  to  join  the  allies,  and  Denmark  did  refuse. 

After  writing  several  letters  to  Napoleon,  urging  him, 
in  the  interests  of  humanity,  to  put  an  end  to  a  war  which 
was  disastrous  to  France,  to  Naples,  and  to  all  Europe, 
Murat,  whose  letters  remained  unanswered,  reluctantly 
joined  the  standard  of  his  imperial  brother-in-law  ;  but 
he  deserted  the  French  army  after  Leipsic,  as  he  had 
deserted  it  during  the  retreat  from  Moscow,  and  he 
soon  afterwards  entered  into  negotiations  with  the  court 
of  Vienna,  which,  being  opposed  to  the  return  of  the 
Bourbons  to  Italy,  was  quite  willing  to  recognise  his 
right  to  the  throne  of  Naples. 

Before  the  close  of  the  year,  too,  the  Prince  of  Orange 
landed  in  Holland,  which  country  at  once  began  to  assert 
its  independence. 

No  letters  on  the  1st  or  2nd  January. 

To  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"Paris,  yd  January,  1813. 
"  The  King  of  Spain  demanding  the  recall  of  Marshal 
Soult,  or  at  least  that  he  may  return  on  furlough,  send 
him  by  an  extraordinary  courier  a  furlough  to  come  back 
to  Paris.  General  Gazan  or  Marshal  Jourdan  can  take  the 
command  of  his  corps.  You  must  send  these  orders  by 
duplicate  and  triplicate. 

"  Inform  the  king  that  under  present  circumstances  I 
think  he  should  take  up  his  head-quarters  at  Valladolid  ; 
that  the  twenty-ninth  bulletin  will  have  made  him  ac- 
quainted with  the  state  of  affairs  in  the  north,  which 
requires  our  care  and  our  efforts  ;  that  he  can  occupy 
Madrid  with  one  extremity  of  his  line ;  and  that  he  ought 
to  take  advantage  of  the  inaction  of  the  English  to  pacify 
Navarre,  Biscay,  and  the  province  of  Santander. 

"  Napoleon." 


206     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Count  Miot  de  Melito  says  that  the  year  1813  opened 
under  very  gloomy  auspices  in  Spain.  Madrid  was  sad, 
the  palace  was  deserted,  and  the  celebrated  twenty-ninth 
bulletin  left  no  doubt  as  to  the  extent  of  the  disaster  in 
Russia.  On  his  return  from  Moscow  Colonel  Desprez 
wrote  to  the  king,  saying :  "  The  imagination  cannot 
attain  the  reality  of  our  reverses ;  in  a  word,  the  army  is 
dead."  As  for  Soult,  the  count  says  that  "  he  passed 
through  Madrid  on  the  2nd  March,  followed  by  a  great 
number  of  waggons  filled  with  precious  articles.  After 
a  short  interview  with  the  king  he  continued  his  road 
to  Paris." 

On  the  3rd  January  Savary  informed  the  Emperor  that 
an  armourer  called  Pauly  had  made  an  extremely  advan- 
tageous discovery  in  the  shape  of  a  musket,  with  which  he 
fired  twenty-two  shots  in  two  minutes,  in  the  garden  of 
the  Minister  of  Police.  According  to  the  inventor,  this 
musket  would  not  cost  more  than  that  in  use,  it  weighed 
a  quarter  less,  while  all  the  accidents  to  which  the 
ordinary  musket  was  exposed  from  wet,  &c,  would  be 
avoided. 

"PARIS,  yrd  January,  1813. 

"  Referred  to  Marshal  Duroc  to  send  for  the  inventor, 
to  examine  the  musket  with  the  officers  of  the  artillery 
of  the  Guard,  to  have  trials  made,  and  to  furnish  me  with 
a  report.1  «  NAPOLEON. 


*T      " 


1  It  is  a  rather  remarkable  fact  that  when  the  chassepot  was  adopted 
by  the  French,  in  1866,  Pauly  was  still  alive,  and  brought  an  action 
against  the  Government  either  for  infringing  his  patent  or  for  pirating 
his  invention.  Napoleon,  in  his  Plan  for  the  New  Organisation  of  the 
Army,  written  at  St.  Helena,  said  : — ''The  infantry  musket,  with  the 
bayonet,  is  the  most  perfect  arm  invented  by  man.  ...  It  can  be 
fired  sixty  times   without   interruption   in  thirty  or  even  in  twenty 

minutes Skilful  mechanics  have  tried  to  load  the  musket  by 

the  breech,  and  to  prime  it  with  fulminating  powder,  so  as  to  do  away 
the  flint.  The  trials  have  not  quite  satisfied  all  the  conditions,  but 
everything  leads  one  to  hope  for  success,  seeing  the  progress  made  by 
chemical  and  mechanical  arts." 


NEW   ARMY    CORPS.  207 

To  GENERAL  RAPP,  Governor  of  Dantsic. 

"  Paris,  \th  January,  1813. 
"  I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  22nd.  Dantsic 
should  be  armed  and  provisioned  so  as  to  be  able  to 
remain  isolated  and  blockaded  for  six  months.  I  have 
united  four  army  corps,  which  will  make  300,000  men, 
independent  of  the  Grand  Army.  Should  you  ever  be 
surrounded,  I  shall  march  myself  to  your  relief. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  the  KING  OF  DENMARK. 

"PARIS,  z,th  January,  1813. 

"  A  letter  from  my  minister  informs  me  that  your 
Majesty  has  received  no  reply  to  the  letter  which  he 
wrote,  and  which  I  received  at  Moscow,  and  to  which  I 
replied  the  next  day.  My  minister  having  sent  me  a 
number  of  Russian  bulletins,  I  must  inform  your  Majesty 
that  they  are  entirely  false.  The  enemy  were  always 
beaten,  and  captured  neither  an  eagle  nor  a  gun  from  my 
army.  On  the  7th  November  the  cold  became  intense  ; 
all  the  roads  were  found  impracticable  ;  30,000  horses 
perished  between  the  7th  and  the  16th.  A  portion  of  our 
baggage  and  artillery  waggons  was  broken  and  aban- 
doned ;  our  soldiers,  little  accustomed  to  such  weather, 
could  not  endure  the  cold.  They  wandered  from  the 
ranks  in  quest  of  shelter  for  the  night,  and,  having  no 
cavalry  to  protect  them,  several  thousands  fell  into  the 
hands  of  the  enemy's  light  troops.  General  Sanson,  chief 
of  the  topographic  corps,  was  captured  by  some  Cossacks 
while  he  was  engaged  in  sketching  a  position.  Other 
isolated  officers  shared  the  same  fate.  My  losses  are 
severe,  but  the  enemy  cannot  attribute  to  themselves  the 
honour  of  having  inflicted  them.  My  army  has  suffered 
greatly,  and  suffers  still,  but  this  calamity  will  cease  with 
the  cold. 

"  I  am  raising  horses  on  all  sides,  independent  of  those 


208     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

which,  thanks  to  your  Majesty,  are  arriving  from  Holstein 
and  Jutland.  I  am  raising  60,000  in  my  own  empire. 
In  the  spring  I  shall  march  with  a  larger  army  than  the 
Grand  Army  at  the  opening  of  the  campaign.  I  enter 
into  these  details  in  order  that  your  Majesty  should  not 
be  deceived  by  the  false  reports  circulated  with  great 
artifice. 

"  I  have  guaranteed  Norway  and  the  integrity  of  your 
states  to  your  Majesty,  and  nothing  in  the  world  shall 
make  you  lose  the  smallest  portion  of  them.1  England  is 
occupied  in  Spain,  in  Sicily,  and  in  America  ;  Russia  will 
be  occupied  more  seriously  than  ever  on  our  frontiers ; 
they  can  do  nothing  to  injure  your  Majesty.  I  shall  have, 
as  always,  a  corps  of  30,000  men  to  protect  your  States,  as 
you  also  will  keep  up  a  corps  for  the  defence  of  the  coasts 
of  the  Baltic.  I  am  assured  of  the  good  feeling  of  Austria, 
and  I  have  no  complaint  to  make  of  the  King  of  Prussia. 
Your  Majesty  need  feel  no  uneasiness  ;  we  shall  come  out 
of  the  struggle  victorious,  and  all  the  efforts  of  the  enemies 
of  Denmark  will  be  vain.  I  know  all  the  intrigues  of 
England,  Russia,  and  Sweden ;  but  I  also  know  your 
character  and  the  loyalty  of  your  nation,  and  I  feel  no 
alarm.  ...  «  NAPOLEON." 

At  last  the  camp  of  Boulogne  was  to  be  broken  up. 

To  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"  Paris,  Zth  January,  1813. 
"  The  camp  of  Boulogne    has   become   useless.      Give 
orders  for  the  troops  to  be  quartered  in  the  town. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  MARSHAL  BERTHIER,  at  Elbing. 

"  Paris,  <jth  January,  1813. 
"  I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  1st  with  the  strange 
news  which  it  contained.  .  .  .    These  are   the    measures 

1  On  the  other  hand,  England  and  Russia  guaranteed  Norway  to 
Sweden  as  the  price  of  her  active  co-operation. 


VAST    PREPARATIONS.  209 

which  I  have  taken.  As  soon  as  I  heard  of  the  treason  of 
General  York,  I  decided  upon  making  a  communication  to 
the  nation,  which  shall  be  done  to-morrow,  and  on  ordering 
an  extraordinary  levy.  I  have  formed  a  corps  of  obser- 
vation on  the  Elbe,  which  is  assembling  at  Hamburg. 
This  corps  will  be  sixty  battalions  strong,  and  commanded 
by  General  Lauriston.  I  have  formed  a  corps  of  obser- 
vation in  Italy,  which  is  assembling  at  Verona,  and  which 
is  forty  battalions  strong,  and  is  commanded  by  General 
Bertrand.  I  have  formed  a  first  corps  of  observation  of 
the  Rhine  composed  of  sixty  battalions,  and  I  have  given 
the  command  to  Marshal  Marmont,  whose  head-quarters 
will  be  Mayence.  I  am  going  to  form  a  second  corps  of 
observation  of  the  Rhine,  which  will  also  consist  of  sixty 
battalions.  I  have  converted  the  eighty-eight  cohorts  into 
twenty-two  regiments  of  the  line.  ...  I  have  called  up 
■  100,000  men,  the  arrears  of  the  conscriptions  since  18 10, 
so  that  they  will  all  be  men  over  twenty-one  years  old. 
....  The  conscription  of  1814WHI  be  of  150,000  men, 
and  will  be  raised  in  the  course  of  February. 

"  The  cantons  of  France  have  offered  me  each  three 
mounted  chasseurs,  which  will  make  from  12,000  to  15,000 
troopers.  ...  I  have  raised  20,000  cavalry  horses  in 
France. 

"  I  have  accepted  the  offers  made  to  me  of  six  squadrons 
of  body  guards  of  200  men  each  ;  they  will  be  composed 
of  volunteers  from  the  departments,  having  each  a  pension 
of  40/.  furnished  by  their  parents.  I  have  passed  con- 
tracts for  8,000  cavalry  horses  in  France.  I  have  re- 
organised six  battalions  of  military  train.  I  have  raised 
12,000  artillery  horses.  I  have  reorganised  the  artillery 
for  the  Grand  Army  and  for  the  other  corps.  I  have 
reorganised  the  engineers.  I  have  created  a  regiment  of 
voltigeurs  and  of  sharpshooters  of  the  Guard.  ...  I 
have  at  this  moment  five  regiments  of  the  young  Guard, 
forming  8,000  men,  under  arms.  I  have  called  up  3,000 
old  soldiers,  who  will  shortly  arrive  at  the  depots  of  the 

VOL.  III.  P 


2  10     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

old  Guard.  I  have  procured  a  special  remount  of  3,000 
horses  for  the  Guard.  I  have  made  an  extraordinary 
recruitment  for  the  cavalry.  .  .  .  Everything  is  in  motion 
here.  Nothing  is  wanting,  neither  men,  nor  money,  nor 
goodwill,  but  we  want  cadres.  .  .  .  The  courts  of  Austria 
and  of  Denmark  appear  to  be  well  disposed. 

"  Napoleon." 

And  on  the  nth  Napoleon  wrote  to  Marshal  Berthier, 
saying : — 

"  Make  known  to  Marshal  Macdonald  the  indignation 
which  the  letter  of  General  York  has  produced  throughout 
the  country,  and  the  national  movement  which  it  has 
occasioned.  .  .  .  You  will  have  seen  all  that  the  King 
of  Prussia  did  when  he  learned  the  treason  of  General 
York.  .  .  ." 

General  York,  who  had  been  engaged  with  Marshal 
Macdonald  in  blockading  Riga,  was  cut  off  by  General 
Diebitch,  when  the  French  were  obliged  to  retreat.  Upon 
this  the  Russian  general  sent  a  flag  of  truce  to  York 
proposing  a  convention,  which,  after  much  hesitation,  was 
accepted  by  the  Prussian  general,  in  order  to  save  the 
remnant  of  his  corps.  The  convention  was  signed  on  the 
30th  December,  and  it  was  stipulated  that  the  Prussian 
corps  should  remain  neutral  for  two  months,  whether  the 
convention  were  ratified  or  not. 

The  King  of  Prussia,  somewhat  perplexed  at  first, 
seeing  the  state  of  feeling  all  through  Germany,  refused  to 
ratify  the  convention,  and  superseded  General  York, 
who,  however,  did  not  remain  long  under  a  cloud. 

To  KING  JEROME. 

"  Paris,  iZth  January,  1813. 
"  According  to  custom,  I  consider  it  right,  on  important 
occasions,  to  make  known  our  situation  to  your  Majesty. 

"  Your  Majesty  has  learned  from  the  published  reports 
the  victories  which  I  have  gained  over  the  Russian  armies. 


LETTER    TO    JEROME.  2  I  I 

I  did  not  once  meet  them  without  beating  them.  As  a 
general  rule  the  Russian  cavalry  and  infantry  did  not 
behave  well.  The  Cossacks  are  the  only  troops  which, 
in  the  kind  of  warfare  suited  to  them,  made  a  good  show. 
After  the  righting  at  Smolensko  and  the  battle  of  Borodino 
I  entered  Moscow.  I  found  abundance  of  everything  in 
that  great  city,  the  houses  all  furnished,  provisions  every- 
where, and  the  inhabitants  very  well  disposed.  But  twenty- 
four  hours  afterwards  the  flames  burst  out  in  200  places  at 
once.  The  rich  magazines  became  a  prey  to  the  fire.  The 
merchants  and  the  middle  classes,  seeing  their  houses  in 
cinders,  took  to  flight,  and  after  four  days  of  prodigious 
and  useless  efforts,  Moscow,  which  we  could  not  save,  no 
longer  existed. 

"  The  inhabitants  of  a  great  number  of  villages  asked 
me  for  a  decree  according  them  their  liberty,  and  promising 
to  take  up  arms  for  me.  But  in  a  country  where  the 
middle  class  is  so  few  in  numbers,  and  when,  frightened  by 
the  ruins  of  Moscow,  the  men  of  that  class  had  fled,  I  felt 
that  to  arm  a  population  of  slaves  would  be  to  devote  the 
country  to  terrible  misfortunes.  I  never  dreamed  of  doing 
this.  I  merely  thought  of  reorganising  my  army  and  of 
falling  back  on  the  Dwina." 

Then,  after  a  description  of  the  retreat  to  Smolensko — 
"  I  reached  Krasnoi.  The  Cossacks,  who  perceived  that 
we  had  no  more  cavalry,  flung  themselves  between  our 
columns.  The  men  left  their  ranks  to  go,  at  night,  in 
search  of  shelter  against  the  rigours  of  that  fearful  climate. 
I  had  no  cavalry  to  protect  them.  However,  the  enemy 
vainly  endeavoured  to  take  advantage  of  this  state  of 
affairs ;  he  was  constantly  attacked  and  beaten:  Mar- 
shal Ney,  who  remained  three  days  behind,  marched  by 
the  left  of  the  Borysthenes,  and  rejoined  at  Orcha,  without 
having  experienced  any  loss  beyond  that  of  his  materiel, 
which  he  was  obliged  to  destroy.  I  called  in  the  other 
corps  which  remained  on  the  Dwina,  and  I  marched  to 
the  Beresina,  which  I  crossed  in  presence  of  the  enemy. 

p  2 


2  I  2  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

I  beat  Tchitchakoff,  and  afterwards  fell  back  upon  Wilna 
with  my  army,  the  command  of  which  I  left  to  the  King 
of  Naples,  and  I  returned  to  my  capital. 

"  Your  Majesty  can  now  appreciate  the  falsehoods  told 
by  the  Russian  bulletins.  There  was  not  an  affair  in  which 
the  Russians  captured  either  a  gun  or  an  eagle  ;  they  took 
no  other  prisoners  than  skirmishers,  a  certain  number  of 
which  are  invariably  captured.  My  Guard  was  never 
engaged,  and  did  not  lose  a  single  man  in  action,  and  it 
could  not  therefore  have  lost  any  eagles  as  the  Russians 
declare.  When  they  relate  that  they  took  4,000  men  from 
Marshal  Ney,  they  tell  another  falsehood.1  What  they 
say  about  the  affair  of  the  viceroy  and  that  of  Krasnoi, 
where  they  say  that  the  Guard  was  engaged,  is  but  a  tissue 
of  impostures  and  stupidities.  No  doubt  a  great  many 
soldiers,  officers,  and  even  generals  fell  into  the  hands  of 
the  enemy  because  they  were  sick  or  had  straggled  away 
from  the  army.  .  .  . 

"  The  Grand  .  Army,  which  I  left  between  Minsk  and 
Wilna,  would  have  remained  at  Wilna  but  for  the  ex- 
cessive cold,  which  induced  the  King  of  Naples  to  go  into 
cantonments  this  side  of  the  Niemen." 

The  Emperor  then  gave  a  very  glowing  sketch  of  the 
actual  state  of  affairs,  and  set  down  the  effective  strength 
of  the  Grand  Army  at  200,000  men,  although  in  a  letter  to 
General  Lacue-  of  the  16th  he  said — "  Nothing  is  to  be 
expected  from  the  Grand  Army,  for  all  the  men  appear  to 
be  excessively  fatigued  ;  it  must  therefore  be  entirely 
reorganised."     His  Majesty  went  on  to  say — 

"  Thus,  independently  of  the  Grand  Army,  and  without 
withdrawing  any  men  from  the  army  of  Spain,  which  has 
an  effective  of  300,000  men,  I  have  more  than  300 
battalions,  all  composed  of  Frenchmen,  and  most  of  them 
of  old  soldiers,  which  could,  with    two  divisions  of  my 

1  It  is  a  well-known  fact  that  the  corps  of  Ney  was  annihilated,  and 
that  the  Grand  Army  lost  900  guns. 


BARON    STEIN.  213 

Guard,  be  concentrated  in  the  month  of  March  on  the 
Oder  and  on  the  Elbe.  With  this  force  in  the  way  of  men, 
with  the  ordinary  revenues  of  my  Empire,  which  for  the 
present  year  will  amount  to  44,000,000/.,  and  having 
reason  to  count  upon  the  fidelity  of  my  allies,  I  flattered 
myself  that  I  should  not  be  obliged  to  ask  my  people  to 
make  any  new  efforts. 

"But  this  state  of  affairs  has  just  been  suddenly  changed 
by  the  treason  of  General  York,  who,  with  a  Prussian  corps 
of  20,000  men,  has  taken  part  with  the  enemy.  On  this  occa- 
sion Prussia  has  given  me  the  strongest  assurances  of  her 
intentions,  which  I  have  reason  to  believe  sincere,  but  they 
do  not  prevent  the  corps  in  question  having  gone  over  to 
the  enemy.  The  immediate  consequences  of  this  treason 
are  that  the  King  of  Naples  has  been  obliged  to  withdraw 
behind  the  Vistula,  and  that  my  losses  will  be  increased 
by  the  men  who  are  in  hospital  in  Old  Prussia.  One 
of  the  eventual  consequences  may  be  that  the  war  will 
approach  Germany.  I  have  taken  all  the  necessary 
measures  for  protecting  the  frontiers  of  the  Confederation  ; 
but  all  the  Confederate  States  must  feel  the  necessity,  on 
their  side,  of  making  efforts  in  proportion  to  the  circum- 
stances. It  is  not  only  against  the  foreign  enemy  that 
they  have  to  protect  themselves ;  there  is  one  more 
dangerous  to  be  feared  :  the  spirit  of  revolt  and  anarchy. 

"  The  Emperor  of  Russia  has  just  appointed  Baron 
Stein  Minister  of  State.  He  admits  into  his  intimate 
counsels  Stein  and  all  those  men  who,  aspiring  to  change 
the  face  of  Germany,  have  long  endeavoured  to  succeed 
by  revolutionary  means.    .    .    . 

"  Napoleon." 


Similar  letters  were  addressed  to  the  other  royal  and 
princely  vassals  of  the  French  Empire,  who  were  beginning 
to  perceive  the  very  onerous  price  which  they  had  to  pay 
for  the  protection  of  France  1 


214  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

TO  PRINCE  EUGENE,  at  Posen. 

"  Fontainebleau,  iznd  January,  1813. 
"  My  Son, — Take  the  command  of  the  Grand  Army.  I 
am  sorry  that  I  did  not  leave  it  to  you  when  I  took  my 
departure  ;  I  flatter  myself  that  you  would  not  have  fallen 
back  in  such  haste,  and  that  my  losses  would  not  have 
been  so  great.  The  harm  which  has  been  done  is  without 
remedy.      You  must  write  to  me  in  detail  every  day. 

"  As  soon  as  you  can  do  without  the  Major-General 
(Berthier),  send  him  back ;  also  Daru,  if  Dumas  is  fit 
for  duty. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  the  KING  OF  SAXONY,  at  Dresden. 

"  Fontainebleau,  12nd "January,  1813. 
"...  The  events  which  have  happened  since  my 
departure  from  the  army  and  the  treason  of  General  York 
have  damaged  our  affairs  in  the  north  ;  but  I  have  set  in 
motion  such  forces  that  when  the  good  weather  comes  our 
enemies,  no  matter  what  progress  they  may  make,  will  be 
driven  back  very  quickly  from  whence  they  came.  I 
receive  from  the  King  of  Prussia  reiterated  proofs  of  his 
good  faith.  The  King  of  Denmark  assured  me  a  few  days 
ago  that  he  is  not  to  be  shaken.  Your  Majesty  ought  to 
have  information  with  regard  to  the  court  of  Austria ;  all 
that  the  Emperor  writes,  and  all  that  he  causes  me  to  be 
told,  show  that  I  should  not  only  have  no  anxiety  on  that 
side,  but  that  the '  Emperor  is  decided  to  make  greater 
efforts  than  during  the  last  campaign.    .    .    . 

"  Napoleon." 

When  the  French  Emperor  wrote  the  above  letter  he 
was  evidently  apprehensive  that  the  Cossacks  were  about 
to  pay  Saxony  a  visit.  A  month  later  the  king  was 
obliged  to  leave  Dresden,  not  for  the  first  time  since  he 
joined  the  Confederation. 


THE    POPE    TO   GO    TO    AVIGNON.  215 

On  the  23rd  his  Majesty  wrote  a  letter  on  naval  affairs 
to  Admiral  Decres,  which  commenced  thus  : — 

"  I  cannot  make  up  my  mind  to  diminish  my  maritime 
armaments.  I  am  not  in  a  position  to  place  the  ex- 
penditure of  twelve  or  fifteen  million  francs  in  the  balance 
with  the  reaction  which  would  be  produced  in  the  minds 
of  my  sailors  and  of  my  enemies  by  a  diminution.  The 
only  thing  to  which  I  can  consent  is  not  to  augment  my 
armaments  in  Holland  and  on  the  Scheldt.    .    .    ." 

To  PRINCE  EUGENE. 

"  FontainebleAU,  iyd  January,  1813. 
"  I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  16th.  I  have  already 
told  you  that  I  see  the  command  of  the  army  in  your 
hands  with  pleasure.  I  find  the  conduct  of  the  King  of 
Naples  very  extravagant,  and  such  that  it  would  require 
very  little  for  me  to  have  him  arrested  by  way  of  an 
example.  He  is  a  brave  man  in  the  field  of  battle,  but  he 
is  totally  devoid  of  combinations  and  moral  courage.  I 
am  very  anxious  to  know  if  any  Frenchmen  have  been  left 
at  Thorn.  Marshal  Ney  has  written  to  me.  Employ  him, 
for  he  will  be  necessary  to  you. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  COMTE  BIGOT. 

"Fontainebleau,  2yd  January ,  18I3. 

"  You  must  send  a  courier  to  General  Miollis  to  acquaint 

him  with  the  arrangement  which  has  just  been  made  with 

the  Pope,  and  furnish  him  with  an  analysis  of  the  treaty. 

He  must  not  have  it  printed,  but  only  make  use  of  it  in 

conversation.     You  must  tell  him  that  the  Pope  is  going 

to  reside  at  Avignon,  where  he  will  exercise  his  pontificate 

as  in  the  past.    .    .    . 

"  Napoleon." 

And  the  Grand  Chamberlain  was  ordered  to  give  a 
year's  wages  to  each  of  the  domestics  of  his  Holiness  by 
way  of  a  present. 


2l6        .  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  M.  MELZI,  Due  DE  Lodi. 

"  Fontainebleau,  i^th  January,  1813. 
"  I    have  just  signed  a  Concordat  with   the  Pope.     I 
hasten  to  forward  a  copy  of  it  for  you  alone,  as  it  is  not 
my  intention  that  it  shall  be  published.   The  Pope  is  going 
to  establish  himself  at  Avignon. 

"  The  Minister  of  Worship  being  dead,  I  beg  that  you 
'will  present  some  one  to  replace  him.  I  also  desire  that 
you  will  furnish  me  with  your  views  as  to  the  appoint- 
ments to  be  made  to  the  vacant  sees,  especially  to  that  of 
Milan.  I  should  like,  for  this  latter  see,  a  bishop  of 
irreproachable  morals,  of  a  pure  doctrine,  and  who  has 
given  satisfaction  under  all  circumstances.    .    .    . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  the  EMPEROR  OF  AUSTRIA. 

"  Fontainebleau,  25^  January,  1813. 

"  Having  had  the  opportunity  of  seeing  the  Pope  at 
Fontainebleau,  and  having  conferred  several  times  with 
his  Holiness,  we  have  come  to  an  arrangement  respecting 
the  affairs  of  the  Church.  The  Pope  seems  to  wish  to 
settle  at  Avignon.  I  send  your  Majesty  the  Concordat 
which  I  have  just  signed  with  him.  I  do  not  wish  this 
document  to  be  made  public  at  present. 

"  The  thorough  acquaintance  which  Comte  Otto 
possesses  of  the  affairs  of  England  and  of  America  make 
me  desire  his  presence  in  Paris,  I  desire  to  replace  him 
by  the  Comte  de  Narbonne,  who  enjoys  my  full  con- 
fidence, and  who  has  manners  which  v/ill  be  agreeable  at 
Vienna.  I  beg  your  Majesty  to  let  me  know  if  he  will  be 
acceptable. 

"  The  King  of  Naples,  being  ill,  desired  to  quit  the 
army ;  he  has  been  replaced  by  the  viceroy.  My  troops 
are  in  motion  [being  driven  back  at  all  points].  The 
whole  of  France  is  in  arms,  and  your  Majesty  may  feel 
certain  that,  with    God's  assistance,  as  soon  as  the  fine 


LETTER    TO    THE    EMPEROR    OF    AUSTRIA.         2  17 

weather  comes,  I  shall  drive  out  the  Russians  quicker  than 
they  came.  All  my  villages  and  cantons  having  offered 
me  a  voluntary  levy  of  horses,  that  alone  makes  40,000 
horses,  the  riders  having  already  served,  and  the  horses 
being  over  six  years  old  ;  and  this  independent  of  20,000 
horses  procured  by  requisition,  and  20,000  more  purchased 
in  the  north. 

"  I  have  received  a  letter  from  the  King  of  Denmark, 
which  is  as  frank  as  it  is  firm.  He  informs  me  of  his 
positive  intention  of  remaining  true  to  the  alliance,  and  of 
turning  a  deaf  ear  to  the  attempts  of  Russia,  Sweden,  and 
England. 

"  I  spoke  about  Sweden  to  your  Majesty  at  Dresden  ; 
but  the  day  after  my  departure  M.  Sigueul  arrived, 
bringing  the  unexpected  demand  that  I  should  allow 
Sweden  to  take  Norway.  I  was  indignant  at  a  proposal 
so  contrary  to  my  honour,  because  my  alliance  with 
Denmark  was  not  an  unknown  circumstance.  I  did  not 
even  condescend  to  make  a  reply. 

"  Your  Majesty  has  been  informed  of  the  affair  of 
General  York.  The  King  of  Prussia  expresses  the  most 
cordial  sentiments  towards  me,  but  I  send  Comte  Otto  a 
translation  of  the  last  English  papers,  which  show  what 
the  English  contemplate.  They  wish  to  treat  with  the 
King  of  Prussia,  as  well  as  with  Ferdinand  VII.,  and  to 
establish  a  revolutionary  committee  to  act  for  him.    .    .    . 

"  Napoleon." 


The  Emperor  was  in  great  hopes  that  in  making  his 
peace  with  the  Church  he  would  secure  the  hearty  alliance 
of  Austria.  The  position  of  Pope  and  Emperor  at  this 
period  may  be  thus  summed  up. 

The  Pope  was  very  differently  treated  at  Fontainebleau 
to  what  he  had  been  at  Savona.  If  still  a  captive,  he  was 
sumptuously  lodged  and  fed,  and  enjoyed  comparative 
freedom.     In  the  hope  that  he  would  consent  to  reside  in 


2l8     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Paris,   Cardinal  Maury  had  been  ordered  to  prepare  the 
archiepiscopal   palace    for  his  reception  ;    architects   were 
called  in  to  decorate  it,  the  gardens  were  enlarged,  and 
stables  built.     The  disasters  in   Russia,  and  the  troubled 
state  of  Europe,  induced  Napoleon  to  reopen  negotiations 
with  the  Holy  See,  in  the  hopes  of  conciliating  Austria 
and  Bavaria  and  their  Catholic  subjects.     Several  inter- 
views  took    place    between  the    Pope  and  the   Emperor 
at   Fontainebleau,   during   which   Napoleon  consented  to 
modify   his    previous   demands.      He   no   longer  insisted 
upon  the  four  propositions  of  the  Gallican  Church,  held 
in  horror  by  Rome.     He  no  longer  insisted  that  the  Pope 
should  reside  in  Paris,  or  that  the  Pope  should  blame  the 
"black  cardinals"   for  not  having  attended  his  marriage 
with  Marie  Louise.     The  Pope  was  no  longer  called  upon 
to  banish  Cardinals  di  Pietro  and  Pacca  for  ever  from  his 
counsels ;  concessions  were  also  made  on  the  subject  of 
the  confirming  of  bishops,  and  the  Emperor  promised  to 
restore    to  favour  all   the   cardinals,   bishops,  and   priests 
who  had  incurred  his  wrath.      The  new   Concordat  was 
signed  on  the  25th  January,  and  by  this  the  Pope  agreed 
to  exercise  his  pontificate  in  France,  and  by  Art.  3  he 
was   to   enjoy  a   revenue  of   80,000/.     Napoleon  at  once 
signified  the  conclusion  of  the  Concordat  to  the  Emperor 
of  Austria,  and  in  a  letter  to  his  Minister  of  Worship,  not 
inserted  in    The   Correspondence,  ordered  Te  Deums  to  be 
chanted  in  its  honour.     The  Pope,  however,  had  no  sooner 
signed  this  document  than  he  repented,  and  with  the  ad- 
vice of  Pacca,  Consalvi,  and  the  "  black  cardinals,"  who 
had  been  released  from  prison,  and  were  allowed  to  visit 
him,  determined  to  retract.     At  this  time  the  Pope  was  in 
very  feeble  health,  and  it  was  a  matter  of  great  difficulty 
for  him  to  draw  up  a  retractation  ;  he  was  under  the  eyes 
of  the  police,  and  he  could  write  only  a  few  lines  a  day. 
However,  the  instrument  was  at  last  prepared  in  secrecy, 
and    forwarded   with    trembling.      The  Pope  denied  the 
validity   of  the  Concordat  of  Fontainebleau   which  had 


THE    CARDINALS.  219 

been  extorted  from  him.  The  anger  of  the  Emperor  when 
he  received  the  letter  of  Pius  VII.,  was  such  that  he  talked 
of  blowing  out  the  brains  of  some  of  the  cardinals.  It 
was,  perhaps,  fortunate  for  them  that  he  was  so  soon  called 
away  to  take  the  command  of  his  armies  in  the  field. 

On  the  25th  March  the  Emperor  wrote  thus  to  Comte 
Bigot  :— 

"  The  Minister  of  Worship  must  observe  the  most  pro- 
found secrecy  on  the  subject  of  the  Pope's  letter  of  the 
24th,  for  I  wish,  according  to  circumstances,  to  be  able  to 
say  that  I  have  or  have  not  received  it.  You  must  write 
to  the  bishops  that  as  this  is  Holy  Week,  and  they  have 
duties  to  perform  in  their  dioceses,  they  should  return 
to  them,  with  the  exception  of  the  bishops  of  Nantes  and  of 
Treves.  .  .  .  The  Concordat  is  henceforth  the  law  of  the 
State.  It  is  a  treaty  more  sacred  than  all  others,  having 
been  drawn  up  by  the  Pope  and  the  Emperor,  and  signed 
by  them  in  presence  of  four  cardinals." 

The  bishops  and  archbishops  were  not  to  know  anything 
of  the  protest  of  Pius  VII.,  but  the  letter  said  that  they 
were  to  go  to  Fontainebleau,  and  to  present  addresses  to 
the  Pope,  imploring  his  Holiness  to  come  to  an  under- 
standing with  the  Chief  of  the  State. 

Not  having  been  able  to  change  the  determination  of 
the  Pope,  the  Emperor,  on  the  2nd  April,  wrote  to  Comte 
Bigot,  saying — 

"I  have  ordered  that  no  one  shall  be  admitted  to 
the  Pope's  mass  but  the  cardinals.  I  have  given 
orders  for  Cardinal  di  Pietro  to  be  carried  off  secretly  at 
night  time,  and  taken  to  some  town  forty  leagues  from 
Paris.  Orders  have  been  given  that  no  more  persons  be 
allowed  to  come  to  FontainebleaUi  ...  I  have  signified  to 
the  cardinals  that  they  must  no  longer  meddle  with  any- 
thing, and  that,  as  they  will  not  settle  the  affairs  of  the 
Church,  they  must  not  disturb  those  of  the  State." 

The  Emperor  had  just  won  the  battle  of  Lutzen,  when 
he  learned  that  the  Chapter  of  Tournay  had  refused  to 


2  20     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

elect  a   bishop.      He   at   once   wrote   to  his  Minister  of 
Worship  from  Dresden,   14th  August — 

"  I  have  ordered  the  Minister  of  Police  to  arrest  all 
the  canons  of  Tournay  .  .  .  and  to  make  the  professors 
of  the  seminaries  swear  to  teach  the  four  propositions  of 
the  Gallican  Church,  and,  on  their  refusal,  to  arrest  them. 
...  If  I  hear  of  any  further  act  of  rebellion,  I  shall 
suppress  the  bishopric.  ..." 

None  of  the  above  letters  are  published  in  The 
Correspondence. 

To  PRINCE  EUGENE. 

"  Fontainebleau,  26th  January,  1813. 

"...  All  your  efforts  should  tend  towards  preserving 
Warsaw.  The  reports  which  reach  me  from  all  sides  show 
that  the  Russians  on  the  Beresina  thought  themselves  lost; 
that,  but  for  the  unfortunate  affair  of  Partouneaux  [who 
wandered  into  the  enemy's  lines,  and  was  captured  with 
his  division],  Victor  would  have  beaten  them  as  we  beat 
the  admiral,  and  that  their  army  would  have  been 
crushed  ;  that  they  had  no  intention  of  marching  upon 
Wilna,  and  were  going  to  remain  at  Minsk,  when  the 
forced  marches  which  were  made,  and  the  measures  taken 
at  Wilna,  encouraged  them  to  push  forward.  Since  then, 
the  success  of  the  treason  of  General  York  has  enabled 
them  to  cross  the  Niemen.  At  present,  will  they  endeavour 
to  reach  Warsaw  ?     That  is  the  question. 

"  Napoleon. 
"  P.S. — I  have  no  doubt  that  you  will  hold  Posen." 

This  was  one  way  of  flinging  dirt  at  Murat.  No  one 
could  have  been  better  aware  of  the  falsehood  of  the 
above  assertions  than  Prince  Eugene  himself. 

In  another  letter  to  the  Viceroy,  written  on  the  29th, 
the  Emperor  said  : — 

"I  have  already  told  you  to  assemble  an  advanced 
guard  of  40,000  men  and  6,000  horses,  in  order  to  hold 


FRESH    INSTRUCTIONS.  22  1 

Posen,  and  to  keep  up  your  communications  with  Warsaw. 
I  should  have  liked  the  command  of  this  advanced  guard 
to  have  been  given  to  Marshal  Ney,  but  since  you  have 
sent  him  to  Paris,  there  remains  Marshal  St.  Cyr.  ...  I 
have  ordered  my  saddle-horses,  and  the  horses  of  my 
household,  to  be  assembled  and  reorganised  at  Berlin,  and  I 
have  recommended  the  announcement  of  my  speedy 
arrival  in  that  capital  [which  was  already  growing  too 
hot  for  the  French  garrison].  .  .  .  You  will  see  in  the 
Moniteur  that  the  kingdom  of  Italy  is  electrified.  Milan 
has  offered  me  IOO  horses,  and  I  am  assured  that  the 
country  will  furnish  2,000.  I  have  a  superb  corps  of 
20,000  men,  drawn  from  the  marines,  on  the  march  ;  there 
is  not  a  soldier  but  has  seen  one  year's  service ;  they 
themselves  asked  to  serve.  You  should  say,  and  yourself 
be  well  convinced,  that  in  the  next  campaign  I  shall  drive 
the  Russians  back  across  the  Niemen. 

"Send  back  Marshal  Berthier,  as  his  health  is  not  "good. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"Paris,  31st  January,  1813. 
"  Reiterate  orders  for  the  King  of  Spain  to  remove  his 
head-quarters  to  Valladolid,  to"  occupy  Madrid  only  with 
the  extremity  of  his  left,  and   to  send  considerable  forces 
to  subdue  the  north  of  Spain. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  ADMIRAL  DECRES. 

"Paris,  2nd  February,  18 13. 
"Order  Admiral  Baste  to  go  to  Swedish  Pomerania, 
where  he  will  be,  under  the  orders  of  General  Morand, 
charged  with  the  command  of  the  flotilla,  and  to  adopt 
measures  for  the  defence  of  the  isle  of  Rugen  and  the 
coasts.     He  must  visit  the  mouths  of  the  Oder.   .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 


222  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  M.  MARET. 

"Paris,  yd  February,  1813. 
"  The  Viceroy  writes  to  me  that  General  Bvilow  has  only 
300  cavalry,  and  that  therefore  Prussia,  instead  of  joining 
with  us  to  defend  her  territory,  and  to  repair  the  treason  of 
General  York,  does  nothing.  There  are  2,000  cavalry  shut 
up  in  the  fortresses  of  Silesia,  as  if  they  were  afraid  of  us, 
instead  of  aiding  us  to  cover  their  country. 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  8th  February  the  Emperor,  in  a  letter  to  the 
Viceroy,  said : — "  If  Prince  Schwartzenberg  evacuates 
Warsaw  and  falls  back  upon  Kalisch,  it  will  be  necessary 
to  reinforce  the  corps  of  General  Regnier." 

It  was  on  the  8th  February  that  the  Russians  entered 
Warsaw  and  captured  Pillau,  while  Thorn  and  Dantsic 
were  invested. 

To  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"Paris,  gt/i  February,  18 13. 
"You  must  inform  the  King  of  Spain,  in  cipher  and 
by  quadruplicate,  that  I  much  regret  to  see  that  he  has 
wasted  two  such  important  months  as  December  and  Janu- 
ary, when  the  English  had  no  power  to  do  anything,  and 
that  he  did  not  profit  by  this  circumstance  to  pacify 
Navarre,  Biscay,  and  Aragon  ;  that  he  is  always  asking 
for  money  ;  that  money  is  there,  and  that  without  any 
excuse  he  allows  the  finest  provinces  to  be  laid  waste  by 
Mina ;  that  I  have  several  times  ordered  him  to  go  to 
Valladolid,  but  that  the  nonchalance  with  which  affairs 
in  Spain  are  conducted  is  inconceivable.  How  comes  it, 
in  fact,  that  he  has  not  kept  up  his  communications  ? .  .  . 

"  There  is  not  a  moment  to  be  lost.  Let  the  king  go  to 
Valladolid,  occupying  Madrid  and  Valentia  with  his 
extreme  left. 

"  Write  to  him  that  the  time  lost  cannot  be  recovered  ;  that 


ENGLISH    INVASION.  223 

affairs  will  turn  out  badly  unless  he  displays  more  activity  ; 
that  it  is  necessary  to  occupy  Valladolid  and  Salamanca 
and  to  threaten  Portugal ;  that  the  English  appear  to  be 
reinforcing  themselves  in  Portugal  either  to  push  forward 
into  Spain  or  to  disembark  with  25,000  men  on  the  French 
coast  while  I  am  engaged  in  the  north  ;  that  to  hinder  the 
execution  of  this  plan  it  is  necessary  that  the  army  of 
Spain  should  be  always  ready  to  assume  the  offensive,  and 
to  threaten  Lisbon  should  the  English  weaken  their  forces 
in  Spain.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  M.  MARET. 

"Paris,  10th  February,  1813. 
"  Write  to  M.  de  St.  Marsan  saying  that  the  extensive 
recruiting  which    is  going  on    all   through  Prussia,  under 
officers  whom  the  king  cannot  trust,  creates  alarm   here, 
and  that  I  desire  that  everything  may  remain  quiet. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  PRINCE  EUGENE. 

"  Paris,  10th  February,  1813. 
"  My  Son, — You  must  cause  this  recruiting  of  Prussians 
to  cease,  and  content  yourself  with  the  troops  of  General 
Biilow  as  they  are.     Issue  orders  on  this  subject. 

"  Napoleon." 

At  the  opening  of  the  Legislative  Body  on  the  14th 
February  the  Emperor  said  : — 

"  The  war  rekindled  in  the  north  of  Europe  offered  the 
.  English  a  favourable  opportunity  for  carrying  out  their 
plans  in  the  Peninsula.  They  made  great  efforts,  but  all 
their  hopes  were  deceived.  Their  army  failed  in  its  attack 
upon  Burgos,  and,  after  experiencing  great  losses,  was 
obliged  to  evacuate  Spanish  territory. 

"  I  myself  entered  Russia.     The  French  arms  were  con- 


2  24  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

stantly  victorious.     Nowhere  could  the  Russians  resist  our 
eagles.     Moscow  fell  into  our  power. 

"  When  the  barriers  of  Russia  were  forced,  and  when 
the  impotency  of  her  armies  was  recognised,  a  swarm  of 
Tartars  turned  their  parricidal  hands  against  the  finest 
provinces  of.  that  vast  Empire  which  they  had  been  sum" 
moned  to  defend.  In  a  very  few  weeks,  in  spite  of  the 
tears  and  despair  of  the  unfortunate  Muscovites,  they 
burned  down  more  than  4,000  of  their  finest  villages,  thus 
gratifying  their  ancient  hatred  on  the  pretext  of  delaying 
our  march  by  making  a  desert  round  us.  We  triumphed 
over  all  these  obstacles  :  even  the  burning  of  Moscow, 
where,  in  four  days,  they  destroyed  the  labour  of  forty 
generations,  in  no  way  interfered  with  the  prosperous  state 
of  my  affairs.  But  the  excessive  cold  of  a  premature 
winter  brought  down  a  fearful  calamity  on  my  army.  In 
a  few  nights  everything  changed.  I  have  suffered  great 
losses.  They  would  have  broken  my  heart  if  I  had  been 
accessible  to  any  other  feelings  but  the  interest,  the  glory, 
and  the  future  of  my  people. 

"  At  the  sight  of  the  misfortunes  which  fell  upon  us  the 
joy  of  England  was  great ;  her  hopes  had  no  limits.  She 
offered  our  finest  provinces  as  the  recompense  for  treason  ; 
she  imposed  as  a  condition  of  peace  the  dismemberment 
of  this  splendid  Empire  ;  in  other  terms,  this  was  pro- 
claiming perpetual  war. 

"The  energy  of  my  people,  their  attachment  to  the 
integrity  of  the  Empire,  and  the  love  they  have  shown 
me,  have  dissipated  all  these  chimeras,  and  have  led  our 
enemies  to  conceive  a  more  just  appreciation  of  the  state 
of  affairs. 

"  The  misfortunes  produced  by  the  rigour  of  the  frost , 
have  brought  out  in  bold  relief  the  grandeur  and  solidity  of 
this.  Empire,  founded  upon  the  efforts    and    the  love   of 
50,000,000  of  citizens,  and  upon  the  territorial  resources 
of  the  finest  countries  in  the  world. 

"  It  is  with  lively  satisfaction   that  we  have  seen  the 


CONDITION    OF    THE    EMPIRE.  225 

people  of  our  kingdom  of  Italy,  those  of  ancient  Holland, 
and  of  the  united  departments  rivalling  the  French. 

"  The  agents  of  England  propagate  among  our  neigh- 
bours the  spirit  of  revolt  against  sovereigns.  England 
would  like  to  see  the  whole  Continent  a  prey  to  civil  war 
and  to  all  the  passions  of  anarchy,  but  Providence  has 
itself  selected  her  as  the  first  victim  of  anarchy  and  civil 
war. 

"  I  have  signed  a  concordat  with  the  Pope  which  has  put 
an  end  to  the  differences  which  had  unfortunately  arisen 
with  the  Church.  The  French  dynasty  reigns  and  will 
continue  to  reign  in  Spain.  I  am  satisfied  with  the 
conduct  of  my  allies  ;  I  shall  abandon  none  of  them  ;  I 
shall  maintain  the  integrity  of  their  states.  The  Russians 
shall  return  to  their  fearful  climate. 

"  I  desire  peace ;  it  is  necessary  to  every  one.  Four 
times  since  the  rupture  of  the  treaty  of  Amiens  I  have 
proposed  it  in  the  most  solemn  manner.  I  shall  never 
make  any  but  an  honourable  peace,  in  conformity  with 
the  interests  and  grandeur  of  my  Empire.  My  policy  is 
not  mysterious ;  I  have  made  known  the  sacrifices  which  I 
am  willing  to  make. 

"As  long  as  this  maritime  war  lasts  my  people  must  be 
prepared  to  accept  all  sorts  of  sacrifices ;  for  a  bad  peace 
would  make  us  lose  everything,  even  hope. 

"  America  has  appealed  to  arms  to  cause  the  sovereignty 
of  her  flag  to  be  respected.  The  good  wishes  of  the  world 
accompany  her  in  this  glorious  struggle.  Should  she 
terminate  it  by  obliging  the  enemies  of  the  Continent  to 
recognise  the  principle  that  the  flag  covers  the  merchandise 
and  the  crew,1  and  that  neutrals  should  not  be  subjected 
to  paper  blockade,  the  whole  in  conformity  with  the  stipu- 
lations of  the  treaty  of  Utrecht,  America  will  have  deserved 

1  Had  not  Napoleon  forced  Louis  to  seize  all  the  American  ships 
lying  in  Dutch  ports,  and  the  Czar  American  vessels  in  the  Baltic, 
having  on  board  colonial  produce  suspected  of  being  of  English 
origin  ? 

VOL.  III.  Q 


2  26     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

well  of  every  one.  Posterity  will  say  that  the  Old  World 
lost  its  rights  which  were  re-conquered  by  the  New 
World. 

"  My  Minister  of  the  Interior  will  acquaint  you  with  the 
situation  of  the  Empire,  the  prosperous  condition  of  agri- 
culture, manufactures,  and  internal  trade,  as  well  as  the 
constant  increase  of  our  population.  In  no  age  have  the 
agriculture  and  manufactures  of  France  flourished  to  such 
an  extent. 

"  I   require  great    resources  to  meet  all  the    expenses  . 
which  circumstances  necessitate  ;  but  by  means  of  different 
measures  which  will  be  proposed  to  you  by  the  Minister 
of  Finance,  I   shall   not   be  obliged  to   impose   any  new- 
burden  on  my  people." 

NOTE  DICTATED  TO  THE  GRAND  MARSHAL  OF  THE 

PALACE. 

"  Paris,  23rd  February,  1813. 

"  It  is  my  intention  to  pursue  quite  another  system  with 
my  equipages  than  that  followed  during  the  last  cam- 
paign. I  desire  the  number  of  persons  to  be  greatly 
reduced,  to  have  fewer  cooks,  less  plates,  dishes  &c,  no 
large  dressing  case,  and  this  as  much  by  way  of  setting  an 
example  as  in  order  to  diminish  trouble.  In  the  field, 
tables,  even  mine,  shall  be  served  with  soup,  a  boiled,  a 
roast,  vegetable,  no  desert.  In  the  large  cities  officers  may 
do  as  they  like. 

"  I  do  not  wish  to  take  any  pages  with  me  ;  they  are  of 
no  use  ;  perhaps  I  will  take  with  me  those  attached  to  the 
hunting  establishment,  who  are  twenty-four  years  old  and 
who  are  accustomed  to  fatigue. 

"  Diminish  also  the  number  of  cantines  ;  instead  of  four 
beds  have  only  two  ;  instead  of  four  tents  have  only  two, 
and  furniture  in  proportion." 

In  a  letter  to  Comte  Lauriston,  of  the  26th  February, 
the    Emperor  said   that   he  was  anxious    for  news   with 


BERLIN    EVACUATED.  2  27 

regard  to  the  Cossacks  which  had  been  seen  prowling  round 
Berlin.  In  another  letter  to  the  Count,  who  was  in  com- 
mand at  Magdeburg,  the  Emperor  said,  on  the  2nd 
March,  after  ordering  some  strategical  movements — "  Not 
having  a  cipher  at  this  moment  I  dare  not  write  these 
plans'  to  the  Viceroy,  because  the  Cossacks  might  inter- 
cept my  letter ;  but  if  the  enemy  march  upon  Dresden 
you  must  tell  him  not  to  be  astonished.  ...  It  is  well 
understood  that  he  must  hold  Berlin  and  the  Elbe  as  long 
as  possible." 

Several  other  letters  were  written  on  the  2nd  March. 
One  to  Prince  Eugene,  in  which  his  Majesty  said  :  "  I  am 
sorry  that  you  have  dispensed  with  the  services  of  Marshal 
Macdonald.  His  presence  at  Berlin  might  be  useful ;  he 
is  accustomed  to  the  police  duty  of  that  city  and  is  known 
to  the  populace.  .  .  .  Make  severe  examples  and  maintain 
tranquillity." 

Prince  Eugene  was  at  this  moment  packing  up,  and  on 
the  3rd  he  evacuated  Berlin,  which  the  Russians  entered 
the  next  day  as  liberators. 

In  a  letter  to  brother  Jerome  his  Majesty  said:  "As 
soon  as  the  Emperor  Alexander  and  General  Kutusoff 
enter  Berlin  or  Dresden  send  the  Queen  to  Paris,  but  not 
before." 

To  his  faithful  ally,  the  King  of  Saxony,  the  Emperor 
wrote  a  long  letter,  explaining  his  plans.  In  this  he 
said  : — 

"  My  minister  tells  me  that  your  majesty  desires  to  go 
to  Baireuth.  I  need  hardly  tell  you  that  all  France  is  at 
your  disposal.  I  have  a  house  at  Mayence  and  another 
at  Strasburg  where  your  Majesty's  family  would  be 
comfortable. " 

And  in  a  letter  to  the  King  of  Wirtemburg  asking  for 
troops  : — 

"  I  have  given  orders  to  allow  the  Russians  to  advance, 
and  all  my  measures  are  ready  for  taking  the  field  shortly. 
However  it  is  necessary  to  guard  the  Thuringian  moun- 

Q  2 


2  28     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

tains  so  as  not  to  allow  the  heart  of  the  Confederation  of 
the  Rhine  to  be  insulted  by  Cossack  patrols." 

And  in  a  letter  to  the  King  of  Bavaria  the  Emperor 
said : — 

"  All  the  measures  which  I  have  taken  have  been  adopted 
with  a  view  of  allowing  the  Russians  to  advance.  The 
more  they  advance  the  more  certain  is  their  destruction." 

A  similar  assurance  was  addressed  to  the  Grand  Duke 
of  Wurzburg. 

In  all,  Napoleon  got  through  twenty-two  letters  and 
despatches  on  the  2nd  March,  extending  over  sixteen 
closely  printed  pages. 

To  GENERAL  DUROC. 

"Paris,  \th  March,  1813. 

"  I  beg  that  you  will  let  me  know  if  my  palaces  of 
Strasburg  and  of  Mayence  are  in  a  good  condition.  They 
may  be  useful  either  for  me  or  for  the  families  of  some  of 
the  princes  of  the  Confederation. 

"  Napoleon." 


On  the  same  day  his  Majesty  fearing  lest  his  coasts 
might  be  insulted  in  his  absence,  wrote  to  General  Clarke 
to  have  an  eye  to  the  defences  of  Brest,  Cherbourg,  Belle 
Isle,  Aix,  Oleron,  Toulon,  Calais,  Ostend,  Dunkirk, 
Havre,  &c. 

In  a  long  letter  to  Prince  Eugene,  dated  the  4th,  the 
Emperor  thus  resumed  his  directions  : — "  Remain  at  Berlin 
as  long  as  you  can.  Make  examples  for  the  sake  of  dis- 
cipline. At  the  least  insult  from  a  town  or  Prussian 
village  burn  it  down,  even  if  it  were  Berlin  which  behaved 
badly.  ...  In  the  month  of  May  the  three  corps  of  the 
army  of  the  Maine  will  join  my  Guard,  a  good  artillery, 
and  a  numerous  cavalry,  and  I  shall  then  drive  the  Russians 
over  the  Niemen.  .  .  ." 


EUGENE    REPRIMANDED.  229 

On  the  5th  and  the  6th  Napoleon  repeated  his  orders  to 
Eugene  to  remain  at  Berlin,  but  if  forced  to  abandon  that 
capital  he  was  to  intrench  himself  in  front  of  Magdeburg  ; 
and  on  the  9th  in  a  long  letter  exhibiting  considerable 
anxiety  and  filled  with  reproaches,  the  Emperor  said — "  I 
have  received  your  letter  of  the  4th  (giving  an  account 
of  the  evacuation  of  Berlin).  I  do  not  know  if  General 
Gerard  has  joined  you;  I  suppose  that  he  had  already 
reached  that  city  when  you  left  it.  I  am  assured  that 
General  G6rard  has  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  Cossacks, 
as  also  my  Secretary  of  Legation.  ...  I  do  not  see  what 
obliged  you  to  leave  Berlin.  .  .  .  Nothing  is  less  military 
than  the  course  you  have  pursued.  .  .  .  An  experienced 
general  would  have  established  a  camp  in  front  of  Custrin. 
.  .  .  You  tell  me  nothing  in  your  letters.  I  have  written 
to  you  several  times  that  in  the  present  state  of  affairs  I 
require  to  know  the  truth  in  all  its  details.  ...  It  is 
shameful  to  say,  and  no,  one  would  believe  it,  but  I  am 
ignorant  what  general  commands  at  Stettin,  and  what 
garrison  has  been  left  there.  It  is  the  same  with  Spandau. 
...  I  order  you  to  inform  the  chief  of  your  staff  that 
if  he  does  not  send  me  detailed  reports  every  day, 
independent  of  your  correspondence,  I  shall  make  a 
severe  example.  I  learn  what  passes  from  the  English 
papers.  .  .  ." 

On  the  nth,  Napoleon  reiterated  his  dissatisfaction 
with  the  conduct  of  the  viceroy,  and  said — "  Our  military 
operations  are  the  object  of  laughter  to  our  allies  of 
Vienna,  and  to  our  enemies  of  London  and  St.  Peters- 
burg, because  the  army  constantly  falls  back  a  week  before 
the  arrival  of  the  enemy's  infantry,  on  the  approach  of  their 
light  troops  and  on  mere  rumour."  His  Majesty  then 
informed  Prince  Eugene  that  after  doing  everything  to 
lead  the  enemy  to  suppose  that  he  intended  to  march  on 
Dresden  himself,  he  meant  to  arrive  at  Stettin  by  forced 
marches  with  300,000  men,  and  to  continue  his  march  on 
Dantsic. 


23O  THE   CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  KING  JEROME. 

"Trianon,  12th  March,  1813. 
"  It  is  unfortunate  with  your  intelligence  that  you  will 
not  see  that  Magdeburg  can  only  be  provisioned  by  means 
of  requisitions,  that  these  means  are  authorised  by  a  state 
of  war  ;  that  they  have  been  constantly  employed  since 
the  world  was  the  world  ;  that  the  same  expedient  was 
resorted  to  in  Italy,  in  the  campaign  of  1809,  even  for 
Strasburg  and  Mayence.  .  .  .  Why  should  I  not  do  for 
Magdeburg  what  I  did  for  Mayence  ?  Instead  of  taking 
energetic  measures,  you  merely  upset  all  that  has  been 
done.  Besides,  you  believe  that  there  are  millions  at  my 
disposal,  while,  if  you  will  take  up  your  pen  for  a  moment, 
you  will  see  how  much  the  300,000  men  whom  I  have  in 
Spain,  all  the  troops  which  I  have  raised  this  year,  and  the 
100,000  cavalry  I  am  equipping,  cost,  .  .  .  You  always 
argue.  What  will  be  the  result  of  this  blundering  ? 
that  the  soldiers  will  requisition  the  country  themselves, 
and  that  there  will  be  insubordination  and  disorder.  Do 
you  suppose  that  if  the  Russians  visit  Westphalia  they 
will  pay  in  ready  money  ?  .  .  .  Your  country  has  some 
experience  of  war,  and  knows  what  that  state  of  affairs 
exacts.  ...  It  is  shameful  that  a  place  like  Magdeburg, 
which  is  the  key  of  your  kingdom,  should  not  be  pro- 
visioned. All  your  arguments  are  nonsense.  .  .  .  You 
must  requisition  with  the  greatest  order  possible  and  pay 
in  bans.  ...  I  am  obliged  to  fortify  Magdeburg  at  my 
expense,  to  arm  it  at  my  expense,  and  to  struggle  con- 
stantly with  the  Westphalian  authorities  about  measures 
which  have  no  other  object  but  the  defence  of  their  country. 
Of  what  use  is  your  intelligence  since  you  take  such  a 
wrong  view  ?  Why  gratify  your  vanity  by  vexing  those 
who  defend  you  ?  "NAPOLEON." 

The  next  day  his  Majesty  wrote  to  Comte  Daru,  say- 
ing— "  The  King  of  Westphalia  complains  that  his  people 


THE    TEMPORAL    POWER.  23  I 

are  overwhelmed  with  taxes.  I  have  some  idea  of  con- 
cluding a  bargain  with  the  king."  .  .  .  And  in  fact  Jerome 
was  just  as  bitter  as  either  Joseph  or  Louis  in  his  com- 
plaints of  the  way  in  which  his  subjects  were  ruined  by 
his  imperial  brother. 

To  COMTE  BIGOT. 

* 

"Trianon,  13M  March,  18 13. 
"  I  return  you  the  letter  of  the  Bishop  of  Nantes.  You 
must  inform  him  that  the  form  of  the  oath  cannot  be 
changed  ;  that  it  could  only  be  changed  if  it  contained 
anything  contrary  to  the  mysteries  of  religion.  All  the 
pretensions  of  the  cardinals  are  ridiculous.  You  must  say 
that  if  the  Pope  ever  becomes  a  temporal  sovereign  we 
shall  break  off  relations  with  him.  We  should  not  create 
a  schism  by  so  doing,  but  we  shall  never  tolerate  the 
influence  of  a  sovereign  whose  political  interests  may  be 
different  from  ours.  Since  the  Pope  takes  the  advice  of 
such  men  as  the  di  Pietros  and  the  Littas  only,  you  must 
inform  him  that  he  will  soon  perceive  once  more  the 
baneful  consequences  of  the  incapacity  of  those  men.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"Trianon,  13th  March,  181 3. 
"I  approve  of  the  measures  taken  for  the  defence  of 
the  Pyrenees,  and  for  calling  out  the  national  guard. 
Write  to  the  general  commanding  in  Catalonia,  to  the 
king,  and  to  General  Reille,  pointing  out  the  false 
direction  given  to  affairs'  in  Spain,  and  the  necessity  of 
protecting  the  frontier. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  PRINCE  EUGENE. 

"Trianon,  14//2  March,  1813, 
"  I  have  received  your  letter  from  Leipsic.  ...  As  soon 
as  you  receive    news  of  General  Morand,  let  me  know, 


232     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

even  the  rumours  which  may  reach  you.  By  our  latest 
news  it  appears  still  undecided  whether  Prussia  will  take 
the  field  against  us.  However,  after  the  treason  of  General 
York,  and  the  appearance  which  matters  have  since 
assumed,  it  does  not  seem  that  the  Prussian  cabinet  will 
long  remain  our  ally ;  but  I  do  not  think  the  Prussians 
have  as  many  troops  as  General  Regnier.  Do  not  forget 
that  Prussia  has  a  population  of  only  7,000,000.  In  the 
most  prosperous  times  she  never  had  more  than  150,000 
soldiers  which  she  exaggerated  into  300,000.  In  spite 
of  all  the  efforts  of  the  king  he  will  certainly  not  have 
40,000  men  in  May,  and  of  these  25,000  at  the  most,  will 
be  able  to  take  the  field,  because  he  will  have  to  protect 
Silesia,  garrison  Kolberg,  Pillau,  and  Grandenz.  After 
the  battle  of  Jena,  in  the  winter  campaign  which  ensued 
all  the  efforts  made  by  the  Prussians  failed  to  produce 
more  than  10,000  men.  There  are  a  great  many  sick  in 
General  York's  corps.  .   .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

By  the  treaty  of  Kalisch,  signed  between  Kutusoff  and 
Hardenberg  in  February,  and  ratified  on  the  1st  March, 
the  Czar  and  the  King  of  Prussia  agreed  to  prosecute 
war  against  France,  the  former  bringing  150,000  men,  and 
the  latter]  80,000,  independent  of  the  garrisons  in  the 
strong  places.  Neither  was  to  conclude  a  separate  peace, 
and  efforts  were  to  be  made  to  induce  Austria  to  join  the 
alliance,  &c.  This  treaty  was  to  be  kept  secret  for  two 
months,  and  it  was  not  until  the  middle  of  March  that  the 
French  ambassador,  M.  de  St.  Marsan,  got  wind  of  it. 

On  the  15th,  in  a  letter  of  several  pages  to  Prince 
Eugene,  the  Emperor  showed  that  he  had  studied  the 
Reveries  of  Marshal  Saxe  to  some  advantage,  for  he 
wrote — 

"As  for  the  difficulty  of  living,  you  have  before  you  the 
finest  provinces  of  Prussia  from  which  you  can  draw  what 
you  require  in  following  the  principles  of  military  execution, 


WAR   WITH    PRUSSIA.  233 

that  is  to  say  by  pointing  out  to  each  village,  even  at  ten 
leagues  distance,  the  quantity  of  provisions  to  be  supplied 
to  your  camp,  and  where  a  village  does  not  execute  your 
order  by  sending  a  detachment  there  to  lay  it  under  con- 
tribution, and  if  necessary  to  burn  some  houses." 

On  the  1 6th  March  General  Clarke  received  orders  to 
send  a  second  convoy  with  160,000/.  to  Spain  ;  and  the  next 
day  the  Emperor  wrote  a  letter  to  the  Queen  of  Westphalia 
who  had  arrived  at  Compiegne,  a  fact  which  irritated  him 
as  it  caused  alarm  in  Paris,  and  as  he  had  told  Jerome  not 
to  send  his  wife  away  unless  either  Alexander  or  Kutusoff 
entered  Berlin. 

On  the  1 8th  the  Emperor  called  for  papers  respecting 
Sweden,  being  of  opinion  that  it  was  high  time  to  publish 
them  and  to  make  a  declaration  of  war.  The  fact  is  that 
Sweden,  treated  with  the  most  unbearable  harshness  and 
arrogance  by  Napoleon,  signed  a  second  treaty  with  Russia 
on  the  3rd  March,  and  entered  the  alliance  against  France 
in  an  active  manner. 

It  was  not  until  the  28th  March  that  Napoleon,  in  a 
letter  to  Marshal  Ney,  who  was  in  command  of  the  3rd 
corps  at  Wurzburg,  announced  that  Prussia  had  raised  the 
standard  and  had  declared  war. 

To  M.  MARET. 

"  Paris,  \th  April,  1813. 
"...  Write  to  M.  de  St.  Marsan  (French  ambassador  at 

Berlin)  to  return  home  at  once M.  de  Rrusemark 

(Prussian  ambassador  in  Paris)  must  leave  before  Monday  ; 
he  is  a  spy  whom  it  is  useless  to  keep  here.  ...  In  the 
last  conference  which  you  have  with  M.  Krusemark  say 
that  M.  de  Hardenberg  keeps  none  of  his  promises.  .  .  . 
It  appears  that  the  King  is  no  longer  master.  .  .  .  Write 
a  circular  to  my  ministers  in  the  confederation,  and  let 
them  dismiss  the  representatives  of  Prussia.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 


234     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

It  was  only  on  the  Emperor  refusing  in  the  most  positive 
manner  so  accord  him  any  pecuniary  relief  that  the  King 
of  Prussia  consented  to  sign  the  treaty  of  Kalisch  which 
was  ratified  on  the  1st  March.  This  blunder  on  the  part  of 
Napoleon  was  due  to  the  fact  of  his  doubting  the  sincerity 
of  Prussia,  when  Prussia  appears  to  have  been  sincere. 
The  King  of  Prussia  had  exhibited  the  greatest  reluctance 
to  break  his  engagements  with  Napoleon,  and  he  did  not 
consent  to  do  so  until,  as  Hardenberg  said,  Prussia  had 
been  driven  to  despair.  Before  signing  the  treaty  of 
Kalisch  an  attempt  had  been  made  on  the  part  of  Prussia 
to  draw  closer  the  bonds  between  the  two  countries  by 
means  of  a  matrimonial  alliance  ;  a  marriage  between  the 
Prince  Royal  of  Prussia  (brother  of  the  present  Emperor 
of  Germany)  and  a  princess  of  the  Bonaparte  family.1 
The  French  Emperor,  however,  would  have  his  pound  of 
flesh,  and  would  listen  to  no  remonstrances.  He  considered 
the  disasters  of  the  Russian  campaign  repaired,  and  they 
were  forgotten. 

In  several  letters  written  in  April,  Napoleon  expressed 
his  faith  in  the  good  intentions  and  the  loyalty  of  Austria. 
He  was  sorry  that  the  King  of  Saxony  had  been  frightened 
out  of  Dresden  as  Eugene  had  been  frightened  out  of 
Berlin,  and  he  complained  of  the  conduct  of  the  Saxon 
troops.  However,  on  the  8th  April  he  wrote  as  follows 
to  Frederick  Augustus  : — 

"  I  have  received  the  letter  in  which  your  Majesty 
announces  your  safe  arrival  at  Ratisbon.  I  am  only 
waiting  until  the  4th  corps  under  General  Bertrand  has 
reached  Nuremburg,  to  start  for  Mayence,  and  to  place 
myself  at  the  head  of  the  army.  I  hope  with  the  aid  of 
God  to  be  at  Dresden  in  the  course  of  a  few  days.  ...  I 
am  sorry  for  the  affair  of  the  bridge  of  Dresden  (which 
had  been  blown  up  by  Davoust),  but  that  after  all  is  only 
an  affair  of  a  few  hundred  thousand  francs.  .  .  ."  And 
writing  to  brother  Jerome  on  the  nth,  the  Emperor  said 
1  Manuscrit  de  18 13.     Baron  Fain,  vol*  i.  p.  212. 


NAPOLEON    LEAVES    FOR    MAYENCE.  235 

— "I  send  you  20,000/.  in  gold.  By  the  22nd  I  shall  be 
at  Erfurth  with  200,000  men  independent  of  the  army  of 
the  Viceroy." 

To  GENERAL  CAULAINCOURT. 

"  St.  Cloud,  13/A  April,  18 13. 
"  These  are  the  plans  for  my  departure  ;  I  shall  start 
with  you  in  a  light  carriage  ;  the  Grand  Marshal  and  the 
Comte  de  Lobau  in  another  carriage  ;  Fain  and  Yvan  in  a 
third.  The  three  carriages  must  be  all  equally  light.  In 
my  carriage  must  be  placed  a  selection  of  books,  maps, 
■  sketches,  &c.  Fain  must  have  in  his  carriage  the  reports 
on  the  situation  of  the  army,  my  correspondence,  Sic.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

to  the  emperor  of  austria. 

"St.  Cloud,  13/A  April,  18 13. 

"  Sir,  my  Brother,  and  very  dear  Father-in-law. 
— Prince  Schwartzenberg  has  handed  me  your  Majesty's 
letter.  I  had  great  pleasure  in  seeing  him,  and  I 
conversed  with  him  for  a  long  time  in  the  most  confidential 
way.  I  have  been  highly  satisfied  with  the  conduct  of 
General  Bubna  during  his  stay  here,  and  I  hope  that  your 
Majesty  will  give  him  some  mark  of  approbation. 

"  I  am  on  the  point  of  starting  for  Mayence  whither  I 
had  the  intention  of  going  on  the  20th,  but  the  movements 
of  the  enemy  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Elbe  have  decided  me 
to  hasten  my  departure.  As  soon  as  I  take  the  field  I 
shall  send  an  order  to  General  Frimont  to  denounce  the 

armistice. 

"Napoleon." 

To  PRINCE  CAMBACERES. 

"Mayence,  17th  April,  1813. 
"  I  reached  Mayence  in  forty  hours,  in  good  health  and 
without  accident.      The   carriage  of  the    grand    marshal 


236     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

has  not  yet  rejoined  me.  I  shall  remain  here  for 
several  days  to  look  after  a  great  many  things  which 
are  wanting. 

"  Napoleon." 


In  a  letter  to  Berthier  of  the  19th,  Napoleon  wrote  : — 
"  Send  a  courier  to  the  King  of  Bavaria.  Inform  him 
of  the  orders  which  you  have  given  his  contingent,  and 
the  immensity  of  our  forces.  Ask  the  King  why  he  does 
not  send  General  Wrede  to  take  the  command  of  his 
troops.  Is  that  General  ill  ?  ...  In  writing  to  the  King 
of  Saxony  tell  him  that  General  Regnier  has  returned  to 
resume  the  command  of  the  7th  corps,  and  that  as  soon 
as  communications  have  been  re-opened  he  will  go  to 
Torgau  :  that  I  desire  the  King  will  give  positive  orders 
so  that  all  the  uncertainties  which  have  recently  arisen 
may  cease,  and  that  the  fortress  and  the  troops  may  be 
placed  under  my  orders  without  the  slightest  reticence." 


To  THE  KING  OF  SAXONY.    1 

"  Mayence,  20th  April,  1813. 

"Your  Majesty's  letter  has  afforded  me  great  pain. 
You  have  no  more  friendship  for  me ;  I  accuse  the  enemies 
of  our  cause  who  are  in  your  cabinet  of  this.  I  require 
all  your  cavalry  and  all  your  officers.  I  have  spoken 
frankly  to  you  ;  but  no  matter  how  events  may  end,  your 
Majesty  may  count  upon  the  esteem  with  which  you  have 
inspired  me. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  COMTE  GERMAIN. 

"  Mayence,  20th  April,  18 13. 
"I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  19th.     The  conjec- 
tures made  with  regard  to   the  fidelity  of   the  King  of 


SPAIN    AND    AUSTRIA.  237 

Saxony  are  absurd  ;  neither  the  opinions  nor  the  probity 
of  that  prince  are  known.  You  should  deny  these  rumours 
with  all  your  force.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 


The  Saxons  themselves  were  certainly '  hostile  to  the 
French,  but  not  so  their  monarch,  who  on  receiving  a  letter 
from  the  King  of  Prussia  calling  upon  him  to  join  the 
coalition  and  shake  off  the  chains  of  France,  replied  on 
the  16th  April,  that  he  intended  to  respect  the  engage- 
ments he  had  contracted. 


To  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"Mayence,  2yd  April,  1813. 
"  Reply  to  the  King  of  Spain  that  I  gave  him  the 
command-in -chief  of  my  army;  that  I  am  surprised 
therefore  by  his  continual  complaints  that  he  is  not 
obeyed,  that  this  happens  because  he  confounds  the  King 
of  Spain  with  the  general-in-chief  of  my  armies ;  that  I 
shall  never  allow  my  armies  to  depend  upon  Spanish 
ministers  ;  that  in  the  present  condition  of  France  he  must 
expect  nothing  from  me.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"Mayence,  242$  April,  1813. 
"  I  have  reason  to  be  satisfied  with  the  intentions  of 
Austria.  I  do  not  suspect  her  preparations ;  however,  it 
is  not  my  intention  to  be  dependent  upon  her.  The 
vulnerable  part  as  regards  Austria  is  my  kingdom  of  Italy 
whither  I  intend  to  send  the  Viceroy  as  soon  as  possible. 
Take  measures  for  forming  an  army  of  Italy.  .  .  .  Write 
to  Naples  so  that  in  addition  to  his  contingent  the  King 
of  Naples  may  have  a  corps  of  infantry,  artillery,  and 
cavalry  ready  to  march. 

"  Napoleon." 


238     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

The  fact  is  that  it  was  the  very  ambiguous  conduct  of 
Austria,  which  induced  Napoleon  to  send  Prince  Eugene 
back  to  his  viceroyalty  in  hot  haste,  nor  had  he  a  very 
lively   faith  in  the  fidelity  of  Murat. 

To  the  KING  OF  WIRTEMBURG. 

"  Mayence,  24/4  April,  1813. 

"  I  thank  your  Majesty  for  the  information  you  have 
sent  me  concerning  Torgau.  If  the  news  of  the  capitula- 
tion be  true,  I  am  surprised  that  the  King  of  Saxony  said 
nothing  about  it ;  but  there  appears  to  be  a  great  deal  of 
intrigue  going  on  round  that  respectable  sovereign.  ...  I 
beg  that  your  Majesty  will  let  me  know  what  you  think 
of  the  intentions  of  Austria.  Prince  Schwartzenberg 
brought  me  the  most  positive  assurances;  and  the 
Emperor  wrote  in  the  same  sense  to  the  Empress.  I 
asked  Prince  Schwartzenberg  if  the  corps  of  General 
Frimont,  which  is  on  the  Cracovia  side,  was  under  my 
orders ;  upon  his  reply  in  the  affirmative,  I  have  warned 
the  Austrian  General  to  hold  himself  in  readiness  to 
denounce  the  armistice,  and  in  fact  I  shall  send  him  an 
order  to  do  this  as  soon  as  I  pass  the  Saal. 

"  A  proposal  was  made  by  Austria  to  assemble  a  con- 
gress at  Prague.  I  adhered  to  this  with  all  my  heart, 
but  it  appears  that  Russia  has  sent  no  reply. 

"Perhaps  it  would  be  well  for  your  Majesty  and  the 
King  of  Bavaria  to  try  and  induce  the  court  of  Saxony 
to  remain  faithful  to  the  Confederation.  I  have  not  said 
anything  on  this  subject  to  the  King  of  Bavaria,  who 
appears  to  have  been  very  much  surprised  by  the  departure 
of  the  King  of  Saxony.  .  .  . 

"Napoleon." 

It  was  becoming  very  evident,  no  matter  what  the 
personal  feeling  of  the  King  might  be,  that  the  Saxons 
themselves  had  no  wish  to  fight  for  the  French  and 
slavery. 


SAVARY   AND    MARIE    LOUISE.  239 

To  GENERAL  SAVARY. 

"Erfurth,  26th  April,  1813. 
"  I  do  not  intend  that  you  should  transmit  direct  to  the 
Empress  your  memoranda  on  police  affairs.  That  can 
have  no  advantage  and  has  many  objections.  The  Empress 
is  too  young  to  have  her  mind  corrupted  or  disturbed  by 
police  details.  .  .  . 

"Napoleon." 

To  M.  MARET. 

"Erfurth,  iZth  April,  18 13. 
"I  send  you  a  letter  from  Comte  de  Mercy.  I  am 
extremely  dissatisfied  with  the  manner  in  which  I  am 
seconded  by  my  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  (M.  Maret, 
Due  de  Bassano).  You  allow  the  missions  at  the  courts 
of  Bavaria  and  of  Saxony  to  remain  incomplete  at  a 
moment  so  important  as  this !  At  Munich  where  you 
should  have  the  greatest  number  of  persons  possible,  you 
have  no  one !  .  .  .  The  King  of  Saxony  has  made  a  con- 
vention with  Austria  respecting  the  Polish  troops  so  as  to 
allow  them  to  pass  through  Bohemia  on  laying  down  their 
arms,  which  is  quite  opposed  to  my  wishes,  and  you  know 
nothing  of  it.  Pay  more  attention  to  my  missions  and  fill 
up  those  of  Munich  and  Dresden  at  once. 

"  Napoleon." 

to  prince  cambaceres. 

"  Lutzen,  1st  May,  1813. 

"  I  have  removed  our  head-quarters  to  this  place.  The 
enemy  wished  to  prevent  us  from  debouching  in  the  plains 
of  Lutzen  where  they  had  massed  a  strong  force  of  cavalry. 
Our  infantry  supported  by  artillery,  repulsed  them.  The 
enemy  have  little  artillery,  and  did  not  do  us  much  harm. 

"  The  first  cannon-shot  fired  caused  us  a  great  loss  ; 
Marshall  Bessieres  was  killed  stone  dead.  Our  whole  loss 
amounted  to  twenty-five  men.     I  write  this  in  haste  so 


24O  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NArOLEON. 

that  you  may  inform  the  Empress,  and  let  the  Duchesse 
d'Istrie  know  what  has  happened.  Make  the  Empress 
understand  that  the  Due  d'Istrie  (Bessieres)  was  a  long 
way  from  me  when  he  was  killed.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  2nd  May  was  fought  the  terrible  battle  of  Lutzen 
which  ended  in  a  retrograde  movement  on  the  part  of  the 
allies,  but  which  was  by  no  means  the  decisive  victory 
which  Napoleon  claimed  in  his  bulletins.  At  one  moment 
matters  seemed  so  gloomy  that  the  Emperor  made  pre- 
parations to  retreat,  and  if  he  afterwards  restored  the 
fortunes  of  the  day  not  only  was  there  no  pursuit  but  at 
nine  o'clock  at  night  he  narrowly  escaped  falling  into  the 
hands  of  a  body  of  Prussian  cavalry  which  made  a  sudden 
dash  on  the  French  position.  The  allies  confessed  to  a 
loss  of  15,000  men,  but  declared  that  no  prisoners,  guns, 
or  standards  had  been  captured.  Napoleon  in  his  bulletin 
said — "  We  have  made  thousands  of  prisoners.  .  .  .  Our 
loss  amounts  to  18,000  killed  or  wounded.  That  of  the 
enemy  is  set  down  at  from  25,000  to  30,000  men.  .  .  The 
gloomy  plots  hatched  by  the  cabinet  of  St.  James's 
throughout  the  winter  have  in  a  moment  been  undone 
like  the  Gordian  knot  by  the  sword  of  Alexander.  .  .  ." 

PROCLAMATION  TO  THE  ARMY. 

"  From  our  Imperial  Camp  at  Lutzen, 
"  yd  May,  1813. 

"  Soldiers, — I  am  satisfied  with  you  !  You  have  fulfilled 
my  expectations.  You  have  made  up  for  everything  by 
your  good  will  and  your  bravery.  On  the  celebrated  day 
of  the  2nd  May,  you  defeated  and  routed  the  Russian  and 
Prussian  army,  commanded  by  the  Emperor  of  Russia 
and  the  King  of  Prussia.  You  have  added  new  lustre  and 
glory  to  my  eagles  ;  you  have  shown  all  that  French  blood 
is  capable  of.  The  battle  of  Lutzen  will  be  placed  above 
the  battles  of  Austerlitz,  Jena,  Friedland,  and  Borodino. 


THE    FIELD    OF    LUTZEN.  24 1 

In  the  last  campaign  the  enemy  found  refuge  against  our 
armies  by  following  the  ferocious  method  of  his  barbarous 
ancestors  ;  the  armies  of  the  Tartars  burned  the  fields,  the 
towns,  and  even  holy  Moscow.  To-day  they  arrive  in  our 
countries  preceded  by  all  that  Germany,  France,  and  Italy 
have  in  the  way  of  scamps  and  deserters,  to  preach  revolt, 
anarchy,  civil  war,  and  murder ;  they  have  made  them- 
selves the  apostles  of  every  crime.  It  is  a  moral  conflagra- 
tion which  they  wish  to  light  up  between  the  Vistula 
and  the  Rhine,  in  order,  after  the  manner  of  despotic 
governments,  to  place  deserts  between  them  and  us.  The 
madmen  !  they  little  know  the  wisdom,  the  good  sense 
and  the  attachment  of  the  Germans  to  their  sovereigns. 
They  little  know  the  power  and  the  bravery  of  the 
French. 

"  In  one  single  day  you  have  defeated  these  parricidal 
plots.  We  will  drive  the  Tartars  back  into  their  fearful 
climate,  which  they  ought  never  to  have  left.  Let  them 
remain  in  their  frozen  deserts,  the  abode  of  slavery, 
barbarism,  and  corruption,  where  man  is  considered  on  a 
par  with  the   brute ! 

"  You  have  deserved  well  of  civilised  Europe.  Soldiers, 
Italy,  France,  and  Germany  thank  you  ! 

"  Napoleon." 

Lutzen  was  a  very  hard-fought  field  ;  and  at  one  period 
of  the  day  the  Emperor  thought  of  retreating.  If  the  next 
day  the  allies  retired,  they  left  neither  prisoners,  guns,  nor 
colours  in  the  hands  of  the  victors,  and  while  the  French 
lost  18,000  men  in  killed  or  wounded,  they  lost  only  15,000, 
thanks  to  their  superiority  in  cavalry. 

To  THE  EMPEROR  OF  AUSTRIA. 

"  PEGAU,  4tk  May,  1813. 
"Knowing  the   interest   which   your   Majesty  takes   in 
every  piece  of  good  fortune  which  befalls  to  me,  I  hasten 
to  announce  the  victory  which  it  has  pleased  Providence  to 
VOL.  ill.  R 


242     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

grant  to  my  arms  in  the  field  of  Lutzen.  Although  I 
wished  to  direct  all  the  movements  of  my  army  myself, 
and  was  sometimes  exposed  to  the  fire  of  grape-shot,  yet 
I  met  with  no  accident,  and,  thank  Heaven,  I  enjoy  the 
best  health. 

"  I  daily  receive  news  from  the  Empress,  with  whom  I 
continue  to  be  extremely  satisfied.  To-day  she  is  my 
prime  minister,  and  she  acquits  herself  to  my  entire 
satisfaction.  .  .  .  "NAPOLEON." 

To  GENERAL  CAULAINCOURT. 

"  Dresden,  Zth  May,  1813. 

"  Send  the  inclosed  letter  to  M.  de  Serra  at  Prague. 

"  The  Emperor  has  arrived  at  Dresden.  .  .  .  To-morrow 
the  army  will  pass  the  river  in  pursuit  of  the  enemy 
Inclosed  you  will  find  a  letter  on  the  subject  of  the 
conduct  of  General  Thielman.  .  .  .  You  must  tell  M. 
Senft  that  to  offend  against  the  principles  of  the  Con- 
federation is  to  declare  war  against  the  Emperor ;  that 
the  Emperor  pities  the  King  ;  that  the  interest  and 
friendship  which  the  Emperor  bears  the  King  have  made 
him  patient  up  to  the  present,  but  that  circumstances  are 
so  pressing  now  that  you  can  accord  the  Court  of  Saxony 
only  six  hours  to  give  satisfaction  on  the  following. points : 
1st.  To  order  General  Thielman  to  leave  Torgau  with  his 
troops.  .  .  .  2nd.  To  order  all  his  cavalry  to  Dresden  with- 
out delay.  3rd.  The  King  must  declare  in  a  letter  to  the 
Emperor  that  he  remains  a  member  of  the  Confederation 
.  .  .  that  he  has  no  treaty  with  any  power  contrary  to  the 
principles  of  the  Confederation.  .  .  . 

"  Unless  you  obtain  satisfaction  upon  these  three  points 
you  must  inform  the  King  that  I  shall  declare  him  a  felon, 
beyond  the  pale  of  my  protection,  and  that  he  has 
consequently  ceased  to  reign.  ..." 

This  vigorous  way  of  acting  was  eminently  successful 
for  the  moment.     In  a  letter  to  Marshal  Ney,  dated  the 


THE   KING   OF    SAXONY.  243 

10th  May,  the  Emperor  said :  "  The  Saxon  General 
Gersdorf  has  just  brought  me  a  letter  from  the  king, 
with  an  order  placing  Torgau  and  General  Thielman  at 
my  disposal.1  The  Saxon  cavalry  is  arriving  from  Prague, 
and  will  be  here  in  three  days  ;  I  think  that  the  king 
himself  will  arrive  before  them.  ..." 

To  PRINCE  CAMBACERES. 

"Dresden,  10th  May,  1813. 
"  We  have  arrived  at  Dresden  ;  I   am  master  of  both 
banks  and  of  the  strong  places  on  the  Elbe.    It  is  probable 
that  I  shall  march  into  Silesia. 

"  Napoleon." 

After  having  been  long  in  disgrace,  and  having  nearly 
lost  his  head,  Fouche  now  received  the  following  letter  : — 

"Dresden,  10th  May,  1813. 

"  I  have  informed  you  of  my  intention,  as  soon  as  I 
enter  the  states  of  the  King  of  Prussia  to  place  you  at 
the  head  of  the  government  of  that  country.  The  victory 
of  Lutzen  having  allowed  me  to  drive  the  enemy  behind 
the  Elbe  ...  I  wish  you  to  come  to  Dresden  secretly 
without  losing  a  minute.  .  .  .  The  Regent  (Marie  Louise) 
alone  knows  anything  of  your  departure.  I  am  very  glad 
to  have  the  opportunity  of  receiving  from  you  new  services 
and  new  proofs  of  your  attachment. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  the  KING  OF  SAXONY. 

"  Dresden,  12th  May,  1813. 
"  I  learn  with  pleasure  that  your  Majesty  is  about  to 
arrive  at    Dresden.  ...  I   experience  sincere  pleasure  in 

1  General  Thielman  had  refused  to  hand  Torgau  over  to  the  French, 
and  when  he  at  last  did  so  on  the  positive  orders  of  the  King  he 
declined  to  serve  any  longer  under  Napoleon. 

R   2 


244  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

being  able  to  reinstal  you  in  your  capital,  and  to  restore 
you  your  states  from  which  Providence  designed  me  to 
drive  your  enemies.  .  .  .  "NAPOLEON." 

The  next  day,  in  a  letter  to  Marshal  Ney,  the  Emperor 
wrote  :  "  The  King  of  Saxony  made  his  triumphal  entry 
yesterday  into  Dresden  ;  he  is  to  dine  with  me  to-day." 

Several  letters  show  that  Napoleon  at  this  moment  was 
ignorant  of  the  position  of  the  allies.  He  had  not  been 
able  to  ascertain  whether  the  Prussians  had  fallen  back 
upon  Breslau  or  upon  Berlin.  He  informed  Marshal  Ney 
that — "  The  enemy  commit  all  kinds  of  horrors,  burning 
villages  as  they  did  in  Russia  :  this  will  be  a  good  lesson 
for  the  Germans."  And,  writing  to  M.  Maret,  his  Majesty 
complained  of  the  conduct  of  the  ambassador  of  the  King 
of  Naples  at  Vienna.  He  had  soon  more  reasons  to  doubt 
the  fidelity  of  his  brother-in-law. 

We  now  come  to  a  curious  episode  in  the  campaign  of 
1813 — an  attempt  oh  the  part  of  Napoleon  to  negotiate 
separately  with  Russia. 

INSTRUCTIONS  FOR  GENERAL  CAULAINCOURT. 
( Who  was  sent  to  the  Emperor  of  Russia?) 
" .  .  .  On  learning  the  Views  of  the  Emperor  of  Russia 
we  shall  come  to  an  understanding.  Moreover,  it  is  my 
intention  to  make  him  a  bridge  of  gold  in  order  to  deliver 
him  from  the  intrigues  of  Metternich.  If  sacrifices  must 
be  made,  I  prefer  making  them  for  the  advantage  of  the 
Emperor  Alexander,  who  fights  me  fairly,  and  for  the 
King  of  Prussia,  than  for  the  benefit  of  Austria,  who  has 
betrayed  the  alliance,  and  who,  under  the  guise  of 
mediator,  wishes  to  assume  the  right  of  disposing  of 
everything."  After  dilating  on  the  advantages  which 
Russia  would  reap  by  coming  to  an  arrangement,  the 
instructions  went  on  to  say — "  Russia  cannot  have  for- 
gotten the  march  of  the  Austrian  contingent  during  the 
recent  campaign,  and  the  Emperor  Alexander  should  feel 


TORTUOUS    POLICY.  245 

flattered  at  the  idea  of  being  able  to  make  peace  without 
the  aid  of  that  Power,  which,  after  having  shown  itself  so 
little  friendly  during  difficulties,  is  now  induced  by  per- 
sonal interest  to  violate  its  recent  alliance  with  France. 
Lastly,  the  Emperor  Alexander  should  joyfully  avail 
himself  of  this  opportunity  of  revenging  himself  openly 
for  the  foolish  diversion  of  the  Austrians  in  Russia.  ..." 
Having  penned  these  instructions,  his  Majesty  wrote 
two  letters  : — 

To  THE  EMPEROR  OF  AUSTRIA. 

"Dresden,  ijthMay,  1813. 

"Sir,  my  Brother,  and  very  dear  Father-in- 
Law, — What  your  Majesty  said  in  your  letter  on  the 
subject  of  the  interest  you  bear  me  greatly  affected  me. 
I  deserve  this  in  consequence  of  my  loyal  feeling  towards 
you.  If  your  Majesty  takes  any  interest  in  rny  welfare, 
you  should  be  careful  of  my  honour.  I  have  decided  to 
die,  if  necessary,  at  the  head  of  all  that  is  generous  in 
France,  sooner  than  become  the  laughing-stock  of  the 
English,  and  to  allow  my  enemies  to  triumph.  Let  your 
Majesty  think  of  the  future ;  do  not  destroy  the  fruit  of 
three  years  of  friendship  and  renew  the  plots  of  the  past, 
which  will  plunge  Europe  into  the  convulsions  of  war ;  do 
not  sacrifice  for  miserable  considerations  the  welfare  of 
our  generation,  that  of  your  existence,  and  the  true 
interests  of  your  subjects,  why  should  I  not  add,  of  a 
part    of   your    family,    which    is    sincerely   attached    to 

y°u-  •  •  ■  "  Napoleon." 

Count  Bubna  having  arrived  to  negotiate,  Napoleon 
wrote — "I  have  received  your  Majesty's  letter.  I  have 
conversed  with  Count  Bubna  for  several  hours.  I  have 
told  him  all  that  I  think  frankly  and  truly.  I  desire  peace 
more  than  any  one.  I  consent  to  the  opening  of  negotia- 
tions for  a  general  peace  and  the  assembling  of  a  congress. 
As  soon   as  I   know    that  England,  Russia,    Prussia,  and 


246  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

the  allies  have  accepted  this  proposition,  I  shall  hasten  to 
send  a  representative  to  the  Congress.  I  shall  even  make 
no  objection  to  admitting  plenipotentiaries  from  the  insur- 
gents in  Spain.  If  Russia,  Prussia,  and  the  other  belligerents 
wish  to  treat  without  England,  I  shall  consent.  .  .  .  Your 
Majesty  will  see  by  this  language,  which  is  the  same  that 
I  have  held  for  the  last  six  months,  my  desire  to  spare  the 
effusion  of  human  blood,  and  to  put  an  end  to  the  ills 
which  afflict  so  many  nations." 

When  Caulaincourt  arrived  to  treat  secretly  with  the 
Czar  he  was  received  by  Alexander  in  presence  of  the 
King  of  Prussia,  and  of  the  ambassadors  of  England 
Prussia,  and  Austria. 

No  letters  seem  to  have  been  written  by  Napoleon  on 
the  20th  and  21st  May.  Upon  those  two  days  he  was 
busy  fighting  a  sanguinary  battle  with  the  allies  at 
Bautzen.  As  at  Lutzen,  the  Russians  and  Prussians, 
greatly  outnumbered,  after  inflicting  terrible  losses  on  the 
French,  fell  back  unmolested,  thanks  to  their  cavalry. 

To  THE  EMPEROR  OF  AUSTRIA. 

"WURCHEN,  12nd  May,  1813.  9  P.M. 
"  I  delivered  battle  to  the  Russian  and  Prussian  army, 
intrenched  in  the  camps  of  Bautzen  and  of  Kochkirch, 
on  the  20th  and  the  21st.  Providence  granted  me  the 
victory.  I  hasten  to  inform  your  Majesty  that  my  health 
is  excellent,  counting  upon  the  interest  you  bear  me. 

"  Napoleon." 

In  the  bulletin  of  the  24th,  giving  an  account  of  Lutzen 
and  Bautzen,  the  death  of  Duroc,  Due  de  Frioul,  who  fell 
on  the  evening  of  the  22nd,  is  thus  described.  He  was 
talking  with  Marshal  Mortier  and  General  Kirgener  when 
a  cannon  ball  shaved  the  marshal,  killed  the  general  stone 
dead,  and  mortally  wounded  Duroc.  "As  soon  as  the 
guards  were  posted,"  says  the  bulletin,  "  the  Emperor  went 
to    visit    the    Due  de  Frioul,   who   showed    the   greatest 


DEATH    OF    DUROC.  247 

sang  froid.  The  Duke  squeezed  the  Emperor's  hand  and 
carried  it  to  his  lips.  'All  my  life,'  he  said,  'has  been 
devoted  to  your  service,  and  I  regret  it  merely  because  I 
shall  no  longer  be  able  to  be  of  use  to  you.'  '  Duroc,'  said  the 
Emperor,  '  there  is  another  life  !  It  is  there  that  you  will 
wait  for  me,  and  where  we  shall  meet  some  day.'  'Yes, 
sire  ;  but  it  will  be  in  thirty  years,  when  you  have  triumphed 
over  your  enemies,  and  realised  all  the  hopes  of  your 
country.  ...  I  have  lived  an  honest  man  ;  I  have  nothing 
to  reproach  myself  with.  I  leave  a  daughter.  Your 
Majesty  will  be  a  father  to  her.' 

"  The  Emperor,  pressing  the  right  hand  of  the  Grand 
Marshal,  remained  silent  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  his  head 
supported  by  his  left  hand.  The  Grand  Marshal  was  the 
first  to  break  silence.  '  Ah,  Sire  !  go  away  ;  this  sight 
affects  you.'  The  Emperor,  leaning  upon  Marshal  Soult 
and  General  Caulaincourt,  left  the  Due  de  Frioul  without 
being  able  to  utter  anything  but  these  words — 'Adieu, 
then,  my  friend  ! '  The  Emperor  retired  to  his  tent  and 
received  no  one  for  the  rest  of  the  night." 

On  the  25th  May  the  Emperor  wrote  to  the  King  of 
Saxony,  saying,  among  other  things,  that  Oudinot  was 
marching  upon  Berlin,  that  Denmark  had  rejected  all  the 
offers  of  the  allies,  and  complaining  that  General  Thielman, 
who  had  lately  commanded  at  Torgau,  had  gone  over 
to  the  enemy. 

To  PRINCE  CAMBACERES. 

"  Rosnig,  yoth  May,  181 3. 

"  I  am  sorry  that  you  did  not  advise  the  Empress  to 
pardon  the  man  condemned  to  death.  You  acted  too 
much  like  a  magistrate  in  that  affair.  .  .  .  Take  the  first 
opportunity  of  making  the  Empress  accord  one  or  two 
pardons  on  her  own  initiative.  This  can  be  done  without 
much  harm  to  justice,  and  it  will  have  a  good  effect  upon 
public  opinion.  «  Napoleon." 


248  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  M.  MARET. 

"  Neumarkt,  31st  May,  1813. 
"  The   Swedish    troops  having  entered    Hamburg,  it  is 
right  that  you   should  at  once  send  me  a   declaration  of 
war  against  Sweden. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"  Neumarkt,  31st  May,  1813. 

"  The   question   asked   by   General    Csesar   Berthier  as 

to   the  conduct    he  should   pursue  with  regard   to  Queen 

Caroline  of  Sicily  is  probably  an  idle  one.     However,  you 

should  reply  that  in  the  event  of  such  a  case  occurring 

he  should  treat  her  with  the  honours  due  to  her  rank,  and 

with    the    greatest    possible  consideration  ;    this    for   two 

reasons — because  she  is  the  grandmother  of  the  Empress, 

and  especially  as  an  unfortunate  queen,  persecuted  by  the 

English} 

"  Napoleon." 

To  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"Neumarkt,  2nd  June,  18 13. 
"  You  will  see  by  the  Moniteur  that  negotiations  for  an 
armistice  are  going  on.  It  will  probably  be  signed  to- 
morrow or  the  day  after.  This  armistice  interferes  with 
the  course  of  my  victories.  I  decided  upon  it  for  two 
reasons  :  my  want  of  cavalry,  which  prevents  me  from 
dealing  decisive  blows,  and  the  hostile  attitude  of  Austria. 
That  court,  under  the  most  amiable,  the  most  tender,  and,  I 
may  say,  the  most  sentimental  pretences,  desires  nothing 
less  than  to  force  me,  through  fear  of  its  army  con- 
centrated at  Prague,  to  restore  Dalmatia  and  Istria.  It 
also  demands  the  left  bank  of  the  Inn,  the  Salzburg 
country,  and  half  the  Grand  Duchy  of  Warsaw,  the  other 
half  being  given  to  Prussia  and  Russia.     Austria  hopes  to 

1  This   was   the   Queen   of    Naples,   driven   from   her  throne    by 
Napoleon,  and  replaced  first  by  Joseph  and  then  by  Murat. 


AN    ARMISTICE    SIGNED.  249 

reap  these  advantages  by  the  mere  presence  of  100,000 
men  and  without  hostilities.  .  .  .  Redouble  your  efforts  ; 
see  that  artillery,  cavalry,  and  infantry  are  ready  to  march 
as  I  have  ordered.  If  I  can,  I  will  wait  until  September, 
in  order  to  strike  heavy  blows.  I  wish  to  be  in  a  position 
to  crush  my  enemies.    .    .    . 

"  Napoleon." 

Writing  on  the  same  day  to  Prince  Eugene  the 
Emperor  complained  bitterly  of  the  insolence  and  the 
perfidy  of  the  court  of  Vienna. 

The  armistice  was  signed  on  the  2nd  June,  and  on 
the  3rd  the  Emperor  wrote  to  General  Caulaincourt,  his 
plenipotentiary,  a  letter  in  which  he  said  : — 

"  The  fact  cannot  be  disguised  that  this  armistice,  as 
proposed  in  my  ultimatum,  is  not  honourable  for  me.  .  .  . 
It  is  I  who  abandon  everything ;  the  enemy  nothing.  .  .  . 
Does  the  enemy  wish  to -humiliate  me  by  driving  me  out 
of  a  town  (Breslau),  which  fell  into  my  hands  after  a  battle, 
by  means  of  an  armistice  ?  .  .  .  .  Tell  the  plenipoten- 
tiaries, in  breaking  off  negotiations,  that  my  love  of  peace 
alone  induced  me  to  consent  to  a  disadvantageous  armis- 
tice ;  that  it  was  through  pure  cajolerie  that  I  consented  to 
abandon  the  capital  of  Silesia ;  that  before  a  week  I  shall 
be  in  Berlin.  .  .  .  Tell  them  that  they  will  be  beaten  in 
the  next  battle,  that  I  shall  remain  master  of  Breslau  and 
of  Berlin 

After  insisting  for  some  time  that  the  Oder  should  form 
the  line  of  demarcation  between  the  two  armies,  and  that 
he  would  not  abandon  Breslau,  Napoleon  consented  to 
yield  on  both  points,  and  ratified  the  armistice.  The 
Emperor  at  once  sent  a  telegram  to  the  Empress  Regent, 
saying : — 

"  An  armistice  of  two  months,  during  which  negotia- 
tions for  peace  will  be  carried  on,  was  concluded  the 
4th  June  between  the  two  armies." 


250  THE    CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  MARIE  LOUISE,  Empress-Queen  and  Regent. 

"  Haynan,  7th  June,  1813. 

"  Madame  and  dear  Friend, — I  have  received  your 
letter  in  which  you  inform  me  that  you  received  the  arch- 
chancellor  while  in  bed.  I  beg  that  under  no  circumstance 
will  you  receive,  no  matter  who,  when  in  bed.  That  is 
permitted  only  to  persons  over  thirty  years  of  age. 

"  Napoleon." 

to  prince  cambaceres. 

"Haynan,  7th  June,  1813. 

"  I  do  not  approve  of  the  Empress  going  to  Notre  Dame. 
Those  great  pomps  should  be  rare,  without  that  they 
become  trivial.  If  the  Empress  were  to  go  to  Notre  Dame 
for  the  victory  of  Wurschen,  she  would  be  obliged  to  go 
there  for  all  the  other  victories.  As  it  was  right  to  go 
there  after  after  the  victory  of  Lutzen,  which  was  unex- 
pected, and  which  changed  the  position  of  affairs,  so,  this 
time,  it  would  be  useless. 

"  I  desire  that  in  general  the  Te  Deum  be  sung  on  the 
Sunday  immediately  following  the  reception  of  the  news. 
Delay  is  inconvenient ;  war  has  its  chances.  It  would  be 
ridiculous  to  sing  a  Te  Deum  for  a  victory  when,  in  the 
interval,  the  news  of  a  defeat  had  arrived. 

"  Napoleon." 


To  THE  COMTESSE  DE  MONTESQUIOU. 

"  Haynan,  7th  June,  1813. 
"  I  see  with  pleasure  that  my  son  grows  and  continues 
to  give  hopes.     I  can  but  express  my  satisfaction  for  all 
the  care  you  bestow  upon  him. 

"  The  death  of  the  Due  de  Frioul  pained  me.  This  was 
the  only  time  during  twenty  years  that  he  did  not  guess 
what  would  please  me. 

"  Napoleon." 


ACTORS  FOR  DRESDEN.  25 1 

To  PRINCE  CAMBACERES. 

"Bunzlau,  8M  June,  18 13. 
"  Caulaincourt  has  written  for  some  comedians  for 
Dresden.  I  desire  that  this  should  make  a  noise  in  Paris, 
as  it  will  have  a  good  effect  in  London  and  in  Spain  by- 
making  it  believed  that  we  are  amusing  ourselves  at 
Dresden.  It  is  not  the  season  for  playing,  and  you  must 
therefore  send  only  six  or  seven  actors  at  the  most,  well 
selected,  and  capable  of  performing  six  or  seven  pieces. 
You  must  also  let  them  travel  without  fuss,  and  without 
making  any  embarras  on  the  road.  You  must  none  the 
less  allow  demands  to  be  made  in  Paris  as  if  the  whole 
'tragedy'  were  about  to  start,  and  let  people  gossip  on 
the  subject.  Remusat  will  choose  between  the  Comidie 
Franqaise  and  the  company  of  the  Feydeau  theatre. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  M.  MELZI,  Due  DE  Lodi. 

"Dresden,  \ilh  June,  1813. 

"  You  can  write  to  your  nephew  through  the  Minister  of 
Police  that  if  he  will  give  his  word  of  honour  not  to  leave 
you  I  will  have  him  liberated  at  once.  ...  • 

"  Napoleon." 

General  Savary  had  evidently  insisted  that  the  good 
people  of  Paris  were  anxious  to  see  peace  concluded,  for 
the  Emperor  wrote  thus  to  his  Minister  of  Police  on  the 
13th  June: —  * 

"  The  tone  of  your  correspondence  does  not  please  me  ; 
you  bore  me  continually  about  the  necessity  of  peace.  I 
know  the  situation  of  my  Empire  better  than  you  do  ;  no 
one  is  more  interested  in  concluding  peace  than  myself, 
but  I  shall  not  make  a  dishonourable  peace  or  one  that 
would  see  us  at  war  again  in  six  months.  .  .  These  things 
do  not  concern  you.  .  .  ." 


252  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

TO  THE  KING  OF  DENMARK. 

"  Dresden,  iStk  June,  1813. 

"  I  have  seen  with  pleasure  that  amidst  the  vicissitudes  of 
political  events  the  feelings  of  your  Majesty  have  remained 
unchangeable.  The  evil  intentions  of  Sweden  towards  me 
are  the  result  of  my  constant  refusal  to  adhere  to  the 
spoliation  of  Norway.  When  recent  unfortunate  events 
obliged  my  troops  to  repass  the  Elbe  (retreat  from  Moscow), 
and  your  Majesty  informed  me  of  your  desire  to  treat  with 
England,  I  consented  ;  my  alliance  would  have  been 
baneful,  and  I  was  the  first  to  desire  that  everything 
should  be  done  in  order  to  insure  the  integrity  of  your 
states.  .  .  .  But  events  went  further.  The  troops  of  your 
Majesty  invaded  French  territory.  Since  then  explana- 
tions have  been  given  which  have  quite  satisfied  me.  Your 
Majesty  repaired  everything  by  placing  your  troops  at  the 
disposal  of  my  generals. 

"  However,  your  Majesty  must  feel  that  the  relations 
between  states  are  regulated  by  treaty,  that  I  cannot  con- 
sider the  last  treaty  as  existing,  because  your  Majesty  has 
since  attempted  negotiations  with  England  and  with  Russia, 
and  because  your  troops  have  entered  my  territory.  I 
think  that  it  would  be  well,  therefore,  to  negotiate  a  treaty 
either  at  Dresden  or  at  Copenhagen  based  on  the  relations 
which  at  present  exist  between  the  two  states.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 


An  extract  from  the  Morning  Chronicle,  showing  that 
Murat  at  this  moment  meditated  treason,  created  an 
unpleasant  sensation  in  France.  On  the  22nd  June  the 
Emperor  directed  his  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs  to  inform 
the  French  ambassador  at  Naples  that  if  an  embargo  were 
laid  upon  any  of  his  corsairs,  or  if  his  flag  were  in  any  way 
degraded,  he  was  to  leave  the  city.  "  Before  leaving," 
added  Napoleon,"  he  must  hand  a  note  to  the  Neapolitan 


INTERVIEW  WITH  METTERNICH.        253 

cabinet,  saying  that  I  am  acquainted  with  all  its  intrigues, 
and  that  it  shall  repent  some  day  of  the  slightest  insult 
to  my  flag.  Tell  Baron  Durand  that  I  am  not  satisfied 
with  his  want  of  dignity  and  energy." 

The  Emperor  at  this  date  accorded  an  audience  to 
Prince  Metternich,  Baron  Fain's  version  of  which  is  given 
in  The  Correspondence.     It  runs  thus  : — 

" '  You  here,  Metternich  ! '  said  Napoleon  oh  seeing  him  ; 
'you  are  welcome.  But  if  you  wish  for  peace  why  do  you 
come  so  late  (23rd  of  June,  181 3)  ?  We  have  already  lost 
a  month,  and  your  mediation,  in  consequence  of  this  in- 
activity, is  almost  an  act  of  hostility.  It  appears  that  it 
no  longer  suits  you  to  guarantee  the  integrity  of  the 
French  Empire.  But  why  not  tell  me  this  sooner  ?  Why 
not  have  informed  me  of  this  on  my  return  from  Russia  ? 
I  should  then  have  had  time  to  modify  all  my  plans,  and 
perhaps  should  not  have  commenced  this  campaign.  In 
allowing  me  to  exhaust  myself  by  making  new  efforts  you 
counted,  no  doubt,  that  events  would  have  marched  more 
rapidly.  Those  efforts  have  been  crowned  by  victory.  I 
gain  two  battles ;  my  enemies  are  weakened  and  recover 
from  their  illusions.  Suddenly  you  glide  in  amongst 
them ;  you  come  to  speak  to  me  of  an  armistice  and 
meditation ;  you  speak  to  them  of  an  alliance,  and  every-- 
thing  is  thrown  into  confusion.  Without  your  baneful  inter- 
vention peace  between  the  allies  and  myself  would  have 
been  concluded  by  this.  .  .  Admit  that  ever  since  Austria 
has  assumed  the  office  of  mediator  she  is  no  longer  on  my 
side.  You  were  about  to  declare  war  when  the  victory  of 
Lutzen  stopped  you  ;  seeing  that  I  was  still  redoubtable 
you  felt  it  necessary  to  augment  your  forces  ;  you  wished 
to  gain  time.  To-day  you  have  200,000  men  ready  ; 
Schwartzenburg  commands  them ;  he  is  concentrating 
them  at  this  moment  behind  the  curtain  of  the  Bohemian 
mountains,  and  because  you  think  yourself  in  a  position  to 
dictate,  you  come  to  seek  me.  I  have  divined  your  in- 
tention, Metternich.     Your  Cabinet  desires  to  increase  my 


254     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

embarrassments  and  profit  by  them  in  order  to  recover  what 
it  has  lost.  The  great  question  for  you  is  to  know  if  you 
can  plunder  without  fighting  me,  or  if  you  must  throw 
yourself  into  the  ranks  .of  my  enemies.  Well !  let  us 
treat.  What  do  you  require  ? '  To  this  sharp  attack 
Metternich  replied  with  set  diplomatic  phrase,  and  talked 
about  a  spirit  of  moderation,  the  respect  which  should  be 
entertained  for  independent  states,  and  some  guarantee 
that  peace  would  not  be  disturbed.  '  Speak  more  clearly,' 
said  the  Emperor,  interrupting  him,  '  but  remember  that  I 
am  an  old  soldier.  I  offered  you  Illyria  to  remain  neutral ; 
will  that  suffice  you  ?  My  army  is  quite  strong  enough  to 
deal  with  the  Russians  and  Prussians,  and  your  neutrality 
is  all  I  ask.'  'Ah !  sire,'  returned  Metternich,  '  why  will 
your  Majesty  remain  alone  in  this  struggle  ?  Why  not  double 
your  forces  ?  You  can,  sire,  for  it  depends  upon  you  to 
dispose  entirely  of  ours.  We  can  no  longer  remain  neuter  ; 
we  must  be  with  you  or  against  you.'  At  these  words  the 
conversation  grew  calmer,  and  the  Emperor  took  Prince 
Metternich  into  the  card-room.  After  some  time  had 
elapsed  the  Emperor's  voice  assumed  a  louder  tone. 
'  What !  not  only  Illyria,  but  half  .of  Italy,  the  return  of 
the  Pope  to  Rome!  Poland,  and  the  abandonment  of 
•Spain !  and  Holland  and  the  Confederation  of  the  Rhine 
and  Switzerland.  And  this  is  the  spirit  of  moderation 
which  animates  you  !  You  think  only  of  profiting  by 
every  chance ;  you  carry  your  alliance  from  camp  to 
camp,  and  you  talk  to  me  of  respect  for  the  rights  of 
independent  states !  You  desire  Italy,  Russia,  Poland, 
Sweden,  Norway,  Prussia,  Saxony,  and  England,  Holland, 
and  Belgium.  What  you  aspire  to  is  the  dismemberment 
of  the  French  Empire.  And  I,  docile  to  your  policy,  must 
evacuate  Europe,  half  of  which  I  still  occupy,  must  lead 
back  my  legions  behind  the  ;  Rhine,  the  Alps,  and  the 
Pyrenees ;  must  hand  myself  over  like  a  fool  to  my 
enemies,  and  trust  to  the  generosity  of  the  conquered. 
And  this  when  my  standards  wave  at  the  mouths  of  the 


AUSTRIAN    PROPOSALS.  255 

Vistula  and  on  the  banks  of  the  Oder ;  when  my  triumph- 
ant army  is  at  the  gates  of  Berlin  and  Breslau,  and  when 
I  am  here  (at  Dresden)  at  the  head  of  300,000  men.  You 
wish  me  to  sign  such  conditions  as  these  without  striking 
a  blow  ?  This  pretension  is  an  outrage ;  and  it  is  my 
father-in-law  who  consents  to  this  project !  In  what 
attitude  does  he  wish  to  place  me  in  presence  of  the 
French  people  ?  He  makes  a  strange  mistake  df  he 
imagines  that  a  mutilated  throne  can  be  a  refuge  for  his 
daughter  and  his  grandson  !  Ah  !  Metternich,  how  much 
has  England  given  you  for  playing  this  role  against  me  ? ' 
At  these  words  Prince  Metternich  changed  colour ;  a 
profound  silence  ensued,  the  two  walked  rapidly  up  and 
down.  The  Emperor's  hat  had  fallen  on  the  floor ;  they 
passed  and  repassed  it  several  times.  Under  any  other 
circumstances  Metternich  would  have  handed  it  to  the 
Emperor  ;  his  Majesty  had  to  pick  it  up  himself.  Both 
were  some  time  recovering  their  temper.  Napoleon 
renewed  the  conversation,  and  in  dismissing  M.  de  Metter- 
nich took  care  to  tell  him  that  Illyria  was  not  the  only 
concession  he  would  make." 

To  THE  EMPEROR  OF  AUSTRIA. 

"Dresden,  30M  June,  181 3. 
"  Prince  Metternich  has  handed  me  your  Majesty's  letter. 
I  desire  peace.  If  the  Russians  show  themselves  as  mode- 
rate as  I  am  it  will  be  promptly  concluded.  If,  on  the 
contrary,  they  wish  to  force  concessions  from  me  which 
are  repugnant  to  my  honour  and  to  the  interests  of  my 
allies,  they  will  not  succeed.  Your  Majesty  knows  my 
feelings  towards  you.  I  hope  that  you  will  not  allow 
yourself  to  be  dragged  into  a  war  which  will  cause  the 
ruin  of  your  states  and  which  will  increase  the  misfortunes 

of  the  world.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  same  day,  in  a  letter  to  Admiral  Decres,  the 


256     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Emperor  talked  of  building  twelve  ships  of  the  line  in 
the  Elbe,  "  to  take  part  in  the  vast  plan  of  war  against 
England." 

To  MARSHAL  SOULT. 

"  Dresden,  1st  July,  181 3. 
"  Start  to-morrow  before  10  P.M.  You  must  travel 
incognito;  assuming  the  name  of  one  of  your  aides-de- 
camp. You  will  reach  Paris  on  the  4th.  .  .  .  Thence 
you  will  continue  your  road  in  order  to  assume  the  com- 
mand of  my  armies  in  Spain.  To  avoid  all  difficulties, 
I  have  appointed  you. my  lieutenant-general  commanding 
my  armies  in  Spain  and  on  the  Pyrenees.  .  .  .  You  must 
take  measures  to  re-establish  my  affairs  in  Spain,  and  to 
preserve  Pampeluna,  St.  Sebastian,  and  Pancoro.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

And  on  the  5th  July  the  Emperor  again  wrote  on  the 
subject  of  Spain  :  "  I  expect  news  from  the  army  with 
impatience.  ...  I  have  forbidden  the  King  of  Spain  to 
meddle  with  my  affairs.  I  suppose  that  Marshal  Soult 
will  send  Marshal  Jourdan  home.  Unless  the  losses  are 
more  considerable  than  have  been  represented  I  hope  that 
100,000  men  will  be  concentrated  on  the  Bidassoa,  and 
that  Marshal  Soult  will  deliver  Pampeluna  and  drive  the 
English  back  across  the  Ebro.  .  .  ." 

The  news  of  the  battle  of  Vittoria  reached  Napoleon 
and  the  allies  at  the  same  moment,  the  30th  June,  and 
was  hailed  with  very  different  feelings  in  the  two  camps. 
It  induced  Napoleon  to  listen  to  the  Austrian  proposals, 
and  it  decided  Austria  to  cast  her  lot  in  with  the  allies. 
Negotiations  were  not  at  once  broken  off,  but  it  soon 
became  clear  that  the  sword  of  Wellington  had  destroyed 
all  chance  of  peace  being  concluded  at  Prague.  Soult  at 
once  returned  to  Spain,  but  with  all  his  ability  he  was 
unable  to  resist  the  torrent  and  carry  out  the  orders  of 
his  master.     Soult  reached  his  post  on  the  13th  July. 


BATTLE    OF   VITTORIA.  257 

King  Joseph  having  written  an  account  of  the  battle 
of  Vittoria  to  General  Clarke,  in  which  he  said  that, 
attacked  by  forces  double  as  strong  as  his  own,  he  had 
retreated  upon  Salvatierra,  received  in  due  time  this 
answer :  "  It  will  be  painful  to  the  Emperor  to  know 
that  the  enemy  did  not  owe  their  success  to  superiority 
in  numbers,  but  rather  to  the  manner  in  which  the  forces 
were  handled.  The  organisation  and  strength  of  the 
Anglo-Portuguese  army  are  too  well  known  to  the 
Emperor  to  allow  him  to  have  any  doubt  upon  this 
subject.  Your  Majesty  disposed  of  four  armies,  or 
118,828  men.  Lord  Wellington  had  little  more  than 
half  that  number.  I  have  in  vain  searched  for  an  ex- 
planation of  that  phrase  in  your  letter  in  which  your 
Majesty  says  that  you  had  to  deal  with  double  your 
numbers."  Lord  Londonderry  says  of  Vittoria  :  "  Since 
the  commencement  of  the  war  the  allies  had  never  gained 
a  victory  so  complete  as  this  in  every  point  of  view.  .  .  . 
They  had  been  opposed  to  the  united  strength  of  the 
French  armies  and  had  totally  overthrown  them  ;  for,  with 
the  exception  of  one  body  of  15,000  under  Clausel  which 
did  not  come  up  to  the  Ebro,  and  another  of  which  Foy 
was  in  command,  every  disposable  soldier  belonging  to  the 
armies  of  the  south,  the  north,  and  of  Portugal  had  been 
brought  into  the  field."  The  allies  had  to  detach  7,000 
men  to  observe  Clausel,  they  were  much  inferior  to  the 
French  in  artillery,  and  the  French  occupied  a  very  strong 
position.  Both  Napoleon  and  Joseph  exaggerated.  The 
number  of  men  engaged  on  each  side  were  nearly  even. 

To  COMTE  BIGOT. 

"Dresden,  17th  July,  1813. 
"  The  Bishop  of  Nantes  was  the  most  enlightened  priest 
of  the  Empire,  the  most  distinguished  doctor  of  the 
Sorbonne ;  he  can  be  placed  alongside  of  the  most 
honoured  bishops  of  the  Gallican  Church.  No  one  was 
more  penetrated  with  the  true  spirit  of  the  Gospel  ;  no 
VOL.  III.  s 


258  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

one  knew  better  how  to  respect  the  rights  of  sovereigns, 
and  to  distinguish  the  rights  of  the  Church  from  the  mon- 
strous abuses  and  the  foolish  and  insane  maxims  of  the 
Court  of  Rome,  maxims  to-day  so  ridiculous,  which  have 
caused  so  much  blood  to  flow,  and  so  many  schisms  in 
days  of  ignorance.  If  all  the  theologians,  if  all  the  bishops, 
had  practised  the  spirit  of  religion  as  well,  and  had  showed 
as  much  intelligence  and  good  faith  as  he  did,  Luther, 
Calvin,  and  Henry  VIII.  would  not  have  formed  sects,  and 
the  whole  world  would  have  been  Catholic.  I  desire  that 
at  the  expense  of  the  imperial  treasury  a  monument  be 
erected  in  the  cathedral  of  Nantes  to  this  worthy  prelate. 

"Napoleon." 


On  the  19th  July  the  Emperor  informed  Marshal 
Davoust,  who  was  at  Hamburg,  that  he  had  concluded  a 
treaty  with  Denmark,  who  engaged  to  declare  war  against 
Russia,  Prussia,  and  Sweden,  as  soon  as  hostilities  were 
recommenced.  France  on  her  side  was  to  declare  war 
against  Sweden.  Denmark  was  to  furnish  a  contingent  of 
10,000  infantry,  2,500  cavalry,  and  40  guns;  also  to 
furnish  10,000  horses,  all  of  which  were  to  be  paid  for  by 
France. 

On  the  same  day  the  Emperor  wrote  to  Prince  Eugene 
saying  that  he  had  just  appointed  Fouche  governor  of  the 
Illyrian  provinces,  which,  under  the  circumstances,  was  a 
decided  insult  addressed  to  Austria,  which  did  not  declare 
herself  for  the  allies  until  the  27th.  At  that  date  she 
promised  to  join  the  coalition  with  200,000  men  on  the 
condition  of  receiving  subsidies  from  England,  who  had 
already  offered  her  1 0,000,000/. x 

1  Among  other  conditions  it  was  stipulated  that  Austria  should  be 
restored  to  the  position  she  occupied  before  the  treaty  of  Presburg, 
and  that  the  Pope  should  be  reinstated  in  Rome.  To  this  last  con- 
dition, of  course,  neither  Protestant  England,  Prussia,  and  Sweden,  nor 
schismatic  Russia,  had  any  objections  to  offer. 


DESIGNS    ON    BERLIN.  259 

To  ADMIRAL  DECRES. 

"  Mayence,  1st  August,  1813. 
"  If  I  were  at  Paris,  I  should  go  to  Cherbourg  to  be  pre- 
sent at  the  introduction  of  the  sea.  I  wish  the  Empress 
to  go  there,  and,  if  she  goes,  it  will  be  proper  for  you  to 
accompany  her.  .  .  .  The  marine  might  order  something 
to  do  honour  to  the  Empress  and  to  amuse  her.  It 
appears  to  me  that  the  preparations,  announced  before- 
hand, would  attract  a  great  many  persons.  .  .  . 

"Napoleon." 

On  the  4th  August  the  Emperor  wrote  this  laconic  note 
from  Dresden  to  Marshal  Ney — "  Nothing  is  doing  at  the 
Congress  of  Prague.  An  English  agent  is  meddling  with 
it.  They  will  arrive  at  no  result,  and  the  allies  intend 
denouncing  the  armistice  on  the  10th."  Similar  notices 
were  forwarded  to  Marshal  Davoust  and  other  commanders. 

To  ADMIRAL  DECRES. 

"Dresden,  stk  August,  18 13. 
"  All  the  news  which  reaches  me  from  England,  and 
which  I  read  in  the  English  papers,  proves  that  the 
English  are  constructing  frigates  of  a  calibre  equal  to 
those  of  America,  and  that  very  soon  our  frigates  will  be 
unable  to  show  themselves  anywhere.  I  beg  that  you  will 
follow  up  this  affair.  <<  NAPOLEON  " 

To  MARSHAL  DAVOUST. 

"  Dresden,  Zth  August,  1813. 
".  .  .  I  have  already  informed  you  that  Marshal 
Oudinot,  together  with  General  Vandamme,  General 
Regnier,  and  the  Due  de  Padoue  (Arrighi),  with  an  army 
of  80,000  men,  will  debouch  by  Luckau  and  Bayreuth  the 
day  the  rupture  of  the  armistice  takes  place,  so  as  to  be 
within  three  or  four  days  of  Berlin.  You  perceive  it  to  be 
necessary  that  all  the  forces  under  the  orders  of  the  Prince 
Royal    (Bernadotte),   to  wit,    the  Swedish  army,  the    3rd 

S  2 


260  THE    CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

Prussian  army  corps  commanded  by  Blilow,  the  auxiliary 
corps  in  the  pay  of  England,  and  the  Russian  division,  must 
not  he  allowed  to  march  in  their  entirety  against  the 
corps  which  is  to  debouch  by  Luckau.  .  .  . 

"  Austria  is  against  us.  That  power  has  300,000  men 
under  arms,  and  will  send  120,000  men  against  Dresden, 
20,000  against  Bavaria,  and  50,000  men  against  the 
viceroy.  .  .  .  "NAPOLEON." 

To  GENERAL  COMTE  DROUOT. 

"  Dresden,  gtk  August,  1813. 
"  It  is   necessary  for  you  to  present  me  a  project  for 
according  gratifications  to  the  actors  of  my  theatre,  and 
to    inform   the    Comte   de   Turenne    that   he   must,  take 
measures  to  send  the  actors  back  to  France  on  the  12th. 

"  Napoleon." 

to  prince  cambaceres. 

"Dresden,  gtk  August,  1813. 
"  I  have  written  a  line  to  the  Due  de  Rovigo  (Savary) 
on  the  present   condition  of  affairs  ;  see  him.     I  hope  to 
make    Austria    repent    her    foolish    aspirations   and  her 
infamous  treason.  .  .  .  "Napoleon." 

To  general  savary. 

"  Dresden,  gtk  August,  18 13. 
"  It  is  probable  that  by  the  12th  the  enemies  will  de- 
nounce the  armistice,  and  that  Austria  will  declare  war 
against  us.  That  Power  indulged  in  a  pleasant  dream  and 
thought  that  it  would  be  able  to  recover  all  that  it  had 
lost  during  the  last  twenty  years  ;  it  wished  even  to  get 
back  Venice.  ...  «  NAPOLEON." 

Two  days  later,  writing  to  General  Clarke,  the  Emperor 
said — "  Austria  seems  decided  to  declare  war  against  us  ; 
she  has  engagements  with  England,  and  has  entered  into 
all  the  views  of  that  Power." 


THE   AUSTRIAN    MANIFESTO.  26 1 

To  PRINCE  EUGEXE,  at  Udine. 

"Dresden,  \ith  August,  1813. 
"  The  enemies  denounced  the  armistice  yesterday  ;  hostili- 
ties  will  recommence  on    the   17th.      I   have   no  news  of 
Austria  having  declared  war,  but  I  suppose  that  I  shall 
receive  news  to  this  effect  during  the  day.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

And  before  the  day  was  over  instructions  were  for- 
warded to  Marshals  Ney  and  Marmont  saying  that 
Austria  had  declared  war.  Napoleon  said  that  he  in- 
tended to  take  up  a  position  between  Gcerlitz  and  Bautzen 
with  300,000  men,  to  see  what  the  Austrians  and  Russians 
were  after,  and  to  take  advantage  of  circumstances.  He 
asked  the  marshals  for  their  advice,  adding,  "  I  suppose 
that  all  this  must  finish  by  a  great  battle." 

The  Austrian  proclamation  in  which  war  was  declared 
was  looked  upon  by  most  persons  as  a  very  able  and 
unanswerable  document,  but  such  does  not  appear  to  have 
been  the  opinion  of  Napoleon. 

To  PRINCE  CAMBACERES. 

"  Dresden,  \ith  August,  1813. 

"The  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  will  have  informed  you 
that  Austria  has  declared  war.  Her  manifesto  is  insignifi- 
cant enough.  In  plain  French  it  simply  comes  to  this, 
that  she  considers  the  opportunity  a  good  one  to  recover 
her  influence. 

"  The  negotiations  of  Prague  did  not  take  place.  The 
plenipotentiaries  did  not  exchange  powers  or  even  see  each 
other.  The  affairs  of  Spain  have  raised  their  hopes ; 
English  intrigue  has  done  the  rest.  We  shall  fight  on 
the  17th. 

"  I  wish  the  Empress  to  make  her  journey  to  Cherbourg, 
and  not  to  know  anything  of  this  until  her  return.  Let 
her  start  on  the  1 7th. 


262     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

"  Call  a  Cabinet  Council  to  know  if  it  will  not  be  advisable 
to  raise  25,000  conscripts  in  the  departments  of  Languedoc 
and  Guienne,  and  to  send  them  to  Bayonne  to  reinforce 
the  armies  of  Spain.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

Writing  to  Davoust  the  next  day  the  Emperor  said — 
"  I  expect  the  King  of  Naples  to-morrow,  he  is  coming 
to  assume  a  command  in  the  army." 

To  the  KING  OF  WIRTEMBERG. 

"  Dresden,  13th  August,  1813. 

"  I  have  received  your  Majesty's  letter.  The  Congress  of 
Prague  never  seriously  existed.  It  was  a  means  chosen  by 
Austria  to  declare  herself.  The  plenipotentiaries  of  the 
various  Powers  never  saw  each  other;  those  of  Russia  and 
Prussia  remained  at  home  and  refused  to  see  the  French 
plenipotentiaries  ;  no  notes  were  exchanged,  nor  was  any 
agreement  arrived  at  with  regard  to  the  nature  of  the 
mediation.  At  last  on  the  12th  the  mediator  declared  war 
against  us.  His  manifesto,  although  moderate,  is  ridiculous. 
...  It  appears  that  Austria  has  had  serious  engagements 
with  the  allies  ever  since  February,  but  she  was  not  strong 
enough  to  declare  herself.  ...  In  her  manifesto  she 
employs  the  term  '  Empire  of  Germany.'  She  was  sounded 
to  know  if  abandoning  Poland  and  ceding  Illyria  would 
satisfy  her,  but  she  requires  Venice,  the  Inn,  Magdeburg) 
and  the  dissolution  of  the  Confederation  of  the  Rhine. .  . ' 

"  In  fact  the  Emperor  of  Austria  wished  for  war.  He 
wrote  to  me,  four  days  before,  the  most  amicable  letters  ; 
this  piece  of  dissimulation  was  very  useless,  for  I  knew 
what  the  Austrians  were  about  ever  since  Minsk,  where 
Prince  Schwartzenberg  received  orders  to  act  in  a  sense 
opposed  to  the  instructions  which  I  gave  him.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon. 

"  P.S.  Your  Majesty  will  do  well  to  arm  as  much  as 
possible." 


THE    RETURN    OF    MOREAU.  263 

To  PRINCE  CAMBACERES. 

"  Dresden,  \$th  August,  1813. 

"  The  declaration  of  war  on  the  part  of  Austria  forebodes 
some  big  battles  which  will  necessarily  cost  a  large  number 
of  men.  The  unfortunate  and  unexpected  turn  which 
affairs  have  taken  in  Spain  requires  that  the  safety  of  the 
frontier  should  be  guaranteed.  .  .  .  Draw  out  a  plan  for 
raising  60,000  men  in  the  good  departments  so  as  to  feed 
the  war  in  the  north.  .  .  .  Draw  attention  to  the  injustice 
of  the  pretensions  of  the  enemy  in  the  preamble.  .  .  .  As 
the  affairs  of  Spain  render  a  levy  in  Languedoc  and 
Guienne  urgent,  let  the  Regent  (Marie  Louise)  not  lose  a 
moment. 

"  General  Moreau  has  arrived  at  Berlin.  He  left  America 
before  hearing  the  news  of  the  battle  of  Lutzen,  and  when 
those  gentlemen  thought  that  they  were  going  to  enter 
France. 

"Napoleon." 

And  the  next  day  the  Emperor  informed  the  arch- 
chancellor  that — - 

"  A  portion  of  the  Russian  and  Prussian  army  has  entered 
Bohemia,  which  promises  well  for  the  campaign. 

"  Moreau  has  arrived  at  the  Russian  army. 

"Jomini,  chief  of  the  staff  to  Marshal  Ney,  has  deserted. 
He  it  is  who  has  published  some  volumes  on  the  campaigns, 
and  for  whom  the  Russians  have  long  been  bidding.  He 
yielded  to  corruption.  He  is  a  soldier  of  little  value ;  he 
is  a  writer,  however,  who  has  acquired  some  wholesome 
ideas  on  the  subject  of  war.     He  is  Swiss. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  M.  MARET. 

"Bautzen,  17  th  August,  1813. 
"  I  have  long  thought  that  Caulaincourt  and  de  Narbonne 
allow  themselves  to  be  taken   in  by  the  honeyed  style  of 


264     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Metternich.  The  stipulations  between  the  Austrians  and 
the  Russians  were  agreed  upon  last  February,  and  I  am 
persuaded  that  the  conditions  which  they  wished  to  impose 
upon  me  were  then  signed.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

In  a  reply  to  the  Austrian  manifesto,  dictated  by  the 
Emperor,  and  naturally  throwing  all  the  blame  of  the  fresh 
rupture  on  the  Court  of  Vienna,  Napoleon  made  use  of  such  ' 
language  as  this — "  Austria  having  declared  herself  in  a 
state  of  war,  the  position  is  simplified.  Europe  in  this 
way  is  nearer  peace  ;  there  is  one  complication  the  less." 

In  the  midst  of  graver  occupations  the  Emperor  found 
time  to  send  the  following  rating  to  the  Comte  de  Montes- 
quieu, his  Grand  Chamberlain  : — 

"  Lowenberg,  2yd  August,  1813. 
"I  was  much  displeased  to  learn  that  matters  were  so 
badly  managed  on  the  15th  August  (the  fete-day  of  his 
Majesty)  that  the  Empress  was  detained  for  a  considerable 
time  listening  to  bad  music,  and  that  consequently  the 
public  were  kept  two  hours  waiting  for  the  fireworks.  .  .  . 
It  would  have  been  very  simple,  at  the  hour  appointed  for 
the  fireworks,  to  have  informed  the  Empress,  who  would  at 
once  have  quitted  the  theatre.  There  would  have  been  no 
inconvenience  in  making  the  Empress  leave  the  theatre, 
where  she  was  stifled  with  heat,  a  little  sooner,  whereas 
there  was  a  great  inconvenience  in  causing  a  whole  popula- 
tion, accustomed  to  retire  at  9  P.M.,  to  wait. 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  23rd  the  Emperor  in  a  letter  to  Marshal  Gouiron 
St.  Cyr  said — "  If  the  enemy  have  effected  a  grand  move- 
ment on  Dresden,  I  shall  consider  it  a  most  fortunate  thing, 
for  it  will  enable  me  to  fight  a  battle  in  the  course  of  a 
few  days  which  will  decide  many  matters." 


vandamme's  orders.  265 

The  French  had  been  forced  to  fall  back  upon  Dresden, 
which  Napoleon  had  taken  the  precaution  of  having 
strongly  fortified,  and  where  he  was  about  to  take  his 
stand  at  the  head  of  130,000  men. 

On  the  25th  August,  3  p.m.,  the  Emperor  wrote  a  series 
of  instructions  to  Vandamme,  of  much  importance  to  re- 
mark, seeing  what  happened  afterwards.  The  Emperor 
was  at  Stolpen,  and  Vandamme  at  the  camp  at  Kcenig- 
stein,  from  whence  he  was  to  move  upon  the  Russians 
and  get  possession  of  the  important  position  of  Tceplitz, 
which  would  enable  the  Emperor  to  deal  the  allies  a  fatal 
blow,  and  to  cut  off  their  right  wing.  Among  other  orders 
sent  to  Vandamme,  his  Majesty  wrote — "  It  will  be  neces- 
sary for  you  to  drive  away  all  the  enemy's  vedettes  so  that 
they  may  not  see  what  you  are  about.  To-morrow,  at  day- 
break, as  soon  as  the  fog  has  cleared  away,  your  advanced 
guard  of  12,000  men  must  seize  upon  the  plateau  of 
Pirna.  ...  I  shall  have  the  heights  of  Pirna  occupied  by 
the  Young  Guard.  .  .  .  The  camp  of  Pirna  will  therefore 
be  occupied,  the  right  by  40,000  infantry  of  the  Guard,  and 
8,000  or  10,000  cavalry,  the  left  by  your  army  corps.  If 
you  find  that  you  can  fall  on  the  rear  of  the  enemy,  do  so, 
and  I  will  support  you  with  the  Young  Guard.  .  .  ." 


To  GENERAL  COMTE  VANDAMME. 

"Stolpen,  26th  August,  1813.     1  a.m. 

"  I  informed  you  of  my  intentions  yesterday.  The  whole 
army  of  the  enemy  presented  itself  before  Dresden  yester- 
day, and  Marshal  St.  Cyr  feared  that  he  would  be  attacked 
to-day ;  I  am  going  there.  ...  In  order  to  create  a 
diversion  you  should  debouch  as  soon  as  possible,  and  I 
hope  that  in  the  course  of  the  day  you  will  fall  upon 
the  enemy's  rear  and  annihilate  the  division  told  off  to 

observe  you. 

"  Napoleon.  " 


266  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  MARSHAL  KELLERMANN,  at  Mayence. 

"  Dresden,  vjth  August,  1813.  6  a.m. 
"  Inform  the  Empress  by  telegraph  that  I  have  gained 
a  great  victory  over  the  Austrian,  Russian,  and  Prussian 
armies,  commanded  by  the  Emperors  of  Austria  and 
Russia,  and  the  King  of  Prussia.  A  great  many  prisoners, 
standards,  and  guns  were  taken.  «  NAPOLEON." 

Writing  to  Berthier  in  the  evening,  the  Emperor  said — 
"  The  enemy  are  not  retreating,  and  regard  the  affair  of 
yesterday  merely  as  an  attack  which  has  failed ;  it  is 
doubtful  whether  they  will  retreat  to-night.  If  they  stand 
firm,  I  shall  turn  their  left  to-morrow.  The  King  of  Naples 
is  charged  with  this  operation." 

Napoleon  had  a  narrow  escape,  for  the  allies  might  have 
attacked  and  captured  Dresden  before  his  arrival.  Fortu- 
nately for  him,  Prince  Schwartzenberg  determined  to  wait 
for  Klenau's  corps,  and  lost  his  opportunity  of  dealing  the 
Emperor  a  severe  if  not  a  fatal  blow.  As  it  was,  Napoleon 
had  time  to  get  back  to  Dresden  and  to  repulse  the  attack 
of  the  allies,  who  suffered  heavily  in  men  and  in  prestige. 
Moreau,  who  was  struck  down  while  speaking  with  the 
Emperor  Alexander,  and  who  died  a  few  days  afterwards, 
wrote  thus  to  his  wife — 

"  My  Dearest, — At  the  battle  of  Dresden  I  had  both 
my  legs  carried  off  by  a  cannon  ball.  That  rascal  Bona- 
parte is  always  lucky.  Amputation  has  been  performed  as 
well  as  possible.  Although  the  army  has  made  a  retro- 
grade movement,  it  was  by  no  means  a  reverse,  but  a  plan 
to  draw  nearer  to  Blucher.  Excuse  my  scrawl.  I  love 
and  embrace  you  with  my  whole  heart." 

To  PRINCE  CAMBACE"RES. 

"  Dresden,  17th  August,  1813.     Evening. 
"  I  am  so  fatigued  and  so  busy  that  I  cannot  write  to 
you  at  length.     The  Due  de  Bassano  (Maret)  will  do  this. 
Affairs  are  going  on  well.  «  NAPOLEON." 


napoleon's  plans.  267 

On  the  29th,  orders  were  given  to  Murat,  Marmont,  and 
St.  Cyr  to  pursue  the  enemy.  Napoleon  wrote  to  Murat 
saying  that  Vandamme  had  attacked  the  Prince  of 
Wirtemberg  near  Hollendorf,  and  had  captured  four  guns 
and   1,900  prisoners,  all  Russians. 

On  the  20th  August,  Napoleon  dictated  some  notes  on 
the  general  situation  of  affairs,  and  the  advantages  and 
disadvantages  of  various  plans  which  suggested  themselves 
to  his  fertile  imagination.  After  discussing  the  idea  of 
going  to  Prague,  he  added — 

"  In  marching  upon  Berlin,  on  the  contrary,  I  shall  at 
once  obtain  a  great  result ;  I  shall  protect  my  line  from 
Hamburg  to  Dresden  ;  I  shall  be  in  the  centre  ;  in  five 
days  I  shall  be  able  to  be  at  the  extreme  points  of  my 
line ;  I  shall  disengage  Stettin  and  Custrin  ;  I  shall  be 
able  to  separate  the  Austrians  and  the  Russians;  during 
the  season  I  shall  be  able  to  live  at  Berlin  ;  potatoes,  the 
great  resources  of  that  city,  the  canals,  &c,  will  feed  me, 
and  I  shall  be  able  to  confine  the  war  to  where  it  is  at 
present.  The  war  with  Austria  will  have  no  other  incon- 
venience for  me  beyond  the  sacrifice  of  120,000  men  stand- 
ing on  the  defensive  between  Hof  and  Dresden.  .  .  .  The 
Russians  and  Prussians  in  Bohemia  will  force  Austria  to 
resume  the  offensive.  But  then  I  shall  have  taken  Berlin, 
revictualled  Stettin,  destroyed  the  Prussian  works,  and 
disorganised  the  landwehr.  Then,  if  Austria  recommences 
her  follies,  I  shall  go  to  Dresden  with  my  army,  and  a  great 
battle  will  terminate  the  campaign  and  the  war.  Lastly; 
in  my  position,  any  plan  where  I  am  not  myself  in  the 
centre  is  not  admissible.  Any  plan  which  removes  me  to 
a  distance  establishes  a  regular  war  in  which  the  superiority 
of  the  enemy  in  cavalry,  in  numbers,  and  even  in  generals, 
would  completely  ruin  me." 

The  opposing  forces  at  the  moment  the  Emperor  in- 
dulged in  such  pleasant  dreams  of  success  may  be  set  down 
thus — The  Grand  Army  of  Bohemia,  which  threatened 
Napoleon's  rear,  consisted  of  220,000  men,  of  which  40,000 


268     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

were  cavalry  and  700  guns.  The  allies  had  also  90,000  men 
in  Silesia,  and  80,000  in  the  north.  There  were  25,000 
Austrians  observing  26,000  Bavarians  under  Wrede,  and 
50,000  more  Austrians  operating  against  Prince  Eugene 
in  Italy.  Wellington  with  100,000  men  was  opposed  by 
Soult  with  an  equal  force  ;  the  allies  in  Catalonia,  and  the 
French  under  Marshal  Suchet,  were  45,000  each.  In  point 
of  numbers  actually  in  the  field  the  French  and  the  allies 
were  evenly  matched,  but  both  Russia  and  Austria  were 
raising  strong  reserves,  whereas  France  was  exhausted. 
The  French  in  Germany  had  the  advantage  of  being 
commanded  by  Napoleon.  The  allies,  on  the  other  hand, 
had  all  the  enthusiasm  on  their  side  —  an  enthusiasm 
heightened  by  a  desire  for  revenge,  and  the  knowledge 
that  the  impending  struggle  was  one  of  life  or  death. 


To  THE  KING  OF  WIRTEMBERG. 

"  Dresden,  30^  August,  1813. 

"...  The  allied  army,  commanded  by  the  Emperor 
Alexander,  has  been  entirely  defeated.  I  captured  30,000 
men,  40  or  50  guns,  30  standards,  &c.  The  enemy  aban- 
doned more  than  12,000  wounded  men  in  the  villages. 
The  Prince  of  Wirtemberg,  who  commanded  a  Russian 
corps,  has  been  beaten  by  General  Vandamme  who  is 
marching  upon  Tceplitz.  ...  It  is  difficult  to  imagine  the 
deplorable  condition  of  the  Austrian  army  ;  it  has  been  in 
the  field  only  a  few  days,  and  already  half  the  soldiers 
are  almost  naked  and  without  shoes.  .  .  .■  You  will  have 
seen  by  the  proclamation  of  Prince  Schwartzenberg  the 
pretentions  of  Austria.  ...  I  am  so  much  attached  to  the 
Emperor  Francis  that  I  pity  him  for  allowing  himself  to 
be  led  astray  by  such  chimeras.  I  am  highly  satisfied  with 
Dresden  and  all  the  Saxon  villages.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 


THE    DISASTER    OF    KULM.  269 

To  THE  KING  OF  NAPLES. 

"Dresden,  \st  September,  1813. 
"  Marshal  Macdonald  is  to-day  at  Gcerlitz.  Should  he 
continue  his  retrograde  movement,  it  will  be  necessary  for 
me  to  march  to  his  assistance.  .  .  .  The  misfortune  which 
has  happened  to  the  first  corps  is  one  which  could  not 
have  been  expected.  General  Vandamme,  who  appears  to 
have  killed  himself,  did  not  place  a  single  sentry  on  the 
mountains,  nor  a  reserve  anywhere.  .  .  .  However,  many 
men  belonging  to  his  corps  are  coming  in ;  nearly  all  the 
generals  have  arrived,  and  15,000  men  already,  so  that  I 
think  my  loss  will  not  exceed  from  4,000  to  5,000  men. 

"  Napoleon." 

The  misfortune  which  overtook  Vandamme's  corps  had 
an  immense  material  and  moral  effect  on  the  campaign. 
The  allies  had  been  sent  reeling  back  from  Dresden  ; 
they  feared  that  their  retreat  would  be  cut  off,  and  it 
seemed  as  if  the  imperial  eagles  would  once  more  be  seen 
at  Berlin.  We  have  seen  the  orders  sent  to  Vandamme 
on  the  25th  August.  On  the  strength  of  these  he  advanced 
towards  Pirna  with  27,000  foot,  3,000  horse,  and  80.  guns, 
and  fell  upon  Osterman's  corps,  17,000  strong,  which 
managed  to  cut  its  way  to  Peterswalde.  On  the  morning 
of  the  29th,  Vandamme,  counting  upon  the  support  of  the 
Young  Guard,  which  was  at  Pirna,  descended  from  the 
mountains  and  attacked  the  Russians  in  the  plain  between 
Kulm  and  Toeplitz.  Having  already  inflicted  considerable 
loss  on  the  foe,  being  two  against  one,  and  having  to  deal 
with  a  beaten  and  dejected  enemy,  Vandamme  attacked 
with  detachments  as  they  came  up,  and  this  over  con- 
fidence proved  fatal  to  him.  The  Russian  Guard  offered 
the  most  heroic  resistance,  and  this  gave  time  for  rein- 
forcements to  come  up  and  turn  the  tide  of  battle.  It  is 
probable  that  Vandamme  would  have  fallen  back  at  this 
juncture,  had  he  not  still  expected  the  co-operation  of  the 


27O     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Young  Guard,  which  was  lying  close  to  the  scene  of  action. 
He  now  found  himself  assailed  by  60,000  men  under 
Barclay  de  Tolly,  and,  when  he  thought  of  escaping  from 
his  difficulties,  he  found  General  Kleist  on  his  only  line  of 
retreat  with  18,000  men.  The  consequences  were  in- 
evitable ;  Vandamme's  corps  went  to  pieces,  and  he  him- 
self was  taken  prisoner.  It  is  calculated  that  in  the  two 
days'  fighting  the  French  lost  18,000  men,  60  guns,  and  2 
eagles. 

Napoleon  tried  to  shuffle  out  of  the  responsibility  of 
this  disaster,  and  to  throw  the  whole  blame  on  the  shoulders 
of  Vandamme.  The  fact  is  that  both  Vandamme  and 
Napoleon  committed  the  same  error:  they  both  underrated 
the  enemy.  The  Emperor  accused  his  lieutenant  (thinking 
him  dead)  of  having  disobeyed  orders.  He  wrote  a  letter 
to  Marshal  St.  Cyr — letter  omitted  from  The  Correspond- 
ence—in which  he  said — "  I  gave  Vandamme  positive 
orders  to  intrench  himself  on  the  heights  and  encamp  his 
corps  there,  and  to  send  nothing  but  detachments  down 
into  Bohemia  to  harass  the  enemy." 

We  have  seen  what  the  orders  of  the  Emperor  were- 
His  admirers  have  endeavoured  to  excuse  him  on  the 
ground  that  he  was  taken  suddenly  ill  on  the  28th,  and  in 
fact  he  appears  to  have  written  no  letters  or  despatches 
on  that  day.  It  was  thus  that  a  disaster  happened  which 
changed  the  whole  face  of  affairs. 

To  MARSHAL  BERTHIER. 

"Dresden,  2nd  September,  1813.  , 

"Write  thus  to  Marshal  Ney — 'We  have  just  received 
news  from  Marshal  Oudinot  who  deemed  fit  to  venture 
within  two  marches  of  Wittenberg.  The  result  of  this 
rash  movement  is  that  the  corps  of  General  Tauenstein 
and  a  strong  body  of  Cossacks  are  interfering  with  the 
communications  of  Marshal  Macdonald.  It  would  be 
difficult  for  any  one  to  have  less  brains  than  Marshal 
Oudinot.  .  .  .  You  must  march  so  as  to  be  atBayreuth  on 


THE    ENEMY    SLIP   AWAY.  2"J\ 

the  6th.  From  Bayreuth  you  will  be  only  three  days' march 
from  Berlin.  Communications  with  the  Emperor  will  then 
be  re-established,  and  Berlin  can  be  attacked  on  the  9th 
or  loth.  All  these  clouds  of  Cossacks  and  this  rabble  of 
bad  landwehr  infantry  will  retreat  from  all  sides  on  Berlin 
as  soon  as  they  learn  that  you   are   marching.'  " 

Ney  had  succeeded  Oudinot  in  the  command  of  the 
army  of  the  north,  the  latter  marshal  having  just  lost  the 
battle  of  Gross-Beeren,  which  cost  the  French  about  8,000 
men  and  26  guns,  and,  in  the  idea  of  the  Prussians,  saved 
Berlin.     Ney  did  no  better  than  Oudinot. 

On  the  3rd  September,  the  Emperor,  writing  to  Berthier 
said — "The  army  of  Marshal  Macdonald  is  rather  put 
out  of  countenance.  I  shall  be  there  at  break  of  day,  and 
shall  attack  the  enemy  and  put  them  to  flight." 

To  M.  MARET,  at  Dresden. 

"Bautzen,  6th  September,  181 2.  2  a.m. 
"  I  have  pursued  the  enemy  beyond  the  Neisse.  We 
enter  Gcerlitz  at  6  o'clock.  As  soon  as  the  enemy  learned 
that  I  was  with  the  army, -they  took  to  their  heels  and 
fled  in  all  directions.  There  was  no  means  of  catching 
them.  .  .  .  "Napoleon." 


t> 


And  his  Majesty  returned  to  Dresden  swearing  that  he 
would  not  go  out  to  fight  again. 

On  the  10th  September  the  Emperor,  in  a  letter  to 
Berthier,  made  this  passing  allusion  to  the  defeat  of  Ney 
atDennweitz — "Marshal  Ney  and  his  three  corps  sustained 
a  check  on  the  6th  while  concentrating  at  Torgau.  Marshal 
Macdonald  has  taken  up  his  position  in  front  of  Bautzen  ; 
Prince  Poniatowski  protects  his  right.  This  retreat  was 
not  necessary,  but  it  was  ordered  so  as  to  concentrate  our 
forces."  In  fact  Ney,  like  Oudinot,  was  surprised  on  the 
line  of  march,  and  lost  13,000  men  and  43  guns  ;  and  still 
more  did  this  victory  encourage  the  allies  in  the  belief 
that  the  charm  of  French  invincibility  was  broken. 


272     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

In  some  instructions  given  to  Captain  Caraman  on  the 
14th  September,  the  Emperor  said  : — 

"  General  Lauriston  has  been  attacked  and  has  suffered 
some  loss  ;  Prince  Poniatowski  was  attacked  near  Stolpen 
without  loss.  Marshal  Macdonald  did  not  foresee  these 
attacks,  and  allowed  himself  to  be  ill-treated.  .  .  .  Caraman 
must  remain  on  the  spot  all  day  to  see  what  happens,  and 
how  the  affair  with  Lauriston  finishes.  He  must  not 
conceal,  with  all  due  reserve,  that  I  consider  the  marshal 
badly  placed,  and  that  I  do  not  understand  his  manner  of 
operating.  ..." 

And  on  the  same  day  his  Majesty  wrote  to  General 
Bertrand   at  Torgau,  saying  : — 

"I  see  with  pleasure  by  your  letter  of  the  12th  that 
your  corps  behaved  well ;  but  I  regret  to  learn  the  issue  of 
the  battle,  which  appears  to  me  to  have  been  badly  en- 
gaged. I  shall  myself  shortly  take  the  command  of  the 
fourth  corps  to  try  and  procure  you  your  revenge." 

To1  M.  MARET. 
"  Peterswalde,  xjth  September,  1813, 
"  I  slept  here  last  night.  Yesterday  I  drove  the  enemy 
back  on  Kulm.  The  cavalry  made  some  splendid  charges. 
We  captured  the  son  of  Blucher,  who  is  a  colonel  or  a 
major-general.  ...  I  am  going  to  Pirna  in  the  course  of 
the  day. 

"  Napoleon." 


And  from  Pirna  his  Majesty  wrote  to  the  King  of  Naples, 
on  the  19th,  a  letter  in  which  he  said  : — 

"  I  descended  yesterday  into  the  plains  of  Bohemia,  and 
obliged  the  enemy  to  unmask  their  forces.  They  drew  up 
their  whole  army  in  battle  array,  expecting  to  be  attacked. 
I  then  drew  back  my  columns.  .  .  .  The  weather  is 
fearful.  Marshal  Berthier  is  suffering  from  an  attack  of 
gout  or  of  fever." 


GENERAL    BRUNO.  273 

To  MARSHAL  BERTHIER. 

"  Pirna,  19M  September,  1813. 
"  General  Bruno  was  captured,  not  by  4,000,  but  by  400 
men,  while  he  was  quietly  sleeping  in  the  town,  with  his 
whole  force.  As  long  as  the  light  troops  perform  their 
duties  so  badly  accidents  will  happen.  Instead  of 
bivouacking  in  a  military  position,  and  changing  his  camp 
every  day,  General  Bruno  shut  himself  up  in  a  town.  Tell 
Marshal  Victor  that  I  am  greatly  displeased  that  he  did 
not  give  General  Bruno  proper  instructions.  I  have  just 
dictated  an  order  of  the  day,  informing  the  army  of  the 
fate  which  has  befallen  General  Bruno.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

Poor  Bruno,  with  150  Westphalian  horse,  had  been 
snapped  up  by  the  Austrians. 

In  some  notes  for  the  Minister  of  War,  drawn  up  on  the 
27th  September,  at  Dresden,  General  Clarke  was  directed 
to  say  in  a  report  that  200,000  men  were  asked  for  so  as 
to  impose  upon  Europe,  but  that  in  reality  the  conscription 
of  1 813  would  not  be  drawn  until  the  next  year  (18 14). 
He  was  to  say  that  the  Emperor  had  given  Austria  no 
cause  to  complain  ;  that  she  did  not  wish  to  negotiate  at 
Prague,  and  that  she  had  long  determined  upon  making 
war ;  that  England  had  rejected  every  proposition  of 
peace ;  that  Russia  had  shown  herself  an  implacable 
enemy,  and  had  employed  her  influence  to  hinder  all 
negotiation ;  that  after  having  burned  Moscow  to  the 
ground,  she  desired  to  avenge  the  evils  she  had  brought 
down  on  herself  by  applying  the  torch  to  the  towns  of  the 
French  Empire,  and  perhaps  even  to  Paris.  The  present 
state  of  affairs  was  to  be  attributed  to  the  hatred  and 
jealousy  of  the  other  Powers,  and  to  the  passions  and 
artifices  fomented  by  England. 

On  the  2nd  October,  in  a  letter  written  to  Marshal 
Victor  from   Dresden,  Napoleon  said  :— 

VOL.  III.  T 


2/4     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

"  I  shall  look  upon  the  certainty  of  the  enemy  blocking 
themselves  up,  with  an  army  of  80,000  men  in  Leipsic, 
as  a  good  piece  of  news ;  the  war  would  soon  be  over ; 
but  I  think  that  they  are  too  well  acquainted  with  my 
manner  of  acting  to  expose  themselves  to  such  an 
adventurous  move.  .  .  ." 

Napoleon  now  vigorously  contradicted  rumours  which 
were  evidently  gaining  ground  concerning  the  defection  of 
Bavaria.  He  wrote  as  follows  to  Savary,  his  minister  of 
police  in  Paris  : — 

"  What  does  a  fall  on  the  Bourse  matter  to  you  ?  Those 
who  have  sold  stock  at  sixty,  will  buy  it  back  at  eighty. 
The  less  you  meddle  with  such  matters  the  better.  .  .  . 
If  the  rente  were  to  go  down  six  francs,  what  would  that 
matter,  provided  the  interest  be  paid  ?  The  only  way  to 
aggravate  the  evil  is  to  give  it  importance.  As  I  make  no 
loans,  and  do  not  require  to  make  any,  the  stock  exchange 
details  in  no  way  affect  the  administration." 

On  the  6th  October,  in  a  series  of  instructions  given  to 
Comte  Daru,  the  Emperor  said  that  he  was  about  to  fight 
a  battle  ;  that  Dresden  would  be  held  by  30,000  man,  but 
that  if  he  lost  the  battle  the  city  was  to  be  evacuated,  the 
guns  were  to  be  spiked,  &c,  &c.  Napoleon  added,  how- 
ever, such  reassuring  paragraphs  as  the  following  : — 

"  His  Majesty  will  win  the  battle,  and  Dresden  will 
continue  to  be  the  centre  of  his  operations."  And — "As 
his  Majesty  thinks  that  he  has  eighty  chances  out  of  100 
on  his  side,  you  must  act  as  if  he  would  succeed." 

In  spite  of  the  military  disadvantages  of  holding  Dresden, 
Napoleon  was  very  loth  to  relinquish  that  capital,  being 
well  aware  of  the  bad  effect  which  such  a  step  would  have 
on  the  members  of  the  Confederation  ;  he  had  the  wolf  by 
the  ears. 

To  THE  KING  OF  NAPLES. 

"Dresden,  7  th  October,  18 13. 

"I  wrote  to  you  this  morning  at  one  o'clock.  I  am 
starting    for    Meissen.      The    whole    Silesian    army    has 


BLUCHER  AND  BERNADOTTE.         275 

debouched  by  Wartenburg  ;  there  is  no  force  from  Dresden 
to  Gorlitz,  nor  from  Dresden  to  Berlin.  Marshal  St.  Cyr 
will  remain  at  Dresden.  Keep  the  Austrians  in  check  as 
well  as  you  can,  so  that  I  may  beat  Blucher  and  the 
Swedes  before  they  join  Schwartzenberg's  corps. 

"  The  King  of  Saxony,  the  Queen,  and  the  Princess 
Augusta  are  coming  to  Meissen  ;  they  will  not  remain  at 
Dresden  during  my  absence. 

"  Napoleon." 

to  prince  cambaceres. 

"  Wurzen,  qth  September,  18 13. 
"  I  have  received  all  your  letters,  with  the  exception  of 
that  of  the  29th,  which  was  intercepted.  Marshal  St.  Cyr 
is  at  Dresden,  and  the  King  of  Naples  on  the  Upper 
Mulde.  I  am  manoeuvring  'with  the  remainder  of  my 
army  to  force  the  enemy  to  raise  the  siege  of  Wittenberg. 
It  is  possible  that  this  will  give  rise  to  a  battle,  the  success 
of  which  I  consider  certain,  and  which  will  exercise  a  great 
influence  on  affairs.  The  weather  is  very  bad.  Berthier 
is  getting  better.     My  health  is  perfect. 

"  Napoleon." 


And  to  the  King  of  Naples  the  Emperor  wrote  saying 
that  he  expected  to  attack  Blucher  at  Duben,  where  he 
was  assured  that  the  army  of  Silesia  had  taken  up  its 
position,  and  also  that  General  Alix  had  entered  Cassel  at 
the  head  of  6,000  French.  His  Majesty  added — "  King 
Jerome  has  returned  to  his  capital.  Czernitchef  made  all 
this  noise  with  2,500  Cossacks.  Do  not  believe  in  the 
reported  defection  of  Bavaria,  nor  in  all  the  rumours 
circulated  by  the  enemy." 

Napoleon  and  Blucher  crossed  each  other,  and  the  two 
armies  were  thus  lying  across  each  other's  communications. 
Blucher  and  Bernadotte  got  between  Napoleon  and  the 
Rhine,  while  Napoleon  got  between  them  and  the  Elbe. 

T  2 


276  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

In   the  march   to    Duben    Napoleon  very  nearly  cut  off 
Sacken's  corps,  which  had  to  beat  a  hasty  retreat. 

On  the  10th  October  the  Emperor  wrote  no  less  than 
nine  despatches  to  Berthier,  five  to  M.  Maret,  two  to 
Murat,  and  one  each  to  Marmont,  Reynier,  Bertrand,  and 
Arrighi,  despatches  which  show  great  uncertainty  as  to 
both  his  own  movements  and  those  of  the  enemy.  To  M. 
Maret  he  wrote — "  In  the  event  of  it  being  impossible  to 
hold  Dresden,  Marshal  St.  Cyr  can  retreat  upon  Torgau. 
...  If  there  be  a  battle,  and  I  beat  the  enemy,  the 
Austrians  will  recross  their  frontiers,  and  I  shall  approach 
Torgau  to  put  myself  in  communication  with  the  King  of 
Naples,  and  to  pay  a  visit  to  Berlin  with  him.  ...  I 
intend  falling  on  the  enemy's  line  of  operations  should 
there  be  no  battle.  ...  I  am  very  anxious  to  receive 
information  from  Leipsic  respecting  the  movements  of  the 
enemy,  and  to  know  if  they  are  advancing  or  retiring.  .  . 
It  is  my  intention,  if  the  King  of  Naples  is  obliged  to 
evacuate  Leipsic,  to  repass  the  Elbe  with  my  whole  army, 
driving  the  armies  of  Silesia  and  Berlin  to  the  right  bank, 
and  taking  my  time  to  destroy  them." 

To  General  Arrighi  (Due  de  Padoue),  commanding  the 
3rd  cavalry  corps,  the  Emperor  wrote — "  Tell  the  King  of 
Naples  that  Leipsic  must  only  be  abandoned  in  order  to 
avoid  being  obliged  to  fight  with  inferior  forces.  ...  At 
the  last  moment  you  must  tell  the  magistrates  of  Leipsic 
to  behave  well  ;  that  all  that  they  see  is  the  result  of 
manoeuvres  to  force  the  enemy  to  fight  a  battle  which  they 
have  always  avoided,  and  that  this  will  finish  with  a  peal 
of  thunder  for  the  enemy." 

Napoleon  was  highly  elated  at  this  moment  by  a  success 
obtained  by  Ney  at  Dessau,  which  threw  open  to  him  the 
road  to  Berlin.  Murat,  too,  had  the  best  of  an  encounter 
with  Wittgenstein,  and  the  Austrians,  with  the  Emperor, 
had  been  forced  to  fall  back  upon  Frohburg.  However, 
with  all  this,  the  allies  were  now  advancing  in  such  masses 
from  various  quarters  that  the  French  were  forced  back 


NAPOLEON  DECIDES  ON  RETREATING.     277 

upon  Leipsic.  A  variety  of  minor  engagements  preceded 
the  great  battle  where,  as  Berenger  sang, 

"  Leipsic  hath  seen  our  eagles  fall 
Drunk  with  renown,  worn  out  with  glory." 

In  one  severe  cavalry  affair,  in  which  the  Prussian 
cuirassiers  overthrew  the  French  horse,  the  King  of  Naples 
had  a  narrow  escape,  and  had  to  save  himself  by  flight. 

Napoleon  was  more  than  ever  anxious  to  play  a  bold 
game,  and  to  carry  the  war  into  Prussian  territory,  but  his 
marshals  unanimously  opposed  this  plan,  fearing  that,  with 
their  250,000  men,  they  would  be  cut  off  from  France  by 
400,000  allied  troops.  Notwithstanding  the  murmurs  of 
the  army  and  the  remonstrances  of  the  staff,  it  was  with 
the  greatest  difficulty  that  Napoleon  was  induced  to 
relinquish  his  idea  of  visiting  Berlin.  In  the  end,  however, 
the  defection  of  Bavaria,  and  the  probable  defection  of 
Wirtemberg,  Baden,  and  Darmstadt  decided  him  to  fall 
back  on  the  Rhine,  and  to  recall  Reynier  and  Bertrand, 
who  were  preparing  to  march  upon  the  Prussian  capital. 

On  the  13th  October,  5  A.M.,  the  Emperor  wrote  to  Ney 
saying — "  I  have  ordered  my  Guard  to  fall  back  upon 
Duben,  so  that  I  may  march  upon  Leipsic  to-morrow.  I 
have  ordered  Marmont  there,  and  with  the  King  of  Naples 
that  will  make  90,000  men.  .  .  .  There  will  undoubtedly 
be  a  great  battle  at  Leipsic."  Similar  orders  were  sent  to 
Macdonald,  Reynier,  Bertrand,  and  Sebastiani,  and  orders 
were  given  that  the  ranks  should  be  only  two  instead  of 
three  deep.  It  was  found  that  a  great  number  of  men  were 
in  hospital  from  wounds  in  the  hand,  which  the  Emperor 
supposed  to  have  been  self-inflicted.  Dr.  Larrey,  however, 
the  surgeon-in- chief,  reported  that  the  men  in  the  front 
ranks  were  frequently  wounded,  when  in  the  act  of  loading, 
by  their  comrades  behind  them.  Napoleon  accepted  this 
explanation,  and  ordered  the  third  rank  to  be  done  away 
with.  The  Emperor  was  in  hopes,  too,  that  this  change  of 
formation  would  deceive  the  enemy  as  to  his  numbers. 


278     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

On  the  15th  October  the  Emperor,  in  a  bulletin  to  the 
army,  said — "  After  having  seized  upon  all  the  enemy's 
bridges,  the  Emperor  intended  to  pass  the  Elbe,  to 
manoeuvre  on  the  right  bank  of  that  river  from  Hamburg 
to  Dresden,  to  threaten  Potsdam  and  Berlin,  and  to  take 
Magdeburg  for  the  pivot  of  his  operations.  But  on  the 
13th  the  Emperor  learned  that  the  Bavarian  army  had 
joined  the  Austrians  and  threatened  the  Rhine.  This 
inconceivable  defection  caused  the  defection  of  other  ' 
princes  to  be  foreseen,  and  determined  the  Emperor  to  fall 
back  upon  the  Rhine."  In  fact,  the  Emperor  found 
himself,  as  he  said,  with  two  more  armies,  against  him — 
that  of  Bavaria,  and  the  Austrian  force  which  had  been 
engaged  in  observing  it. 

On  the  evening  of  the  16th  came  another  bulletin,  in 
which  Napoleon  said  that  Prince  Schwartzenberg,  the 
commander-in-chief  of  the  allied  army,  had  announced  a 
decisive  battle  for  the  16th,  and  which  gave  a  description  of 
the  first  day's  fighting  at  Leipsic,  with  the  result  of  which 
he  appeared  satisfied.  He  created  Poniatowski  a  marshal. 
During  the  day  the  Emperor  had  sent  news  to  the  King  of 
Saxony  that  he  had  beaten  the  enemy,  and  told  him  to 
have  the  bells  of  the  city  rung  in  honour  of  his  victory.  In 
fact,  the  look-out  was  so  gloomy  that  Napoleon  ought  at 
once  to  have  prepared  to  retreat.  If  the  allies  had  made 
little  impression  on  the  positions  where  he  commanded  in 
person,  the  corps  of  Ney  had  suffered  a  severe  repulse,  and 
Bernadotte,  Beningsen,  and  Colloredo  were  expected  to 
join  the  enemy  the  next  day  with  100,000  men. 

Late  in  the  day  General  Meerfelt  fell  into  the  hands  of 
the  French,  and  as  soon  as  the  firing  had  ceased  Napoleon 
sent  for  this  officer  in  the  hope  of  being  able,  through  him, 
to  open  up  separate  and  confidential  negotiations  with  the 
Emperor  of  Austria.  It  was  Meerfelt  who  had  been  sent 
to  solicit  the  armistice  of  Leoben,  who  had  conducted  the 
negotiations  which  ended  in  the  treaty  of  Campo  Formio. 
It  was  Meerfelt  who,  after  Austerlitz,  had  negotiated  the 


BATTLE   OK    LEIPSIC.  279 

peace  of  Presburg.  And  now,  a  prisoner,  it  was  the  French 
Emperor  who  was  soliciting  his  good  offices. 

Napoleon,  who  sent  Meerfelt  back  to  his  camp  with  a 
message  for  his  master,  was  under  the  impression  that  the 
Emperor  of  Austria  might  be  persuaded  to  come  to  terms 
with  his  son-in-law  ;  but  the  war  had  escaped  from  the 
hands  of  monarchs. 

On  the  20th  Napoleon,  before  making  his  escape  from 
the  city  of  Leipsic — an  escape  accomplished  with  great 
difficulty — wrote  at  7  A.M.  to  General  Bertrand,  who  was 
at  Weissenfels,  a  series  of  orders,  adding — "  Write  to 
Erfurth  to  communicate  with  Marshal  Kellermann,  who 
must  make  known  by  telegraph,  that  after  a  number  of 
engagements,  in  which  we  sustained  the  glory  of  our  arms, 
I  am  marching  in  the  direction  of  the  Saal ;  that  the 
Emperor's  health  is  good."  This  was  his  Majesty's 
description  of  Leipsic.  In  the  afternoon  he  himself 
reached  Weissenfels,  whither  he  was  followed  by  the 
remnant  of  his  army. 

On  the  24th  the  Emperor,  having  reached  Erfurth,  drew 
up  a  bulletin,  in  which  he  attributed  his  retreat  to  want  of 
ammunition,  which  obliged  him  to  fall  back  on  his 
magazines  at  Erfurth  or  Magdeburg  to  replenish.  He 
chose  the  former  place,  so  as  to  be  the  better  able  "  to 
appreciate  the  influence  of  the  defection  of  Bavaria."  He 
then  added — "  This  circumstance  obliged  the  French  army 
to  renounce  the  fruit  of  two  victories  in  which,  with  so 
much  glory,  it  had  beaten  a  vastly  superior  force — all  the 
armies  of  the  continent."  The  Emperor  spoke  in  bitter 
terms  of  the  treason  of  the  Saxons,  and  made  the  most  of 
the  blowing  up  of  the  bridge  over  the  Elster,  which  had  so 
disastrous  an  effect  after  the  battle.  "  The  losses,"  he  said, 
"  occasioned  by  this  unfortunate  event  amounted  to  about 
12,000  men.  The  disorder  into  which  it  threw  the  army 
changed  the  face  of  affairs  ;  the  victorious  French  army 
reached  Erfurth  as  if  it  had  been  beaten.  .  .  .  The 
French  army,  after  such  brilliant  successes,  has  lost  its 


280    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

victorious  attitude.    We  found  everything  that  we  required 
at  Erfurth." 

From  Eriurth  the  French,  hotly  pressed  by  Blucher,  fell 
back  to  Gotha,  whence  the  Emperor  wrote  thus  to  his  sister, 
Pauline  Borghese  : — 

"  I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  13th.  My  expenses 
have  been  considerable  this  year,  and  will  be  so  for  next 
year.  I  accept  the  gift  which  you  wish  to  make  ;  but  the 
goodwill  and  the  resources  of  my  subjects  are  such  that  I 
think  I  shall  have  means  to  meet  the  enormous  expendi- 
ture which  will  be  caused  by  the  campaign  of  1 8 14  and 
181 5.  If  the  European  coalition  against  France  lasts 
beyond  that  date,  and  that  I  have  not  obtained  the 
amount  of  success  which  I  have  a  right  to  expect  from 
the  bravery  and  the  patriotism  of  the  French,  then  I  shall 
make  use  of  your  gift,  and  of  all  the  gifts  which  my 
subjects  may  feel  inclined  to  offer. 

"  Napoleon." 

Now  the  Emperor,  on  his  return  to  Paris,  at  once  held  a 
Council  of  State,  and  exposed  the  true  position  in  which 
he  stood.  He  said  that  France  would  have  to  make  vast 
sacrifices.  He  himself  took  1,200,000/.  from  his  vaults  in 
the  Tuileries  to  be  applied  to  the  public  service,  and 
taxation  was  greatly  increased. 

To  Cambaceres  the  Emperor  wrote  upon  the  same  day, 
saying : — 

"  I  have  nothing  to  add  to  my  bulletins,  which  you  can 
communicate  to  the  Empress.  I  am  going  to  Mayence, 
and  I  shall  concentrate  my  army  on  the  frontier.  The 
inconceivable  and  unexpected  treason  of  Bavaria  dis- 
arranged all  my  plans." 

His  Majesty  then  dwelt  on  his  want  of  men  and  money. 
He  was  bent  on  raising  another  100,000  men  over  twenty- 
two  years  of  age. 

"  When  all  Europe  is  in  arms,"  he  wrote ;  "  when  every- 
where married   and   unmarried   men   are   being  enlisted  ; 


BATTLE    OF   HANAU.  28 I 

when    every   one  is    rushing   to  arms   against  us,  France 
will  be  lost  unless  she  does  the  same." 

To  PRINCE  CAMBACERES. 

"  Frankfort,  31st  October,  1813. 
"  I  have  arrived  here.  The  Bavarians  and  Austrians, 
60,000  strong,  posted  at  Hanau,  tried  to  cut  me  off  from 
France.  I  gave  them  a  good  drubbing,  and  captured  their 
guns,  standards,  and  6,000  prisoners.  .  .  .  My  health  was 
never  better.     I  am  going  to  Mayence. 

"  Napoleon." 

Marshal  Wrede,  who  commanded  in  this  battle,  was 
able  to  bring  only  45,000  men  into  action,  with  which  he 
endeavoured  to  stop  the  French  army  in  its  retreat.  That 
army  had  been  reduced  to  80,000  men,  many  of  them 
stragglers  ;  but  still  Napoleon  had  with  him  his  Guard, 
which  had  not  suffered  much  during  the  campaign,  and 
Bertrand's  corps,  which  had  not  been  engaged  at  Leipsic. 
The  losses  were  heavy  on  both  sides,  and  the  French, 
although  victorious,  were  unable  to  carry  off  their  wounded, 
3,000  of  whom  remained  in  the  woods  of  Hanau. 

To  MARIE  LOUISE,  Empress,  Queen,  and  Regent. 

"Frankfort,  \st  November,  1813. 
"  Madame  and  very  dear  Wife, — I  send  you  twenty 
standards  captured  at  Leipsic  and  Hanau ;  it  is  a  homage 
which  I  have  much  pleasure  in  rendering  to  you.  I  desire 
that  you  will  see  in  it  a  mark  of  my  great  satisfaction  with 
your  conduct  during  the  regency  which  I  confided  to  you. 

"  Napoleon." 

to  prince  cambaceres. 

"  Mayence,  6th  November,  181 3. 
"  I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  3rd.     My  presence 
here  is  still  necessary  for  the  reorganisation  of  the  army. 
As  soon  as  affairs  will  permit  me  to  leave  I  shall  return  to 
Paris.  "Napoleon." 


202     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

The  same  day  Napoleon  gave  orders  to  General  Clarke 
for  reconstructing  the  fortifications  of  Geneva,  which  had 
been  blown  up  by  his  orders ;  also  a  letter,  in  which  his 
Majesty  talked  of  withdrawing  16,000  cavalry  from  Spain, 
as  he  had  no  longer  any  intention  of  carrying  on  offensive 
operations  in  that  country. 

The  Emperor  was  back  at  St.  Cloud  on  the  10th 
November.  On  the  12th  he  wrote  to  Prince  Eugene, 
saying  that  he  was  sorry  to  learn  that  he  was  on  the 
Adige,  and  asking  what  resources  it  would  be  possible  to 
draw  from  Italy.  He  said  that  he  himself  was  engaged  in 
raising  600,000  men. 

To  the  Senate  his  Majesty  made  this  brief  speech  at  the 
Tuileries  on  the  14th  November  : — 

"  Senators,  I  accept  the  sentiments  which  you  express. 

"  All  Europe  was  marching  with  us  a  year  ago ;  to-day 
all  Europe  is  marching  against  us.  The  fact  is  that  the 
opinion  of  the  world  is  formed  by  France  or  by  England. 
We  shall  therefore  have  everything  to  fear  without  the 
energy  and  the  power  of  the  nation. 

"  Posterity  will  say  that  if  great  and  critical  circum- 
stances arose  they  were  not  too  much  for  France  and 
for  me." 

TO  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"St.  Cloud,  i/^ih  November,  181 3. 

"  I  am  not  aware  if  Belfort  is  in  a  state  of  defence.  If 
so,  have  it  armed,  as  well  as  all  the  castles  along  the  Swiss 
frontier.  Not  that  I  have  any  reason  to  distrust  the 
Swiss,  but  because  in  the  present  state  of  the  Empire  it 
is  necessary  to  arm  on  all  sides.  «  NAPOLEON." 

To  GENERAL  CAULAINCOURT. 

"St.  Cloud,  i$th  November,  1813. 
"  Give  orders  that  if  ever  the  English  arrive  at  the  castle 
of  Marracq  (near  Bayonne)  it  be  set  fire  to  ;  also  to  all  the 
houses  which  belong  to  me,  so  that  they  may  not  sleep  in 
my  bed.  ...  «  NAPOLEON." 


ST.    JEAN-DE-LUZ.  283 

To  M.  FOUCHE,  at  Bologna. 

"St.  Cloud,  i$th  November,  1813. 
"I  beg  that  you  will  hasten  to  Naples  to  make  the 
•king  feel  the  necessity  of  marching  on  the  Po  with  25,000 
men ;  you  must  also  inform  the  Queen  of  this,  and  you 
must  do  all  you  can  to  let  the  country  be  beguiled  by  the 
fallacious  promises  of  Austria  and  the  horrid  language  of 
Metternich.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

Napoleon  had  considerable  doubts  with  regard  to  the 
fidelity  of  his  brother-in-law — doubts  not  a  little  increased 
when  Murat  left  him  after  Leipsic  on  the  ground  that  his 
presence  was  absolutely  necessary  at  Naples. 


To  COMTE  DE  SUSSY. 

"St.  Cloud,  10th  November,  1813. 
"The  movement  of  the  English  upon  Bayonne  has 
opened  up  a  portion  of  the  frontier.  I  learn  that  they 
have  already  landed  a  certain  quantity  of  their  merchan- 
dise near  St.  Jean-de-Luz.  I  suppose  that  you  have 
removed  your  custom-house  line.  This  matter  deserves 
your  attention.1 

"  Napoleon." 


The  continental  blockade  was  strong  in  death. 

The  King  of  Bavaria  having  endeavoured  to  induce  his 
son-in-law  to  desert  the  cause  of  Napoleon,  as  he  himself 
had  deserted  it,  Prince  Eugene  informed  the  Emperor  of  the 
overtures  which  had  been  made  and  indignantly  rejected. 
Napoleon  wrote  back — "I  recognise  in  this  the  policy  of 
Austria;    it   is  thus  that  she   makes  so  many   traitors." 

1  The  harbour  of  St.  Jean  de  Luz  was  no  sooner  in  the  hands  of  the 
British  than  it  was  crowded  with  ships  of  all  nations,  for  it  was 
declared  a  free  port,  even  for  French  vessels. 


284     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Before  long  Napoleon  doubted  the  fidelity  of  even 
Eugene. 

At  this  period  M.  de  St.  Aignan,  the  French  Minister  at 
Gotha  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Prussians,  and  was  taken 
to  Frankfort,  which  place  Prince  Schwartzenberg,  followed 
by  the  allied  sovereigns,  reached  on  the  4th  November.  He 
was  present  on  the  9th  November  at  a  conference  between 
Count  Nesselrode,  Prince  Metternich,  and  Lord  Aberdeen, 
in  which  the  Austrian  minister  exposed  the  conditions  of 
peace  which  the  allies  would  accept. 

On  the  1st  December  Napoleon  dictated  the  following 
reply,  which  was  to  be  sent  to  Prince  Metternich  by 
Caulaincourt,  who  had  just  succeeded  M.  Maret  as 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs. 

"  It  appears  from  the  verbal  communication  of  M.  de  St. 
Aignan,  that  the  general  bases  of  the  allies  are  a  peace 
founded — first,  on  the  equilibrium  of  Europe  ;  second,  on 
the  recognition  of  all  the  nations  within  their  natural 
limits ;  third,  on  the  recognition  of  the  independence  of 
all  the  nations  without  any  one  being  able  to  arrogate  to 
itself  any  right  of  supremacy  or  suzerainty,  under  no 
matter  what  form,  on  land  or  on  sea. 

"  It  is  therefore  with  lively  satisfaction  that  I  am  directed 
and  authorised  by  the  Emperor,  my  master,  to  declare  to 
your  excellency  that  his  Majesty  adheres  to  the  bases 
which  M.  de  St.  Aignan  has  communicated.  They  will 
entail  great  sacrifices  on  the  part  of  France ;  his  Majesty 
will  make  them  without  regret,  provided  similar  sacrifices 
be  made  by  England,  so  as  to  conclude  a  general  peace  on 
land  and  sea,  which  your  excellency  assures  me  is  the 
desire  not  only  of  the  continental  powers  but  of  England." 

The  allies  had  not  only  made  proposals  of  peace,  which 
would  have  left  France  with  the  Rhine,  the  Alps,  and  the 
Pyrenees  for  her  frontiers,  but  the  Emperor  of  Austria  had 
written  a  private  letter  to  Marie  Louise,  in  the  hope  that 
she  might  induce  Napoleon  to  listen  to  reason.  England 
was  prepared  on  her  side  to  make  great  sacrifices,  and  to 


THE    PRINCE    OF    ORANGE.  285 

do  nothing  hostile  to  the  dynasty  of  Napoleon.  The 
French  Emperor  resorted  to  delay,  in  order  to  gain  time. 
With  marvellous  activity  he  prepared  for  the  defence  of 
his  empire. 

On  the  3rd  December,  in  a  letter  to  Prince  Eugene,  the 
Emperor  said — "The  King  of  Naples  writes  to  me  that  he 
will  soon  be  at  Bologna  with  80,000  men.  ...  It  is  a  great 
consolation  to  me  to  have  nothing  to  fear  for  Italy." 

To  General  Clarke  on  the  4th  : — "  Everything  announces 
that  the  war  is  about  to  become  serious  on  the  side  of 
Holland." 

On  the  27th  November  the  Prince  of  Orange,  coming 
from  England,  had  disembarked  from  the  Warrior,  and 
had  been  hailed  with  even  greater  enthusiasm  than  that 
which  not  long  before  had  greeted  Napoleon  and  Marie 
Louise.  In  a  very  short  time  the  tricoloured  flag  waved 
only  over  some  of  the  forts  on  the  southern  frontier. 

On  the  15th  December,  the  Emperor,  having  learned 
that  the  Nassau  regiment  and  the  Frankfort  battalion 
employed  with  the  army  of  Spain  had  deserted,  gave 
strict  orders  for  all  the  troops  of  the  Confederation  to  be 
disarmed.1 

On  the  16th,  his  Majesty,  in  a  letter  to  General  Lebrun, 
Due  de  Plaisance,  governor  of  Antwerp,  said  : — "  General 
Lefebvre  Desnoettes  will  leave  here  to  night  by  post  to  put 
himself  at  the  head  of  his  division.  Two  other  divisions  of 
the  guard  will  concentrate  at  Brussels.  Marshal  Mortier, 
with  the  old  general,  is  marching  on  Namur.  .  .  .  Show 
coolness  and  energy." 

Admiral  Allemand,  the  most  energetic  and  brutal  of 
French  admirals,  was  to  take  up  his  head  quarters  at 
Flushing,  and  to  co-operate  with  the  land  forces. 

1  The  Nassau  and  Frankfort  regiments  came  over  to  the  allies  just 
after  the  repulse  of  the  desperate  attack  made  by  Soult  on  Wellington 
when  he  had  forced  the  passage  of  the  Nive.  They  were  received 
with  great  joy,  drums  beating,  and  arms  presented,  and  were  at  once 
despatched  to  join  the  allied  army  in  Germany. 


286  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

On  the  17th,  in  a  long  letter  to  Comte  de  Montalivet, 
the  Emperor  expressed  his  astonishment  that  there 
should  be  21,200  persons  out  of  work  in  Paris,  while  diffi- 
culty was  experienced  in  getting  work  done  for  thcarmy. 
However,  he  would  double  or  triple  his  orders  sooner  than 
allow  men  to  remain  without  employment.  There  was  no 
difficulty  in  finding  work  for  tailors  and  shoemakers,  &c,  &c, 
but  his  Majesty  had  to  ask  for  a  report  to  see  what  could 
be  done  for  the  silversmiths,  clockmakers,  jewellers,  and 
such  like. 

On  the  19th,  at  the  opening  of  Parliament,  the  Emperor 
pronounced  a  discourse,  in  which  he  said  that — "  Brilliant 
victories  illustrated  the  French  arms  during  this  campaign  ; 
defections  without  example  rendered  those  victories  useless. 
Everything  turned  against  us.  France  even  would  be  in 
danger  but  for  the  energy  and  union  of  Frenchmen. 

"  Under  these  great  circumstances  my  first  thought  was 
to  call  you  to  my  side.  My  heart  required  the  presence 
and  affection  of  my  subjects. 

"  I  have  never  been  seduced  by  prosperity.  Adversity 
shall  find  me  superior  to  its  strokes. 

"  I  several  times  gave  peace  to  the  nations  when  they  had 
lost  everything.  With  a  portion  of  my  conquests  I  raised 
up  thrones  for  kings  who  have  abandoned  me. 

"  I  had  conceived  and  executed  great  plans  for  the  pros- 
perity and  welfare  of  the  world.  Monarch  and  father,  I 
feel  all  that  peace  adds  to  the  security  of  thrones  and  of 
families.  Negotiations  were  opened  with  the  allies.  •  I 
adhered  to  the  preliminary  bases  which  they  presented.  I 
was  in  hopes  that  before  the  opening  of  this  session  the 
congress  of  Manheim  would  have  assembled  ;  but  new 
delays,  which  cannot  be  attributed  to  France,  have  delayed 
this  movement." 

Napoleon,  after  reiterating  his  desire  to  conclude  peace, 
said  that  he  had  been  obliged  to  increase  his  army,  and 
that  he  would  require  money.  Denmark  and  Naples  alone, 
he  added,  had  remained  faithful  to  the  alliance. 


ARRANGEMENT    WITH    SPAIN.  287 

To  ELIZA  NAPOLEON,  Grand  Duchess  of  Tuscany. 

"  Paris,  25M  December,  1813. 
"  My  Sister, — You  must  not  give  any  muskets  to  the 
Neapolitans.  Send  the  muskets  which  are  at  Leghorn 
and  Porto  Ferrajo,  in  all  haste  to  Alexandria,  to  arm  the 
conscripts.  The  intentions  of  the  King  of  Naples  appear 
extravagant.  .  .  .  Should  the  King  declare  war,  France  is 
not  yet  dead,  and  a  piece  of  treason  so  infamous,  should  it 
exist,  will  fall  upon  its  author.  I  reckon  upon  your  firm- 
ness. Allow  the  King  to  throw  you  into  prison,  or  to  kill 
you,  but  do  not  permit  him  to  insult  the  nation. 

"  Napoleon."     ' 

"  P.S. — I  have  arranged  matters  with  the  Spaniards.  It 
is  useless  to  publish  this,  but  you  can  let  it  transpire. 
This  will  set  free  my  armies  of  Aragon,  Catalonia,  and 
Bayonne." 

To  M.  MELZI,  Due  de  Lodi,  Grand  Chancellor  of  the 
Kingdom  of  Italy. 

"  Paris,  252$  December,  1813. 
"  I  suppose  that  Pallafox  wrote  to  you  on  leaving  Vin- 
cennes.  I  have  sent  him  to  Prince  Ferdinand,  and  thence 
he  went  to  Madrid.  I  have  settled  matters  with  the 
Spaniards.  I  have  still  200,000  men  there.  It  will  be 
useless  to  publish  this  news,  but  you  can  communicate  it 
to  the  Viceroy." 

The  way  in  which  matters  were  arranged  with  the 
Spaniards  was  this.  The  Emperor  opened  negotiations 
with  his  captive,  through  M.  Laforest,  and  received  the  fol- 
lowing artful  reply  from  Ferdinand,  dated  November  21st, 
1 81 3  : — "  Sire,  I  feel  highly  flattered  at  the  honour  paid  to 
me  by  your  Imperial  Majesty,  and  your  desire  to  treat  with 
me  in'  order  to  terminate  the  misfortunes  of  Spain.  I  con- 
tinue to  remain  under  the  tutelage  of  your  Majesty,  for 


2  88     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

whose  person  I  profess  both  love  and  respect,  but  I  can  do 
nothing  without  the  consent  of  the  Spanish  nation.  Your 
Imperial  Majesty  would  do  better  to  come  to  terms  with 
the  Regency.  I  have  spent  five  years  and  a  half  here  very 
pleasantly,  and  would  willigly  pass  the  remainder  of  my 
life  at  Valencay."  However,  through  the  instrumentality 
of  the  Duke  of  San  Carlos,  a  treaty  was  concluded  with 
Ferdinand.  The  French  Emperor  agreed  to  recognise  him 
as  King  of  Spain,  to  respect  Spanish  territory,  and  to 
withdraw  his  troops.  Ferdinand,  on  his  side,  engaged  to 
maintain  the  integrity  of  Spain,  to  conclude  a  convention 
by  which  Spain  was  to  be  evacuated  simultaneously  by  the 
French  and  English  forces,  and  to  marry  King  Joseph's 
eldest  daughter.  Ferdinand  knew  that  this  treaty  would 
never  be  sanctioned  by  the  Cortes,  and  he  sent  San  Carlos 
to  Spain  to  say  that  he  would  himself  declare  it  null  and 
void  as  soon  as  he  crossed  the  Pyrenees,  on  the  ground 
that  it  had  been  extorted  from  him  by  force. 

On  the  26th  December,  the  Emperor,  in  a  letter  to 
Marshal  Mortier,  said  that  the  enemy,  debouching  by 
Bale,  were  marching  on  Belfort.  On  the  30th  his  Majesty, 
in  reply  to  an  address  of  the  Senate  of  the  most  laudatory 
character,  said  : — "  You  have  seen  by  the  documents  which 
I  have  communicated  to  you,  what  I  have  done  to  obtain 
peace.  The  sacrifices  contained  in  the  preliminary  bases 
which  were  proposed  by  the  enemy,  I  accepted  them  with- 
out regret ;  but  my  life  has  only  one  object,  the  welfare  of 
the  French.  However,  Beam,  Alsace,  Franche  Comte  and 
Brabant  are  invaded.  The  cries  of  that  portion  of  my 
family  rend  my  soul.  I  call  upon  Frenchmen  to  aid 
Frenchmen !  I  call  upon  the  Frenchmen  of  Paris,  of 
Brittany,  of  Normandy,  of  Champagne,  of  Burgundy,  and 
the  other  departments  to  help  their  brothers !  Shall  we 
abandon  them  in  their  misfortune  ?  Peace,  and  the  de- 
liverance of  our  territory,  should  be  our  rallying  cry.  At 
the  sight  of  the  whole  nation  in  arms,  the  foreigner  will  flee 
or  sign  peace   on    the  bases  which  he  himself  proposed. 


laine's  report.  289 

It  is  no  longer  a  question  of  recovering  the  conquests  we 
have  made." 

Such  was  the  gloomy  document  which  closed  the 
eventful  year  of  181 3.  Out  of  400,000  men  with  whom 
he  commenced  the  campaign,  only  80,000  recrossed  the 
Rhine  in  November,  and  it  was  with  this  force  and  raw 
levies  that  he  was  preparing  to  fight  Europe,  and  even 
attacking  the  allies  on  the  Rhine.  The  Correspondence, 
though  it  speaks  of  the  Senate  and  its  report,  makes  no 
mention  of  the  report  of  Laine  in  the  Lower  House, 
which  ably  exposed  the  sufferings  entailed  upon  the 
country  by  a  series  of  sanguinary  and  useless  wars.  His 
report,  adopted  by  a  large  majority,  was  not  allowed  to  be 
printed,  and  it  caused  the  dissolution  of  the  Chamber, 


VOL.  III.  U 


CHAPTER  V. 

THE     YEAR     1814. 

France  was  about  to  suffer  the  horrors  of  invasion. 
She  had  carried  fire  and  the  sword  through  every  country 
on  the  Continent,  and  now,  for  the  first  time  since  the  be- 
ginning of  the  Revolution,  the  sacred  soil  was  going  to  be 
violated.  In  1814  Schwartzenberg  and  his  Austrians  de- 
bouched into  France  by  way  of  Switzerland  ;  the  English 
had  crossed  the  Pyrenees,  a  large  force  of  Russians  and 
Prussians  pushed  forward  from  the  east,  and  another  host  of 
Germans  and  Swedes,  under  Bernadotte,  approached  from 
the  north.  It  was  almost  too  much  to  hope  that  an  ex- 
hausted France  would  be  able  to  resist  so  mighty  a 
torrent  as  that  which  now  threatened  to  overwhelm  her. 
Napoleon  in  18 14  stood  in  much  the  same  position  as  did 
Frederick  the  Great  in  1756 — a  position  which  Macaulay 
has  thus  described  : — "  No  such  union  of  the  Continental 
Powers  had  been  seen  for  ages.  A  less  formidable  con- 
federacy had  compelled  Louis  XIV.  to  bow  down  his 
haughty  head  to  the  very  earth.  A  less  formidable  con- 
federacy has  within  our  own  memory  subjugated  a  still 
mightier  empire  and  abased  a  still  prouder  name.  .  .  The 
people  whom  Frederick  ruled  were  not  5,000,000.  The 
populations  of  the  countries  leagued  against  him  amounted 
to  at  least  100,000,000.  .  .  .  Above  all  Frederick  was  one 


A    DESPERATE   GAME. 


291 


and  his  enemies  were  many.     In  their  camp  would  in- 
evitably be  found  the  jealousy,  the  dissension,  the  slack- 
ness inseparable   from  coalitions  ;    on   his  side  were    the 
energy,   the    unity,   the  secresy  of    a  strong  dictatorship. 
Small  as  the  king's  army  was  when  compared  with  the 
600,000  men  which  the  confederates  could  bring  into  the 
field,  celerity  of  movement   might  in  some  degree  com- 
pensate for  deficiency  in  bulk.     It  was  just  possible  that 
genius,  judgment,  resolution,  and  good  luck  might  protract 
the   struggle  during    a    campaign    or   two.    .    .    ."      The 
Senate,  at  the  close  of  18 13,  had  voted  Napoleon  300,000 
men,  but  when  he  took  the  field  on  the  25th  January  he 
was  fearfully  over-matched,  and  yet  he  was  more  than 
once  on  the  point  of  driving  the  allies  out  of  the  country. 
If  there  was  no  absolute  dissension   in    the    confederate 
camp  Austria  was  at  first  very  lukewarm,  having  views  of 
her-;  own,    and  it  was   the   same   with   Bernadotte.     The 
military  errors,  too,  committed  by  the  allies  gave  Napoleon 
a  fine  opportunity  for  a  display  of  his  genius  and  for  turn- 
ing to  account  the  advantages  enumerated  by  Macaulay. 
With  60.000  men  he  rushed  against  the  allies  and  beat 
Blucher  at  St.  Dizier  and  Brienne  on  the  27th  and  29th 
January ;  then  he  experienced  a  check  at  La  Rothiere  on 
the   8th  February,   but  repaired    it  a   few  days    later   at 
Champaubert  and  Montmirail ;   he   triumphed   again   at 
Vauchamps,  at  Montereau,  at  Craonne,  and  at  Rheims. 
At   Bar-sur-Aube,  however,   at  Laon,  and    at  Arcis  the 
French  arms  were   not  fortunate.     Unable  to  arrest  the 
advance  of  the  allies  in  front,  Napoleon  conceived  the  bold 
idea  of  marching  to  St.  Dizier  to  cut  off  their  communica- 
tions, leaving  the  road  to  Paris  open.     His  knowledge  of 
the  Austrian  generals  led  him  to  suppose  that  directly  they 
found  their  rear   threatened  they  would  become  terribly 
alarmed  and  would  at  once  fall  back.    The  allies,  however, 
pushed  forward  to  Paris,  which  Mortier  and  Marmont  in 
vain  endeavoured  to  defend.     Marmont  then  forsook  his 
old  chief  and  treated  with  the  enemy.     On  the  nth  April 

u  2 


292    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Napoleon  signed  his  abdication  and  on  the  13th  he 
took  the  poison  at  Fontainebleau,  which  he  had  always 
carried  about  him  since  he  was  nearly  snapped  up  by 
the  Cossacks  during  the  retreat  from  Moscow,  but  its 
strength  having  wasted  away  it  had  little  effect.  On  the 
20th  April  he  bid  farewell  to  his  Guard  and  set  off  for 
Elba. 

Among  other  matters  which  aided  in  the  downfall  of 
Napoleon  was  the  defection  of  Murat,  who  thought  to 
save  his  crown  by  coming  to  terms  with  the  Austrians. 
Soult  was  unable  to  prevent  Wellington  from  entering 
Bordeaux  on  the  12th  March,  and  Angereau,  who  dis- 
played very  little  energy,  failed  to  prevent  the  Austrians 
from  entering  Lyons  on  the  21st,  while  General  Maison 
was  driven  out  of  Belgium. 

During  all  these  battles,  or  up  to  19th  March,  the 
Congress  of  Chatillon  had  remained  sitting,  and  frequent 
and  ineffectual  attempts,  perhaps  not  very  sincere  on 
either  side,  were  made  to  bring  hostilities  to  a  close. 
When  French  prospects  looked  bright  Napoleon  talked 
arrogantly  of  dictating  terms  of  peace  on  the  Vistula,  and 
the  allies  reduced  their  demands ;  but  when  the  Empire 
was  down  they  insisted  upon  her  being  reduced,  not  to  her 
natural  limits  of  the  Alps  and  the  Rhine,  as  demanded  at 
Frankfort,  but  to  her  frontiers  of  1789.  Napoleon  indig- 
nantly rejected  this  proposal.  "Abandon  the  conquests 
which  were  made  before  me,"  he  exclaimed  ;  "leave 
France  smaller  than  I  found  her  ?     Never ! " 

Marie  Louise  played  the  part  of  Regent  during  the 
stormy  time  which  preceded  the  abdication  of  Napoleon, 
and  after  the  abdication  she  and  the  King  "of  Rome  were 
sent  to  Vienna,  where  her  return  was  hailed  with  the 
same  enthusiasm  as  had  been  exhibited  four  years 
previously  when  Berthier  arrived  to  demand  her  hand. 
While  Napoleon  on  his  road  to  embark  for  Elba  narrowly 
escaped  being  torn  to  pieces,  crowds  flocked  round  the 
carriage  of  Marie  Louise  during  her  journey  to  welcome 


NEGOTIATIONS. 


293 


her  home.  What  Napoleon  most  dreaded  occurred — both 
wife  and  son  fell  into  Austrian  hands — and  after  leaving 
Fontainebleau  all  communication  was  cut  off  between  the 
Emperor  and  the  Empress. 


On  the  4th  January  appeared  a  decree  ordering  a 
levee  en  masse  in  the  departments  through  which  the 
enemy  were  pushing  forward.  Nine  generals  were 
appointed  to  direct  this  movement;  they  were  to  raise 
free  corps  and  to  give  commissions  to  partisans  who  were 
to  act  on  the  flanks  of  the  enemy  and  do  them  all  the 
damage  possible. 

To  GENERAL  CAULAINCOURT. 

"  Paris,  \th  January,  1814. 
"  I  consider  it  doubtful  if  the  allies  are  acting  in  good 
faith,  and  if  England  desires  peace.    For  myself  I  desire  it, 
but   solid  and  honourable.     France   without   her   natural 
limits,  without  Ostend  and  Antwerp,  would   not  be  on  an 
equal  footing  with  the  other  states  of  Europe.     England 
and  all  the  Powers  recognised  these  limits  at  Frankfort. 
The  conquests  of  France  within  the  Rhine  and  the  Alps 
cannot  be  considered  as  a  compensation  for  what  Austria, 
Russia  and  Prussia  have  acquired  in  Poland  and  Finland, 
and   England  in  Asia.     The  policy  of  England   and  the 
hatred  of  the  Emperor  of  Russia  will  carry  the  day  with 
Austria.     I  have  accepted  the  bases  of  Frankfort,  but  it  is 
probable  that  the  allies  have  other  ideas.      Their  proposi- 
tions have  been  merely  a  mask.  ...  It  is  not  certain  that 
you  will  be  received  at  head-quarters ;  the  Russians  and 
the  English  wish  to  prevent  .all  conciliation  and  explana- 
tion   with  the   Emperor  of  Austria.     You  must   try  and 
fathom  the  views  of  the  allies,  and  you  must  let  me  know 
day  by  day  what  you  learn,  so  that  I  may  be  in  a  position 
to  furnish  you  with  instructions.     Do  they  wish  to  reduce 
France  to  her  ancient  limits  ?     This  would  be  to  degrade 


294  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF   NAPOLEON. 

her.  They  are  mistaken  if  they  think  the  misfortunes  of 
war  can  make  the  nation  desire  such  a  peace.  .  .  ,  Italy 
is  intact,  the  Viceroy  has  a  fine  army.  Before  a  week  I 
shall  have  assembled  a  sufficient  force  to  fight  several 
battles,  even  before  the  arrival  of  my  troops  from  Spain. 
The  depredations  of  the  Cossacks  will  arm  the  inhabitants 
and  will  double  our  forces.  If  the  nation  seconds  me 
the  enemy  will  march  to  their  destruction.  Should  fortune 
betray  me  my  mind  is  made  up  ;  I  do  not  care  for  the 
throne.  I  shall  not  disgrace  the  nation  or  myself  by  ac- 
cepting shameful  conditions.  You  must  find  out  what 
Metternich  wishes.  It  is  not  in  the  interests  of  Austria  to 
push  matters  to  extremes.  ...  «  NAPOLEON." 

In  some  instructions  which  were  appended  to  this  letter 
the  Emperor  said: — "The  independence  of  the" whole  of 
Italy  is  of  the  greatest  importance  to  France,  comprising 
even  Rome  and  Genoa."  Holland,  he  said,  should  be  left 
to  France,  or  at  all  events  have  a  government  not  attached 
to  England  by  any  family  alliance.  "If  the  independence 
of  Italy  be  recognised  the  Emperor  will  give  her  Corfu. 
This  should  suit  Russia  and  England.  .  .  .  There  must  be 
no  question  about  Elba  or  Corsica,  which  must  remain 
French.  ...  If  we  cannot  help  it  we  must  allow  the  Pope 
to  be  replaced  at  Rome,  but  he  must  recognise  the  Con- 
cordat of  1813  and  the  arrangements  since  made  in  France 
for  the  clergy.  ...  If  Italy  is  partitioned  Tuscany  should 
be  given  to  King  Joseph.  If  they  do  not  leave  the  King 
of  Westphalia  his  states  in  Germany  he  must  be  accorded 
an  indemnity  in  Italy.  The  Princess  Eliza  must  keep 
Lucca.  .  .  .  All  this  is  included  in  the  bases  of  Frankfort 
which  I  accepted.  Anything  else  must  be  rejected  on  the 
ground  that  the  above  conditions  were  offered  by  all  the 
cabinets,  even  by  that  of  England.  Without  Mayence 
and  Antwerp,  France  would  be  nothing  but  a  second- 
rate  Power,  which  would  be  contrary  to  the  interests  of 
Austria.  .  .  ." 


KING    JOSEPH.  295 

Joseph  on  his  return  from  Spain  was  very  badly  treated 
by  his  brother,  who  was  some  time  before  he  would  allow 
him  to  go  to  Paris.     However  a  reconciliation  took  place. 

To  KING  JOSEPH. 

"Paris,  \oth  January,  18 14. 
"  I  have  had  it  placed  in  the  orders  of  the  palace  that 
you  shall  henceforth  be  announced  as  King  Josef  h^  and  the 
Queen  as  the  Queen  Julie,  with  all  the  honours,  and  in  the 
manner  usual  with  French  princes.  ...  I  authorise  you  to 
wear  the  uniform  of  the  Grenadiers  of  my  Guard,  such  as 
I  wear  myself.  I  think  that  it  will  not  be  suitable  for  you 
to  wear  any  foreign  decorations.  ...  <■  Napoleon." 

There  was  some  little  difficulty  about  this  affair  of  a 
ludicrous  nature.  Joseph,  although  he  had  been  bundled 
out  of  Spain  in  the  most  hopeless  manner,  wished  to  pre- 
serve his  royal  titles,  while  Napoleon  having  concluded  a 
treaty  with  Ferdinand  VII.  could  not  possibly  allow  his 
brother  to  appear  at  the  Tuileries  as  King  of  Spain. 

To  Marshal  Mortier  who  was  in  command  of  the  Old 
Guard  at  the  important  strategical  position  of  Langres,  the 
Emperor  wrote  on  the  10th  saying,  "  I  send  you  a  letter 
from  the  Commandant  of  Belfort.  Try  and  inform  him  by 
means  of  peasants  that  he  must  hold  out  to  the  last 
extremity,  and  that  every  effort  will  be  made  to  succour 
the  place." 

In  the  Franco-German  war  of  1 870,  Belfort  was  one  of 
the  only  places  in  France  which  offered  a  successful  resist- 
ance to  the  Germans,  and  the  result  of  this  resistance  was 
that  France  was  allowed  to  retain  it  much  to  the  annoyance 
of  the  military  party  in  Germany. 

To  MARSHAL  MACDONALD. 

"PARIS,  10th  January,  1814. 
"  You  must  leave   garrisons  in    all    the  places,  call  in 
General  Sebastiani  and    your    cavalry,  march    upon  the 


296  THE    CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

Meuse  and  manoeuvre    on    Blucher's    right    flank  in  the 
direction  of  Namur. 

"  Marshal  Marmont  will  manoeuvre  round  Metz.  Marshals 
Ney  and  Victor  will  guard  the  passes  of  the  Vosges. 
Marshal  Mortier  is  at  Langres.  The  Emperor  is  assem- 
bling an  army  of  100,000  men  in  front  of  Paris.  So  that 
.should  the  enemy  neglect  the  forts  to  march  upon  Paris, 
which  is  not  probable,  your  corps  and  those  of  Marshals 
Marmont,  Victor,  Ney,  and  Mortier  will  be  able  to  join 
the  reserves  before  the  enemy. 

"  But  you  will  feel  how  important  it  is  to  stop,  or  at  least 
to  delay  the  march  of  the  enemy.  .  .  .  Employ  the  wood- 
rangers,  the  rural  police,  and  the  national  guards  to  do 
them  all  the  harm  they  can. 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  1 2th  January  the  Emperor  wrote  a  long  note  on 
the  forces  of  the  allies,  and  his  own  forces.  Bulow,  he 
said,  was  invading  Belgium  with  20,000  men  (9,000  being 
English  under  General  Graham).  Then  the  army  of  Silesia 
40,000  strong,  after  having  left  10,000  men  to  observe  May- 
ence  and  other  places,  was  marching  on  Metz,  while  Prince 
Schwartzenberg  was  advancing  with  100,000  men,  but  he 
would  be  obliged  to  leave  half  this  force  behind  him  to 
observe  Besancon,  Belfort,  &c.  In  the  opinion  of  the 
Emperor,  Blucher  and  Schwartzenberg  would  not  be  able 
to  muster  more  than  80,000  men  between  them  to  march 
on  Paris.  "  This  operation  is  then  a  piece  of  madness,  but 
it  must  be  taken  into  consideration,"  summed  up  Napoleon' 
who  added — "  If  Spanish  affairs  take  a  good  turn  that  will 
be  an  immense  weight  in  the  balance,  and  will  entirely 
change  the  face  of  affairs,  for  the  army  of  Lyons  could 
reinforce  the  army  of  Paris  with  30,000  men. 

"  No  matter  what  happens  proper  measures  must  be 
adopted,  and  in  no  case  must  Paris  be  abandoned." 

Orders  were  to  be  given  for  the  fortification  of  the 
capital. 


26l 

000  men 

137 

000 

?j 

174 

000 

)> 

235 

000 

» 

80 

000 

j> 

78 

000 

» 

talonia      62 

000 

» 

1.027 

000 

)j 

THE    FORCES    ON    EACH    SIDE.  297 

The  real  strength  of  the  opposing  forces  appears  to 
have  been : — 

Schwartzenberg       

Blucher     

Bernadotte       

Russian,  Prussian,  and  Austrian  reserves 
Austrians  in  Italy  under  Bellegarde    . . . 
British  and  Portuguese  in  France 
Anglo-Sicilian  and  Spanish  armies  in  Catalonia 

Total 

The  French  could  oppose  to  this  formidable  host  but 
381,700  men,  100,000  of  whom  were  shut  up  in  various 
fortresses  on  the  Elbe,  and  the  Oder  in  Italy  and  in 
Holland.  With  such  a  disparity  of  force  the  plan  of  the 
allies  was  not  such  a  piece  of  madness  as  Napoleon  made 
it  out  when  using  his  own  figures. 

In  some  general  instructions  which  Napoleon  wrote  to 
his  Marshals  on  the  13th  giving  them  permission  to  issue 
proclamations  in  order  to  counteract  the  "  invectives  "  of 
the  enemy's  generals,  he  said  : — "  They  must  declare  that 
a  force  of  200,000  National  Guards  has  been  formed  in 
Brittany,  Normandy,  Picardy,  and  the  neighbourhood  of 
Paris,  and  is  marching  on  Chalons,  independent  of  an 
army  of  reserve  of  the  line  of  100,000  men  ;  that  peace 
having  been  concluded  with  King  Ferdinand,  and  the 
Spanish  insurgents,  our  troops  of  Arragon  and  Catalonia 
are  marching  upon  Lyons,  and  those  of  Bayonne  on  Paris ; 
in  fact  they  must  predict  to  the  enemies  that  the  sacred 
territory  which  they  have  invaded  will  consume  them." 

To  PRINCE  METTERNICH. 

"  Paris,  16th  January,  1814. 

"  PRINCE, — The  delays  which  have  taken  place  in  the 

negotiations  are  due  neither  to   France  nor  to  Austria,  and 

yet  France  and  Austria  suffer  the  most  from  them.     The 

allied  armies  have  already  invaded  several  of  our  provinces. 


298     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

If  they  advance,  a  battle  will  become  inevitable,  and 
surely  it  behoves  Austria  to  weigh  and  calculate  the 
results  of  this  battle  whether  lost  by  the  allies  or  by 
France. 

"  Writing  to  a  minister  so  enlightened  as  you  are,  Prince, 
I  have  no  need  to  develop  those  results.  I  shall  confine 
myself  to  glancing  at  them,  being  sure  that  their  ensemble 
will  not  escape  your  penetration. 

"The  chances  of  war  are  uncertain.  By  degrees,  as  the 
allies  advance  they  enfeeble  themselves,  while  the  French 
armies  are  receiving  reinforcements,  and  in  advancing  they 
give  the  nation  a  double  courage,  for  henceforth  it  is 
evident  that  it  is  called  upon  to  defend  its  greatest  and 
dearest  interests.  Now  the  consequences  of  a  battle  lost 
by  the  allies  would  weigh  upon  none  of  them  so  heavily 
as  upon  Austria,  since  she  is  the  principal  Power  among 
the  allies,  and  one  of  the  central  Powers  of  Europe. 

"  In  supposing  that  fortune  should  continue  to  favour 
the  allies,  it  remains  for  Austria  to  consider  with  attention 
what  the  situation  of  Europe  will  be  the  day  after  a  battle 
lost  by  the  French  in  the  heart  of  France ;  and  if  such  an 
event  would  not  produce  results  diametrically  opposed  to 
that  equilibrium  which  Austria  aspires  to  see  established, 
to  her  policy,  to  the  personal  affections,  and  to  the  family 
of  the  Emperor  Francis. 

"  Then  Austria  protests  that  she  desires  peace,  but  by 
continuing  hostilities  does  she  not  place  herself  in  a  position 
to  be  unable  to  accomplish  this  end  ? 

"  All  these  considerations  lead  me  to  think  that  in  the 
present  position  of  the  respective  armies,  and  during  this 
severe  weather  a  suspension  of  arms  might  be  reciprocally 
advantageous.  It  might  be  established  by  a  convention 
or  by  a  simple  exchange  of  declarations.  It  might  be 
limited  to  a  fixed  or  be  for  an  indefinite  period. 

"This  suspension  of  arms  appears  to  me  to  depend 
more  especially  upon  Austria  since  she  has  the  chief 
direction  of  military  affairs. 


LETTER    TO    PRINCE    METTERNICH.  299 

"  And  I  have  reflected  that  in  one  way  or  the  other,  the 
interest  of  Austria  is  that  matters  should  not  be  pushed  to 
extremes.  It  is  chiefly  owing  to  this  persuasion  that  I 
write  to-day  confidentially  to  your  Excellency. 

"  If  I  am  mistaken,  if  this  advance,  absolutely  con- 
fidential, should  have  no  effect,  I  beg  of  your  Excellency 
to  consider  it  null  and  void. 

"  You  have  shown  me  so  much  personal  confidence,  and 
I  myself  have  such  great  confidence  in  the  straightforward- 
ness of  your  views,  and  in  the  noble  sentiments  which  you 
have  always  expressed,  that  I  venture  to  hope  that  a  letter 
dictated  by  this  confidence,  if  it  does  not  attain  its  object 
will  remain  a  secret  between  your  Excellency  and  myself. 

"  Napoleon." 


On  the  17th  the  Emperor  directed  Berthier  to  say  that 
he  highly  disapproved  of  Marshal  Victor  having  abandoned 
Nancy  when  his  Majesty  had  ordered  him  not  to  leave  the 
Moselle  without  fighting.  The  letter  also  said  : — "  You  have 
fatigued  your  troops  by  too  long  marches,  and  you  have 
emboldened  the  enemy.  This  will  oblige  Marmont  and 
Mortier  also  to  make  a  retrograde  movement  and  will 
greatly  damage  our  affairs." 

To  PRINCE  EUGENE. 

"Paris,  ijth  January,  1814. 

"You  will  have  seen,  by  the  various  documents  which 
have  been  published,  all  the  efforts  made  to  obtain  peace. 
I  have  since  sent  my  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  to  the 
enemy's  outposts.  They  put  off  receiving  him  and  yet 
they  march  forward. 

"  Fouche  will  have  told  you  that  the  King  of  Naples 
has  joined  our  enemies.  As  soon  as  your  receive  the 
official  news  it  will  be  important  for  you  to  march  to  the 
Alps  with  your  whole  army.     You  may  leave  Italians  in 


300     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

garrison  at  Manuta  and  other  places,  taking  care  not  to 
leave  behind  the  silver  and  other  precious  goods  belonging 
to  my  household. 

"  Napoleon." 

to  marshal  berthier. 

"Paris,  i&th  Jatiuary,  1814. 
"  Write  to  Marshal  Marmont  to  hold  his  own  at  Metz  as 
long  as  possible,  and  to  let  you  know  the  strength  of  York 
and  of  Sacken.  A  great  many  inhabitants  and  soldiers 
must  have  seen  them  pass  and  must  have  a  tolerable  idea 
of  their  strength  and  their  position. 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  24th  January  the  Emperor,  before  quitting 
Paris,  appointed  Marie  Louise  Regent  and  King  Joseph 
his  Lieutenant-General,  and  gave  him  the  command  of 
the  National  Guard.1  In  a  series  of  instructions  he 
explained  his  own  position  and  that  of  the  enemy, 
who    were  pushing    forward    upon    Langres,    St.    Dizier, 

1  Comte  Miot  de  Melito  has  left  an  interesting  account  of  what 
happened  at  the  Tuileries  on  the  23rd  January,  when  Napoleon  gave 
a  grand  audience.  He  says  : — "  The  Emperor  came  with  the  Empress 
and  the  King  of  Rome.  He  presented  them  one  after  the  other  to  the 
officers  of  the  newly  re-organised  National  Guard,  and  asked  them  to 
watch  over  the  safety  of  what  he  considered  the  most  dear,  repeating 
several  times,  '  You  will  answer  for  them,  will  you  not  ?  You  will 
defend  them  ?'  He  pronounced  these  words  with  a  warmth  and  an 
amount  of  feeling  which  made  a  deep  impression  upon  all  who  heard 
him.  There  was  a  moment  of  enthusiasm,  and  cries  of  '  Vive 
l'Empereur  !'  'Vive  l'Imperatrice  !'  and  'Vive  le  Roi  de  Rome  !'  were 
heard  on  all  sides.  In  this  animated  address  the  Emperor  did  not 
indulge  in  any  hope  of  peace ;  on  the  contrary,  he  allowed  the  possi- 
bility of  the  enemy  arriving  under  the  walls  of  Paris  to  be  distinctly 
seen.  .  .  .  But  what  struck  me  most  was  the  language  of  the' French. 
Never  had  it  been  more  obsequious.  M.  de  Laplace  approached  me 
and  spoke  of  his  deep  attachment  to  the-Emperor,  and  his  confidence 
in  him,  in  the  most  feeling  manner,  expressing  at  the  same  time  his 
indignation  against  the  Bourbons.  .  .  . 

M.  de  Laplace  a  few  months  afterwards  threw  himself  into  the 
arms  of  the  Bourbons. 


BATTLE    OF    BRIENNE. 


30I 


and  Dijon.  "The  measures  I  have  taken,"  he  said, 
"  appear  sufficient  to  keep  the  enemy  at  a  distance  from 
Paris  and  to  insure  the  tranquillity  of  the  capital."  On 
the  26th  his  Majesty  was  writing  from  Chalons-sur-Marne. 
"  At  Vitry,"  he  wrote  to  Berthier,  "  take  200,000  or  300,000 
bottles  of  wine  or  brandy  for  the  troops  and  distribute 
them  to-day  and  to-morrow.  If  there  be  no  other  wine 
but  champagne  in  bottle  take  it ;  it  is  better  that  we 
should  have  it  than  the  enemy."  On  the  evening  of  the 
same  day  we  find  some  despatches  dated  from  Vitry-le- 
Francois. 

To  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"St.  Dizier,  2%th  January,  1814. 
"  On  the  27th  I  marched  upon  St.  Dizier,  which  was  occu- 
pied by  the  enemy.  I  drove  them  out,  captured  some 
guns,  killed  a  few  men,  and  took  a  few  prisoners.  I 
learned  here  that  Blucher  with  25,000  men  had  gone  to 
Brienne,  where  he  arrived  to-day.  I  have  had  the  line  of 
operations  cut,  caused  Bar  to  be]occupied,  and  am  starting 
in  pursuit  of  Blucher.  If  he  stands  there  will  possibly  be 
an  affair  to  morrow  at  Brienne. 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  31st  the  Emperor  wrote  to  his  War  Minister 
from  Brienne,  and  said  : — "  I  had  a  very  warm  affair  on  the 
29th  at  Brienne.  I  attacked  the  armies  of  Blucher  and  of 
Sacken — 80,000  infantry  and  a  strong  body  of  cavalry.  I 
attacked  them  with  10,000  men  just  after  having  made  a 
long  march.  At  the  beginning  of  the  action  I  had  the  good 
fortune  to  seize  upon  the  castle  which  dominated  every- 
thing. As  the  attack  did  not  begin  until  an  hour  before 
night-fall  we  fought  all  night.  Blucher  was  beaten  and 
had  3,000  or  4,000  killed  or  wounded,  and  lost  500  or 
600  prisoners.  He  has  been  obliged  to  call  in  all  the 
detachments  which  were  marching  on  Paris  and  to  fall 
back  upon  Bar-sur-Aube.     I  pursued  him  in  that  direction 


2,02  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

for  two  leagues.  ...  If  I  had  had  old  troops  I  should 
have  done  better  .  .  .  but  with  the  troops  I  have  we  must 
consider  ourselves  lucky  with  what  happened.  ...  I  am 
impatiently  expecting  the  divisions  of  the  army  of 
Spain.  .  .   ." 

There  were  strange  ups  and  downs  in  those  days.  On 
the  same  day  that  the  above  letters  were  dictated  Napoleon 
wrote  thus  to  his  Police  Minister  Savary  :  "  I  highly  ap- 
prove of  what  General  Miollis  has  done  in  giving  passports 
to  the  quondam  Director  Barras,  allowing  him  to  return  to 
France."  Barras  who  had  formerly  given  Napoleon  not 
only  Josephine  for  a  wife  but  the  command  of  the  army  of 
Italy. 

To  KING  JOSEPH. 

"Piney,  2nd  February,  1814. 
"  It  seems  that  the  allies  have  selected  the  3rd  February 
for  the  opening  of  the  Congress  at  Chatillon  ;  that  Lord 
Cathcart  will  treat  for  England  with  a  dozen  Englishmen, 
Stadion  for  Austria,  Humbolt  for  Prussia,  and  Razoumosky 
for  Russia.  ...   I  shall  be  to-morrow  at  Troyes. 

"  Napoleon." 
to  general  caulaincourt. 

"  Piney,  ind  February,  1814. 

"  The  troops  of  the  enemy  behave  horribly  everywhere. 
All  the  inhabitants  seek  refuge  in  the  woods.  No  more 
peasants  are  found  in  the  villages.  The  enemy  eat  up 
everything,  take  all  the  horses,  cattle,  clothes,  and  all  the 
rags  of  the  peasants ;  they  beat  every  one,  men  and 
women,  and  commit  rape.  The  picture  which  I  have  just 
seen  with  my  eyes  should  make  you  understand  easily 
how  much  I  desire  to  extricate  my  people  as  soon  as 
possible  from  this  state  of  misery  and  suffering,  which 
is  realty  terrible.  This  should  also  make  the  enemy 
reflect,  for  the  Frenchman  is  not  patient ;  he  is  naturally 


THE  BATTLE  OF  LA  ROTH1ERE.        303 

brave,  and  I  expect  to  see  the  people  organise  themselves 
into  bands.  You  should  draw  a  very  energetic  sketch  of 
these  excesses.  In  towns  like  Brienne,  of  2,000  souls, 
there  is  no  one  ! 

"  Napoleon." 

The  horrors  of  war  seem  to  have  been  brought  home  to 
the  Emperor  for  the  first  time  when  he  saw  this  desola- 
tion of  desolations  at  Brienne,  which  was  utterly 
wrecked. 

To  GENERAL  CAULAINCOURT. 

"  Troyes,  4M  February,  18 14. 

"The  report  of  Prince  Schwartzenberg  is  a  piece  of 
folly.  There  has  been  no  battle.  The  Old  Guard  was  not 
there  ;  the  Young  Guard  was  not  engaged.  A  few  guns 
were  taken  from  us  by  charges  of  cavalry.  But  the  army 
was  marching  to  cross  the  bridge  of  Lesmont  when  this 
happened,  and  two  hours  later  the  enemy  would  not  have 
found  us.  It  appears  that  the  whole  army  of  the  enemy 
was  there,  and  they  look  upon  this  as  a  battle  ....  they 
had  to  deal  with  a  force  of  only  15,000  men,  and  we  held 
the  field  of  battle  all  day. 

"The  letter  which  M.  de  Metternich  has  written  to  you 
is  perfectly  ridiculous,  but  I  recognise  in  it  what  I  have 
perceived  for  a  long  time,  that  while  he  thinks  that  he 
leads  all  Europe  every  one  leads  him.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

The  affair  above  alluded  to  was  the  battle  of  La 
Rothiere,  much  slurred  over  in  French  history.  The  allies 
had  been  warned  at  Brienne  of  the  presence  of  Napoleon, 
and  had  rapidly  concentrated  over  80,000  men,  with  which 
force  they  attacked  the  French  on  the  1st  February.  The 
struggle  was  a  severe  one,  but  when  night  fell  Napoleon  had 
to  return  with  his  shattered  army  to  Brienne  with  a  loss  of 
6,ooo  men  and  73  guns.  Baron  Fain  says  that  the  Emperor 
ordered  a  retreat  upon  Troyes  by  the  bridge  of  Lesmont, 


304  THE   CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

and  that  while  the  army  accomplished  this  movement, 
favoured  by  the  obscurity,  Napoleon 'greatly  feared  that 
a  night  attack  would  spread  confusion  through  his  ranks. 

On  the  5  th  the  Emperor  wrote  another  letter  to  Cau- 
laincourt,  dated  from  Troyes  at  1  A.M.  In  this  he  said  : 
"  I  remained  at  Troyes  to-day  thinking  that  I  should  have 
news  of  the  Congress.  It  seems  that  you  did  not  begin 
until  the  4th.  If  they  desire  peace,  and  if  this  again  is 
not  a  mask  to  prolong  hostilities  unanimously,  things  must 
be  arranged  promptly,  for  in  a  few  days  there  will  be 
a  general  engagement  which  will  settle  everything.  I  am 
going  to  Nogent  to  meet  20,000  men  of  the  army  of  Spain, 
who  will  arrive  to-day  or  to-morrow." 

Napoleon,  when  he  wrote  this  letter,  had  no  intention  of 
risking  a  general  engagement.  He  considered  it  more  pru- 
dent to  abandon  Troyes  and  to  fall  back  on  Nogent. 
Everything  was  going  wrong  and  bad  news  was  pouring  in 
from  Italy  and  from  the  north,  and  Blucher  was  marching 
on  Paris.  As  for  the  Congress,  it  increased  its  demands, 
and  would  no  longer  grant  the  conditions  of  Frankfort. 
The  blunders  of  the  allies  in  dividing  their  forces  and  the 
military  genius  of  Napoleon,  which  once  more  shone  forth 
as  brilliant  as  ever,  soon  changed  the  aspect  of  affairs. 


To  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"  Troyes,  6th  February,  1814. 
"  I  am  much  surprised  that  Marshal  Suchet  should  not 
have  despatched  the  troops  which  I  demanded  from 
Lyons.  They  ought  to  have  arrived  and  I  hear  no  more 
of  them.  If  the  marshal  has  taked  upon  himself  not  to 
execute  orders  he  is  very  culpable.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

Writing  the  same  day  to  King  Joseph  oh  this  and  other 
subjects,  his  Majesty  said  :  "  I  have  been  very  much  put 
out,    for    I    wished    to    attack    the   Emperor   Alexander 


PARIS    ALARMED.  305 

to-morrow  at  Bar,  and  to  have  beaten  him.  He  appears  to 
me  to  have  made  some  false  plans.  However,  I  sacrifice 
everything  to  the  necessity  of  covering  Paris.  .  .  In  the 
event  of  anything  unforeseen  happening  the  idea  of 
putting  King  Louis  at  the  head  of  Paris  seems  to 
me  a  good  one.  .  .  .  Have  all  the  valuable  furniture,  and 
everything  which  can  be  regarded  as  a  trophy,  removed 
from  Fontainebleau.  .  .  ." 

The  greatest  uneasiness  prevailed  in  Paris,  for  Napoleon 
had  sent  only  one  bulletin  from  the  front,  and  that  was  not 
of  a  cheering  character. 

To  PRINCE  CAMBACERES. 

"  Nogent,  7th  February,  18 14. 
"  I  see  that  instead  of  sustaining  the  Empress  you  dis- 
courage her.  Why  do  you  lose  your  head  like  that  ? 
What  are  these  Misereres,  and  these  prayers  of  forty  hours 
at  the  chapel  ?  Have  people  in  Paris  gone  mad  ?  The 
Minister  of  Police  says  and  commits  follies  instead  of 
informing  himself  of  the  movements  of  the  enemy.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  same  day,  writing  to  King  Joseph,  the  Emperor 
said — 

"  The  Empress  had  the  intention  of  going  to  St.  Gene- 
vieve ;  I  fear  that  that  will  have  a  bad  effect,  and  create 
no  other  result.  Put  a  stop  to  these  prayers  of  forty 
hours,  and  the  Miserere.  If  these  monkey  tricks  are 
continued  we  shall  all  be  afraid  of  death.  Long  ago  it 
was  said  that  priests  and  doctors  render  death  painful. 
The  moment  is  no  doubt  difficult,  but  up  to  the  present 
I  have  done  nothing  but  gain  advantages.  ...  It  is 
possible  that  parties  of  cavalry  may  be  seen  at  Soissons. 
The  enemy  has  an  immense  cavalry,  with  which  they 
inundate 'France.  .  .  .  "Napoleon." 

"  P.S. — Keep  the  Empress  gay ;"  she  is  dying  of  con- 
sumption." 

VOL.  III.  x 


306  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

On  the  8th  the  Emperor  wrote  another  reassuring  letter 
to  King  Joseph,  adding  a  postscript  in  which  he  said  : — 

"  Have  an  article  inserted  in  the  Moniteur  about  Cha- 
tillon,  saying  that  the  six  members  of  the  Congress  dined 
with  Lord  Castlereagh,  and  that  it  was  remarked  that  the 
greatest  politeness  existed  between  the  ambassadors,  and 
especially  between  those  of  France  and  England,  who  were 
most  attentive  to  each  other." 

In  a  third  letter  to  his  brother  of  the  same  date  the 
Emperor  said — 

"I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  7th,  which  much 
astonished  me'.  I  have  read  the  letter  of  King  Louis.  I 
have  replied  with  regard  to  the  eventuality  of  Paris  ;  you 
have  no  need  to  return  to  that.  That  finale  will  affect 
more  people  than  us.  When  it  comes  I  shall  no  longer 
exist,  consequently  it  is  not  for  myself  that  I  speak.  I 
have  given  you  orders  for  the  Empress,  for  the  King  of 
Rome,  and  our  family.  Be  sure  that  should  the  case 
happen,  what  I  have  predicted  will  infallibly  come  to  pass. 

"  King  Louis  speaks  of  peace ;  this  is  giving  advice  in 
very  bad  season.  Besides,  I  understand  nothing  of  your 
letter.  I  thought  that  I  had  explained  matters  to  you  ;  but 
you  remember  nothing,  and  you  are  of  the  same  way  of 
thinking  as  the  first  man  who  speaks  to  you  and  who  reflects 
an  opinion. 

"  I  repeat  to  you  that  Paris  shall  never  be  occupied 
during  my  life. 

"  I  have  a  right  to  be  aided  by  those  who  -surround  me, 
because  I  have  aided  them. 

"  If  by  any  chance  I  should  march  on  the  Loire  I  shall 
not  leave  the  Empress  and  my  son  behind,  because  both 
of  them  might  be  carried  off  to  Vienna.  ...  I  must  ac- 
knowledge that  your  letter  has  pained  me,  because  I  see 
that  your  ideas  are  shallow,  and  that  you  allow  yourself  to 
be  influenced  by  the  gossip  of  a  crowd  of  unreflecting 
persons.  I  f  Talleyrand  has  anything  to  do  with  this  idea 
of  leaving  the  Empress  in  Paris  in  the  event  of  our  troops 


GLOOMY   FOREBODINGS.  307 

evacuating  the  capital,  it  is  treason.  I  tell  you  again  to 
distrust  that  man.  I  know  him  for  the  last  sixteen 
years  ;  I  have  even  shown  him  some  favour,  but  he  is 
surely  the  greatest  enemy  of  our  house  now  that  fortune 
has  for  some  time  past  abandoned  us. 

"  Should  the  news  of  a  battle  lost,  or  of  my  death,  arrive, 
send  the  Empress  and  the  King  of  Rome  to  Rambouillet  ; 
order  the  Senate,  the  Council  of  State,  and  all  my  troops 
to  assemble  on  the  Loire,  and  leave  a  prefect  and  an 
imperial  commissioner  or  a  mayor  at  Paris. 

"  I  informed  you  that  Madame  and  the  Queen  of  West- 
phalia .x  might  remain  in  Paris  as  well  as  the  vice-reine  of 
Italy.  But  never  allow  the  Empress  or  the  King  of  Rome 
to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy. 

"  Be  certain  that  from  that  moment  Austria  would  cease 
to  take  any  interest  in  us,  and  would  carry  off  the  Em- 
press to  Vienna  on  the  pretence  of  rendering  her  happy, 
and  France  would  be  obliged  to  adopt  the  suggestions  of 
the  Regent  of  England  and  of  Russia.  By  this  our  party 
would  find  itself  destroyed  by  that  horrible  league  between 
the  Republicans  and  the  Royalists.  .  .  . 

"  However,  it  is  possible  that  I  may  beat  the  enemy,  who 
are  approaching  Paris,  and  then  all  this  will  not  take 
place.  It  is  also  possible  that  I  may  conclude  peace  in  a 
few  days.  ...  It  is  in  the  interest  of  the  country  that  the 
Empress  and  the  King  of  Rome  should  not  remain  in  Paris, 
because  the  interests  of  the  country  cannot  be  separated 
from  their  persons,  and  that  since  the  world  was  the  world  I 
have  never  seen  a  sovereign  allow  himself  to  be  captured 
in  an  open  town.  That  unfortunate  King  of  Saxony  allowed 
himself  to  be  taken  at  Leipsic  ;  he  lost  his  states,  and  was 
made  prisoner.  ...  If  I  live  I  must  be  obeyed,  and  if  I 
die  my  son  and  the  Empress  Regent  should,  for  the 
honour  of  France,  not  allow  themselves  to  be  captured, 
but  retire  to  the  last  village  with  the  last  soldiers.  Re- 
member what  the  wife  of  Philip  V.  said.  What  would  be 
said  of  the  Empress  ?  That  she  abandoned  the  throne  of 
1  Napoleon's  mother,  and  the  wife  of  King  Jerome. 

X   2 


308     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

her  son  and  ours.  And  the  allies  would  prefer  to  finish 
matters  by  leading  their  prisoners  to  Vienna.  I  am  sur- 
prised that  you  cannot  understand  this.  I  see  that  fear 
has  turned  the  heads  of  every  one  in  Paris. 

"  The  Empress  and  the  King  of  Rome  once  in  the  hands 
of  the  enemy,  you  and  all  those  who  would  defend  your- 
selves would  be  rebels. 

"  As  far  as  I  am  concerned,  I  would  sooner  see  my  son 
slain  than  brought  up  at  Vienna  as  an  Austrian  prince ; 
and  I  have  a  sufficiently  good  opinion  of  the  Empress  to 
feel  persuaded  that  she  thinks  in  the  same  way,  as  far  as 
it  is  possible  for  a  woman  and  a  mother  to  do  so. 

"  I  never  saw  Andromaque  represented  without  pitying 
Astyanax  surviving  his  family,  and  without  regarding  it  as 
a  piece  of  good  fortune  that  he  did  not  survive  his  father. 

"  You  do  not  know  the  French  nation  ;  the  results  of 
what  will  happen  during  these  great  events  is  incalculable. 
As  for  Louis,  I  think  that  he  should  follow  you. 

"  Napoleon." 

Two  other  letters  Napoleon  wrote  to  his  brother  Joseph 
on  the  8th.  The  first  ran  thus : — "  Have  the  inclosed 
letter  placed  in  the  hands  of  the  Empress  Josephine.  I 
have  written  to  her  to  write  to  Eugene.  Tell  her  to  send 
you  her  letter,  and  that  you  will  forward  it  by  estafette'.' 

The  fifth  letter  was  as  follows  : — "  I  have  just  written  to 
the  War  Minister  relative  to  the  evacuation  of  Italy,  and  to 
the  King  Ferdinand.  ..." 

Joseph,  in  his  letter  of  the  7th,  had  urged  upon  Napoleon 
the  necessity  of  coming  to  terms  with  the  enemy. 

As  regards  Italy,  the  Emperor,  on  account  of  the  defec- 
tion of  Murat,  gave  orders  for  all  the  French  soldiers  to  be 
withdrawn  from  that  country.  His  Majesty  was  beginning 
to  doubt  the  fidelity  of  Eugene,  and  hence  the  letter  which 
his  mother  was  to  write  to  him.1 

1  The  following  correspondence  relates  to  this  subject.    Josephine 
at  once  wrote  as  follows  to  her  son,  Eugene  de  Beauharnais  : — 
"  Do  not  lose  an  instant,  my  dear  Eugene ;  no  matter  what  the 


KING    FERDINAND.  309 

On  the  subject  of  King  Ferdinand  the  Emperor  wrote 
thus  to  General  Clarke : — "  As  for  King  Ferdinand,  we 
hear  nothing  more  of  the  treaty.  ...  If  the  king  wishes 
to  go  to  Barcelona  he  can  do  so  incognito.  The  fortresses 
will  be  handed  over  to  him  in  return  for  the  French 
garrisons,  who  must  be  sent  back." 

On  the  8th  Napoleon  also  wrote  to  Commissioner  Daure, 
saying  : — "  The  army  is  dying  of  hunger  in  spite  of  all  your 
reports.  Twelve  men  died  of  hunger,  although  everything 
was  '  put  to   fire   and  blood '    on   the   march  in   order  to 

obstacles,  redouble  your  efforts  to  carry  out  the  orders  of  the  Emperor, 
who  has  just  written  to  me  on  the  subject.  His  intention  is  that  you 
fall  back  upon  the  Alps,  leaving  only  Italian  troops  in  Mantua  and 
the  other  fortresses.  His  letter  concludes  thus  :  '  France  before 
everything.  France  has  need  of  all  her  children.'  Hasten  hither, 
my  dear  son,  and  never  will  your  zeal  have  better  served  the  Emperor. 
I  can  assure  you  that  each  instant  is  precious.  I  know  that  your 
wife  is  about  to  leave  Milan.  Tell  me  if  I  can  be  of  any  use  to  her. 
Adieu,  my  dear  Eugene,  I  have  only  time  to  embrace  you  and  to 
implore  you  to  come  quickly." 

Prince  Eugene  replied  to  his  mother : — 

"My  good  Mother, —  I  received  your  letter  of  the  9th  on 
returning  from  an  expedition,  during  which  I  beat  the  Austrians.  It 
perfectly  astonished  me.  I  have  replied  to  the  Emperor.  I  did  not 
expect,  after  such  a  length  of  time,  to  be  obliged  to  give  the  Emperor 
proofs  of  my  fidelity  and  devotion." 

To  the  Emperor  and  to  the  War  Minister  the  Viceroy  answered  on 
February  1 8th  : — 

"Sire, — I  have  received  a  letter  from  the  Empress  Josephine, 
reproaching  me  with  not  having  promptly  executed  the  orders  trans- 
mitted by  the  Due  de  Feltre.  Your  Majesty  seems  to  think  that 
I  need  more  than  my  devotion  towards  your  person,  and  my  love  of 
my  country,  to  excite  me  to  fall  back  upon  France  under  present 
circumstances.  Your  Majesty  must  pardon  me  if  I  tell  you  that 
I  have  not  deserved  these  reproaches,  nor  the  little  confidence  you 
have  in  sentiments  which  will  always  most  powerfully  influence  my 
actions.  Your  Majesty's  orders  expressly  stated  that  I  was  to  retreat 
on  the  Alps  should  Murat  declare  war.  This  order  was  conditional, 
and  I  should  have  been  culpable  had  I  executed  it  before  the  condition 
was  fulfilled." 


3IO  THE   CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

procure  provisions.  However,  if  I  refer  to  your  reports 
the  army  is  well  fed.  Marshal  Victor  has  nothing :  General 
Gerard  has  nothing  ;  the  cavalry  of  the  guard  are  dying 
of  hunger.  .  .  ." 

On  the  9th  Napoleon  addressed  five  despatches  to  King 
Joseph,  and  on  the  10th  he  wrote  to  him  thus : — 

"  To-day  I  attacked  the  enemy  to  Champaubert.  They 
were  twelve  regiments  strong,  and  had  forty  guns.  The 
general-in-chief  Olsoufief,  and  all  his  generals,  colonels, 
cannon,  ammunition  waggons  and  baggage,  were  captured. 
We  count  6,000  prisoners,  40  guns,  and  200  waggons. 
The  remainder  were  thrown  into  a  pond,  or  killed  on  the 
field  of  battle.     This  corps  is  entirely  destroyed. 

"  We  are  marching  upon  Montmirail,  where  we  shall 
arrive  at  ten  this  evening.  I  shall  be  there  myself  to- 
morrow morning  before  daybreak  in  order  to  march  against 
Sacken  with  20,000  men.  ...  I  am  close  on  the  enemy's 
heels.  ...  I  flatter  myself  that  Sacken  is  destroyed  ;  and 
if  fortune  favours  us  to-day  affairs  will  be  changed  in  the 
twinkling  of  an  eye ;  for  it  is  in  Sacken's  corps  that  the 
strength  of  the  Russian  army  lies,  since  he  has  ten  divisions, 
or  sixty  regiments.  Blucher  is  cut  off  from  Sacken ;  he 
has  two  divisions.    ...    I  think  that  we  have  to  regret 

200  men. 

"  Napoleon." 

The  surprise  of  the  Russians  and  the  success  of 
Napoleon's  cross  march  had  a  wonderful  effect,  and  com- 
pletely revived  the  drooping  spirits  of  the  French,  who 
were  fast  losing  their  confidence  in  the  genius  of  their 
leader.  Champaubert  restored  the  prestige  of  Napoleon, 
and  rendered  all  the  chances  of  the  campaign  uncertain. 
His  Majesty,  as  usual,  exaggerated  the  losses  of  the  enemy, 
which  seem  to  have  been  3,000  out  of  5,000  men,  and  twelve 
guns.  He  now  began  to  speak  of  dictating  terms  of  peace 
to  Alexander  on  the  banks  of  the  Vistula. 


BRILLIANT    SUCCESS.  3II 

To  KING  JOSEPH. 
"Farm  of  Epine-aux-Bois,  nth  February,  1814. 
"Berthier  sent  you  a  courier  from  the  field  of  battle.  I 
have  since  despatched  the  young  Montesquiou.  It  is 
8  o'clock,  and  before  going  to  sleep  I  send  you  two  words 
to  inform  you  that  the  affair  of  yesterday  was  decisive. 
The  enemy's  army  of  Silesia  no  longer  exists.  I  have 
completely  routed  it.  We  have  taken  all  its  guns  and  its 
baggage,  and  made  thousands  of  prisoners — perhaps  over 
7,000.  There  are  5,000  or  6,000  enemies  lying  on  the  field 
of  battle.  All  this  was  obtained  by  bringing  into  action  only 
the  half  of  my  Old  Guard,  which  accomplished  more  than 
could  be  expected  from  men.  The  enemy  have  fled  in 
disorder  in  the  direction  of  Chateau  Thierry.  .  .  .  These 
two  days  change  the  face  of  affairs.  Sacken  was  killed, 
and  a  great  many  of  their  generals  captured.  I  think  that 
as  night  fell  York's  corps  came  up  ;  it  shared  the  fate 
of  the  Russians.  I  have  written  to  the  Empress  to  fire 
sixty  rounds.  .  .  .  I  think  that  these  two  days  will  remove 
all  danger  from   Paris,  for  the  army  of  Silesia  was  the  last 

army  of  the  allies.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  marshal  berthier. 

"Farm  of  £pine-aux-Bois,  12th  February,  1814. 
"  Write  to  Marshal  Marmont  that  the  enemy  have  fallen 
back  upon  Chateau  Thierry ;  that  we  have  repulsed  them 
on  all  sides.  .  .  .  The  cavalry  of  Marshal  Marmont  should 
commit  fearful  havoc  with  the  rear  guard,  seeing  that  their 
cavalry  is  in  front,  and  that  those  people  are  not  accus- 
tomed to  see  their  rear  compromised.  Let  Marmont 
publish  proclamations  saying  that  sixty  Russian  regiments 
have  been  destroyed,  and  120  guns  captured  ;  that  it  is  time 
for  the  French  people  to  rise  and  fall  upon  the  enemy ; 
that  the  Emperor  is  pursuing  them  ;  let  them  arrest  the 

Cossacks.  ... 

"  Napoleon. 


312  THE    CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

Further  information  was  addressed  to  King  Joseph  on 
the  same  day  from  Chateau  Thierry,  whence  the  rear  guard 
of  the  enemy  had  been  pursued,  for  a  large  portion  of  the 
sixty  regiments  entirely  destroyed  still  remained,  although 
in  a  bad  plight.     His  Majesty  wrote  : — 

"  Having  cut  the  enemy  off  from  the  road  to  Chalons 
the  whole  army  was  obliged  to  cross  the  Marne  in  order  to 
reach  the  road  to  Soissons.  I  snapped  up  their  rear  guard, 
composed  of  four  Russian  battalions,  three  Prussian  batta- 
lions, and  three  guns.  To-day  we  have  captured  2,000 
prisoners.  Marmont  is  marching  from  Etoges  on  Epernay 
or  Chalons.  If  Macdonald,  as  I  hoped,  had  operated  on 
the  right  bank  of  the  Marne,  not  a  man  would  have 
escaped.  However,  we  have  made  between  8,000  and 
10,000  prisoners,  amongst  them  five  or  six  generals.  We 
have  taken  nearly  all  their  artillery,  all  their  baggage,  and 
killed  an  enormous  lot  of  men.  This  army,  which  was 
35,000  strong,  is  certainly  not  over  12,000  to-day.  The 
enemy  have  been  thrown  into  horrible  confusion.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

The  loss  of  the  allies  at  Montmirail  was  very  heavy, 
although  exaggerated  by  Napoleon  in  his  letter  to 
Joseph.  They  acknowledge  having  lost  6,000  men,  seven- 
teen guns,  and  five  colours  during  the  two  days,  and  the 
pursuit  would  have  been  continued  had  they  not  blown 
up  the  bridges  after  crossing  the  Marne.  Marmont  was 
unable  to  obey  the  orders  of  the  Emperor,  having  been 
repulsed  by  Blucher. 

Describing  this  affair  to  Savary,  Napoleon  wrote : — "  The 
last  army  of  Russia  is  destroyed.  My  Old  Guard  and 
Horse  Guards  performed  miracles ;  the  dragoons  distin- 
guished themselves.  I  did  not  bring  into  action  more  than 
2,000  men  of  the  Old  Guard.  What  they  did  can  be  com- 
pared to  the  romances  of  chivalry,  and  to  the  men  in 
armour  of  those  days  where  one  beat  300  or  400.    The 


FEARS    FOR   FONTAINEBLEAU.  313 

enemy  must  have  been  struck  with  a  singular  terror. 
Redouble  your  efforts  to  arrest  all  stragglers ;  let  the 
hospitals  at  Paris  be  thrown  open  to  the  sick,  and  let 
care  be  taken  that  this  multitude  of  men  from  the  army 
be  not  allowed  to  remain  there  uselessly." 

There  is  a  strange  contrast  between  the  beginning  and 
the  end  of  this  letter. 

On  the  13th  the  Emperor,  who  could  not  get  across  the 
Marne  to  finish  the  destruction  of  Sacken's  totally  annihi- 
lated regiments,  wrote  to  King  Joseph  from  the  farm  of 
Lurmont,  saying: — "During  the  whole  of  yesterday  the 
enemy  attacked  Nogent.  Marshal  Victor  had  crossed 
over  to  the  light  bank,  and  had  left  only  1,200  men  in  the 
town  under  the  command  of  General  Bourmont.  This 
Bourmont  is  the  famous  Chouan  with  whom  I  am  much 
pleased.  The  enemy  wished  to  enter  in  close  column  ; 
they  were  repulsed  in  three  consecutive  assaults,  and  lost 
2,000  or  3,000  men.  Bourmont  was  slightly  wounded,  but 
our  loss  was  light.  Then  the  enemy,  in  a  rage,  brought 
up  mortars  and  set  fire  to  the  town,  but  to  no  purpose. .  . . 
I  tremble  lest  those  scamps  of  Russians  should  set  fire 
to  Fontainebleau  by  way  of  reprisal." 

Nogent  was  evacuated  the  next  day,  and  Fontainebleau 
fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Cossacks  on  the  14th. 

To  M.  FOUCHE,  Due  d'Otrante,  at  Florence. 

"Chateau  Thierry,  13M  February,  1814. 
"  I  have  received  your  different  letters.  The  conduct 
of  the  King  of  Naples  is  infamous,  and  there  is  no  name 
for  that  of  the  Queen  (Sister  Caroline).  I  hope  to  live 
long  enough  to  be  able  to  revenge  myself  and  France  for 
such  an  insult  and  for  such  fearful  ingratitude.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 


And  orders  were  given  to  Caulaincourt  to  "  prepare  the 
documents  concerning  this  strange  war  "  between  Napoleon 

n r\A    nit!    V\rr\4- Ti pr.in _  1 P \xr 


3H  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

On  the  14th  Napoleon  wrote  to  Marshal  Mortier,  who 
was  in  command  of  the  Old  Guard,  saying  : — "  It  is  3  A.M., 
and  I  am  just  starting  for  Montmirail  to  fall  upon  Blucher, 
who  has  debouched  with  10,000  men  to  attack  Marmont, 
who  in  presence  of  a  superior  force  has  fallen  back  without 
fighting  on  Fromentieres.  I  hope,  therefore,  to  obtain  a 
success  to-day,  for  I  have  concentrated  30,000  men." 
The  Emperor  wrote  in  the  same  manner  to  King  Joseph 
and  to  General  Clarke. 

To  KING  JOSEPH. 
"Montmirail,  14M  February,  1814.  9  p.m. 
"  I  send  you  a  line  to  let  you  know  the  happy  issue  of 
the  battle  of  Vauchamps.  General  Blucher,  who  was  sepa- 
rated from  his  army,  and  who  had  his  head-quarters  at 
Vertus,  had  been  joined  by  Kleist's  corps,  twenty- four 
battalions  strong,  and  by  a  new  Russian  corps  of  twelve 
battalions,  or  20,000  men.  He  marched  on  the  1 3th  against 
Etoges  and  Champaubert.  Marmont,  who  was  informed 
of  this  movement,  retreated.  I  started  at  three  this  morn- 
ing from  Chateau  Thierry,  and  arrived  at  Montmirail  when 
the  enemy  were  nearly  at  the  gates.  I  attacked  the  enemy, 
who  had  taken  up  a  position  in  the  village  of  Vauchamps. 
I  beat  them,  and  took  8,000  prisoners,  three  guns,  and  ten 
colours.  Their  loss  in  dead  and  wounded  must  be  more 
than  4,000  men.  I  have  lost  in  killed  or  wounded  only 
300.  This  grand  result  was  obtained  because  the  enemy 
had  no  cavalry,  whereas  I  had  from  6,000  to  8,000  excellent 
troopers.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

Blucher  was  in  pursuit  of  Marmont  with  20,000  men 
when  he  suddenly  found  himself  in  presence  of  Napoleon, 
and  at  once  determined  to  retreat.  As  usual,  the  Emperor 
exaggerated  his  triumph,  but  it  was  signal  and  complete. 
It  was  only  after  the  most  desperate  fighting,  and  with  a 
loss    of  6,000   men,  fifteen   guns,    and    two  colours,  that 


FURTHER    ATTEMPTS    TO    NEGOTIATE.  3 1  5 

Blucher,  with  his  shattered  columns,  found  shelter  behind 
the  Marne  from  Grouchy  and  his  cavalry. 

In  a  letter  to  King  Joseph  on  the  15th  the  Emperor  said 
that  the  peasants  had  picked  up  40,000  muskets  thrown 
away  by  the  enemy,  and  that  he  was  moving  in  the  direc- 
tion of  Meaux,  for  it  was  now  necessary  to  look  after  the 
Austrians,  who  were  approaching  Paris  sluggishly  from 
another  quarter ;  and  that  Bulow  also  was  abandoning 
Belgium  and  the  north  in  order  to  march  upon  the  capital. 

On  the  1 6th  the  Emperor  wrote  to  the  King  from 
Meaux,  as  follows  : — "  I  am  going  to  Guignes,  and  I  shall 
attack  the  enemy  to-morrow.  Send  me  in  all  haste  what 
remains  of  the  Old  Guard,  horse  and  foot,  to  repair  the 
losses  which  have  been  sustained.  ...  I  missed  a  fine  stroke 
yesterday  ;  6,000  Bavarians  were  at  two  leagues  from  me. 
The  enemy  manoeuvre  with  such  ignorance  that  I  hope  in 
the  course  of  a  few  days  to  obtain  excellent  results." 

The  allies,  at  last  aware  of  the  error  they  had  com- 
mitted in  separating  their  armies,  now  proposed  to  fall 
back  on  Troyes  to  concentrate  ;  and  with  the  view  of 
gaining  time  to  execute  this  movement  a  flag  of  truce  was 
sent  in  to  say  that  they  were  surprised  at  the  offensive 
movement  made  by  the  French  army,  as  they  had  agreed 
to  the  terms  of  peace  proposed  by  Caulaincourt  at  Cha- 
tillon — proposals  to  which  Napoleon  would  gladly  have 
adhered  but  for  his  success  at  Champaubert.  In  reply, 
Napoleon  wrote  to  Caulaincourt,  who  was  still  at  Cha- 
tillon,  dwelling  upon  the  immense  advantages  he  had 
gained  since  the  opening  of  the  campaign,  adding—"  I 
am  ready  to  cease  hostilities  and  to  allow  the  enemy  to 
return  home  tranquilly,  if  they  will  sign  the  preliminary 
bases  of  the  propositions  of  Frankfort.  The  bad  faith  of 
the  enemy,  and  their  violation  of  the  most  sacred  engage- 
ments alone  cause  delay,  for  we  are  so  near  to  each  other 
that  if  they  will  permit  you  to  correspond  with  me  directly, 
they  can  have  replies  to  your  despatches  in  twenty-four 
hours.     Besides,  I  am  going  to  approach  nearer  still." 


316    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

On  the  1 8th  Napoleon  informed  King  Joseph  that: — 
"  Prince  Schwartzenberg  has  just  given  sign  of  life.  He 
has  sent  to  ask  for  a  suspension  of  arms.  It  is  difficult  to 
be  cowardly  to  such  a  degree  ;  he  has  constantly  refused  in 
the  most  insulting  terms  all  kinds  of  suspensions  of  arms, 
and  even  to  receive  my  flags  of  truce  after  the  capitulation 
of  Dantzic  and  Dresden — a  horrible  thing,  without  example 
in  history.  These  wretches  at  the  first  check  fall  on  their 
knees.  Fortunately  the  aide-de-camp  of  Prince  Schwart- 
zenberg was  not  allowed  to  enter  my  quarters.  I  merely 
received  his  letter,  to  which  I  shall  reply  at  my  leisure.  I 
shall  consent  to  no  armistice  which  does  not  purge  the 
territory." 

Napoleon  then  gave  his  reasons  for  being  willing  to  treat 
before  Champaubert : — "You  can  conceive,"  he  wrote, 
"  that  being  on  the  eve  of  a  battle,  in  which  I  was  determined 
to  conquer  or  die — in  which,  if  I  were  beaten,  my  capital 
would  have  been  taken — I  would  have  consented  to  every- 
thing so  as  to  avoid  this  great  chance.  I  owed  this  sacri- 
fice to  my  self-love,  to  my  family,  and  to  my  people.  But 
since  they  refused  to  treat,  the  battle  has  been  fought,  and 
as  my  capital  is  no  longer  threatened  I  owe  it  to  the 
interest  of  my  empire,  and  to  my  glory,  to  negotiate  a 
real  peace.  .  .  ." 

And  so  it  went  on ;  each  side,  when  matters  went 
badly,  wished  to  negotiate,  and  each  party  raised  its 
pretensions  to  an  unacceptable  degree  as  soon  as  it 
triumphed. 

To  PRINCE  EUGENE. 

"Nangis,  i  Zth  February,  1814. 
"  I  see  with  pleasure  the  advantages  which  you  have 
obtained  ;  if  they  had  been  a  little  more  decisive  we 
should  have  been  able  to  keep  Italy.  ...  I  have  de- 
stroyed the  army  of  Silesia,  composed  of  Russians  and 
Prussians.  I  began  yesterday  to  beat  Schwartzenberg.  In 
four  days  I  have  taken  from  30,000  to  40,000  prisoners, 


A   LESSON   TO    SAVARY.  317 

five  generals,  600  officers,  from  150  to  200  guns,  &c.  I 
have  lost  hardly  any  one.  The  cavalry  of  the  enemy  is 
very  low.  .  .  .  Should  fortune  continue  to  favour  us,  and 
the  enemy  be  driven  across  the  frontier,  we  shall  be  able  to 
preserve  Italy.  Perhaps  the  King  of  Naples  will  then 
change  sides. 

"  Napoleon." 

Writing  to  Caulaincourt  on  the  19th  the  Emperor 
said  : — "  It  is  false  what  they  tell  you.  The  Austrians 
have  been  beaten  in  Italy,  and,  far  from  being  at  Meaux, 
I  shall  soon  be  at  Chatillon.1  In  this  situation  I  re- 
iterate my  orders,  to  do  nothing  without  learning  my  in- 
tentions. ...  As  soon  as  I  reach  Troyes  I  will  send  you 
a  counter  project.  I  thank  heaven  that  I  have  the  note 
of  the  allies,  for  it  will  make  the  blood  of  every  French- 
man boil  with  indignation.  This  is  why  I  wish  to  draw 
up  my  own  ultimatum.  ...  I  am  so  upset  by  the  in- 
famous proposals  which  you  have  sent  me,  that  I  con- 
sider myself  dishonoured  at  being  placed  in  a  position  to 
have  received  them.  I  will  let  you  know  my  intentions 
from  Troyes  or  Chatillon.  .  .  ." 

And  on  the  same  day  his  Majesty  wrote  as  follows  to 
Police  Minister  Savary  : — 

"  The  journals  are  edited  without  intelligence.  Is  it  proper 
at  the  present  moment  to  say  that  I  have  few  men,  and  that 
I  have  conquered  the  enemy  because  I  have  surprised  them, 
and  that  we  were  one  against  three  ?  You  must  have  lost 
your  heads  in  Paris  to  say  such  things,  when  I  am  constantly 
giving  out  that  I  have  300,000  men,  when  the  enemy  believe 
it,  and  when  you  ought  to  declare  it  to  satiety.  This  is  how 
you  destroy  the  good  resulting  from  victory  with  a  stroke 
of  the  pen.     You  should  read  over  these  things  yourself; 

1  Sacken  did  reach  Meaux,  and  the  sound  of  his  guns  was  dis- 
tinctly audible  in  Paris  ;  it  is  true  that  he  fell  back  as-soon  as  he 
learned  that  Napoleon  was  on  the  move  with  the  intention  of 
attacking  Blucher. 


3 18     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

it  is  not  now  an  empty  question  of  glory  ;  it  is  one  of  the 
first  principles  of  war  to  exaggerate  your  forces.  But  how 
can  poets,  who  endeavour  to  flatter  me,  and  to  flatter  the 
national  self-love,  be  made  to  understand  this  ?  .  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  PRINCE  EUGENE. 
"  ChAteau  de  Surville,  iqth  February,  1814. 

"  It  is  necessary  that  the  vice-reine  should  go  to  Paris 
without  delay  in  order  to  be  confined,  it  being  my  in- 
tention that,  under  no  circumstances,  shall  she  remain  in 
a  country  occupied  by  the  enemy.  ...  I  have  beaten  Witt- 
genstein at  the  action  of  Nangis,  where  I  took  4,000 
Russian  prisoners,  with  guns  and  flags ;  and  above  all  I 
seized  upon  the  bridges  of  Montereau  before  the  enemy 
could  burn  them. 

"  Napoleon." 


The  above  letter,  which  greatly  annoyed  the  Viceroy, 
was  written  under  these  circumstances.  Prince  Eugene 
had  been  obliged  to  fall  back  upon  the  Mincio,  and  was 
uncertain  where  he  would  be  able  to  make  a  stand ;  he 
consequently  wrote  to  Marshal  Bellegarde,  asking  permis- 
sion for  his  wife  to  remain  in  Milan  for  her  confinement, 
and  to  be  allowed  to  rejoin  him  afterwards.  The  Austrian 
commander  at  once  granted  the  request,  and  forwarded 
the  following  letter  from  the  Emperor  of  Austria  to  the 
Princess  Augusta,  dated  from  Troyes,  in  Champagne  : — 

"Madame,  my  Cousin, — Marshal  Bellegarde  having 
acquainted  me  with  your  determination  to  remain  momen- 
tarily at  the  chateau  of  Monza,  I  beg  to  assure  your 
Imperial  Highness  that  this  general  has  perfectly  acted 
up  to  my  intentions.  I  have  given  orders  for  the  forma- 
tion of  a  guard  of  honour  for  your  Imperial  Highness,  who 
will  enjoy  the  most  entire  liberty  in  all  things,  and  I  only 


THE   PRINCESS   AUGUSTA.  319 

regret,  madame,  the  motives  which  force  you  to  come  to 
a  determination  which,  under  other  circumstances,  I 
should  consider  extremely  flattering.     I  beg  you,  &c.  &c. 

"  Francis." 

When  Prince  Eugene  communicated  Napoleon's  letter 
to  his  wife  she  expressed  her  indignation  in  these 
terms  : — 

"  I  am  highly  indignant,  and  feel  no  longer  astonished 
that  people  abandon  the  Emperor.  Was  any  one  ever 
more  ungrateful?  ....  It  is  clear  that  the  family  of  the 
Emperor,  and  perhaps  the  Emperor  himself,  are  jealous  of 
you.  The  King  of  Naples  will  be  pardoned  for  his  treason, 
■but  you  will  never  be  pardoned  for  the  reputation  and 
esteem  you  enjoy.  I  know  not  where  all  this  will  end,  but 
it  is  sure  our  lot  will  never  be  fixed  as  long  as  it  depends 
on  the  Emperor.  This  certitude,  however,  should  not 
hinder  us  from  following  the  path  of  virtue  and  honour 
to  the  end  of  our  lives.  .  .  .  Were  I  to  fall  into  the  hands 
of  the  enemy  they  could  not  treat  me  worse  than  the 
Emperor,  who  has  plunged  a  dagger  into  my  heart.  Do 
not  fear  telling  me  to  start.  If  I  could  go  with  you  to 
America  I  would  willingly  do  so,  for  I  am  disgusted  with 
the  grandeur  of  the  world,"  &c. 

The  consequence  was,  that  the  Princess  Augusta  threw 
herself  into  Mantua,  and  she  was  confined  just  as  Marshal 
Bellegarde,  who  had  laid  siege  to  that  place,  was  firing  a 
salute  in  honour  of  the  capitulation  of  Paris. 

To  KING  JOSEPH. 

"Montereau,  20th  February,  1814. 
"  The  Due  de  Bassano  (M.  Maret)  will  send  you  a  copy 
of  the  proposals  of  the  allies.  You  will  see  by  them  that 
your  sermons  are  out  of  place,  and  that  I  do  not  require  to 
be  preached  to  in  order  to  sign  an  honourable  peace  if  that 
be  possible. 


320     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

"  He  will  also  send  you  an  intercepted  letter  from  the 
Due  d'Angouleme.  ...  «  Napoleon. 

"  P.S. — The  Emperors  had  selected  their  quarters  at 
Fontainebleau  for  the  18th,  but  on  the  same  day  they  left 
Bray  in  hot  haste  for  Troyes,  on  which  place  the  allied 
armies  are  retiring." 

To  KING  JOSEPH. 

"Nogent,  10th  February,  1814.  6  p.m. 
"  I  have  just  arrived  at  Nogent.  The  enemy  after 
Montereau  fell  back  upon  Troyes  with  the  greater  por- 
tion of  their  army.  They  enjoyed  great  luck,  for  the 
frost  enabled  them  to  march  across  country ;  but  for  this 
half  their  baggage  and  their  artillery  would  have  been 
captured.  The  enemy  committed  at  Montereau,  Bray, 
and  Nogent  unspeakable  horrors  ;  this  should  be  made 
known  in  Paris.  The  Emperor  of  Austria  has  not  left 
Troyes,   .  .  } 

"  Napoleon." 

In  several  letters  Napoleon  complained  in  bitter  terms  of 
the  horrors  committed  by  the  enemy.  On  the  21st,  in  a 
letter  to  Savary,  he  said  : — "  My  hair  stands  on  end  at  the 
crimes  committed  by  the  enemy,  and  the  police  should 
collect  the  facts.      Women  of  sixty  and  young  girls  of 

1  That  the  French  troops  also  committed  great  excesses  at  this  date 
may  be  gathered  from  the  following  proclamation,  dated  the  8th 
February,  and  which,  though  not  to  be  found  in  The  Correspondence, 
is  quoted  by  Alison  (vol.  xii.  p.  491),  who  says  that  it  was  due  to  the 
destruction  of  a  castle  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Nogent  which  be- 
longed to  the  Emperor's  mother.  Greatly  incensed  at  the  universal 
pillage  indulged  in,  Napoleon  issued  this  proclamation  :■ — 

"  The  Emperor  has  to  express  to  the  army  his  displeasure  at  the 
excesses  to  which  it  abandons  itself.  Such  disorders  are  always 
hurtful  ;  but  they  become  criminal  when  committed  in  our  native 
country.  From  this  day  forth  the  chiefs  of  corps  and  the  generals 
shall  be  held  entirely  responsible  for  them.  The  inhabitants  are 
flying  on  all  sides,  and  the  troops,  instead  of  being  their  country's 
defenders,  are  becoming  its  scourge." 


MARSHAL   AUGEREAU.  32  I 

twelve  have  been  ill-used.  They  plunder,  rape,  destroy, 
and  burn  everywhere.  The  Russian  officers  declare  their 
intention  of  going  to  Paris,  and  of  reducing    the    capital 

to   ashes.     The  Prince    de   has    covered   himself 

with  mud.  .  .  ." 

To  MARSHAL  AUGEREAU. 

"Nogent,  7.1st  February,  1814. 
" .  .  .  .  What !  six  hours  after  having  received  the  first 
troops  coming  from  Spain  you  were  not  in  the  field  !  Six 
hours'  repose  was  sufficient.  I  won  the  action  of  Nangis 
with  a  brigade  of  dragoons  coming  from  Spain,  which, 
since  it  left  Bayonne,  had  not  unbridled  its  horses.  The 
six  battalions  of  the  division  of  Nismes  want  clothes, 
equipment,  and  drilling,  say  you.  What  poor  reasons  you 
give  me  there,  Augereau !  I  have  destroyed  8o,o'oo 
enemies  with  conscripts  having  nothing  but  knapsacks! 
The  National  Guards,  say  you,  are  pitiable  ;  I  have  4,000 
here,  in  round  hats,  without  knapsacks,  in  wooden  shoes, 
but  with  good  muskets,  and  I  get  a  great  deal  out  of 
them.  There  is  no  money,  you  continue ;  and  where  do 
you  hope  to  draw  money  from  ?  You  want  waggons ; 
take  them  wherever  you  can.  You  have  no  magazines  ; 
this  is  too  ridiculous.  I  order  you  twelve  hours  after  the 
reception  of.  this  letter  to  take  the  field.  If  you  are  still 
Augereau  of  Castiglione,  keep  the  command  ;  but  if  your 
sixty  years  weigh  upon  you,  hand  over  the  command  to 
your  senior  general.  The  country  is  in  danger,  and  can 
be  saved  by  boldness  and  goodwill  alone.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

Augereau  was  in  command  of  the  army  of  Lyons,  and  the 
Emperor  thought  that  by  operating  on  the  rear  of  the  allies, 
and  threatening  their  communications,  he  would  frighten 
the  Austrians  nearly  out  of  their  lives.  The  Austrians,  too, 
were  under  the  impression  that  Augereau  had  a  much  more 
formidable  force  under  his  orders  than  was  the  case. 

VOL.  III.  Y 


32  2  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  FRANCIS,  First  Emperor  of  Austria. 

"Nogent,  21st  February,  1814. 

"  Sir,  my  Brother,  and  very  dear  Father-in- 
Law, — I  did  all  that  I  could  to  avoid  the  fighting  which  has 
taken  place.  Fortune  has  smiled  upon  me.  I  have  de- 
feated the  Russian  and  Prussian  armies  commanded  by 
General  Blucher,  and  since  then,  the  Prussian  army  com- 
manded by  General  Kleist.  In  this  situation,  and  no 
matter  what  the  prejudices  of  your  head-quarters,  my  army 
is  more  numerous  in  infantry,  cavalry  and  artillery  than 
that  of  your  Majesty  ;  and  if  the  assurance  of  this  fact  be 
necessary  to  influence  your  determinations,  I  have  no 
objection  to  let  it  be  seen  by  a  man  of  sound  judgment 
such  as  Prince  Schwartzenberg,  Count  Bubna,  or  Prince 
Metternich.  I  consider  it  my  duty  to  write  to  your 
Majesty,  because  this  struggle  between  a  French  army 
and  an  army  chiefly  Austrian  appears  to  me  to  be 
opposed  to  your  interests  and  to  mine.  Should  fortune 
betray  my  hopes,  your  situation  will  be  all  the  more  em- 
barrassing. If  I  beat  your  army,  how  will  you  retire  from 
France,  whose  inhabitants  are  exasperated  to  the  highest 
degree  by  the  crimes  of  all  kinds  committed  by  the 
Cossacks  and  the  Russians  ? 

"  In  this  state  of  affairs  I  propose  to  your  Majesty  to 
sign  peace  without  delay,  on  the  bases  which  you  yourself 
laid  down  at  Frankfort,  and  which  I  and  the  French  nation 
adopted  as  our  ultimatum.  I  say  more  ;  these  bases  can 
alone  re-establish  the  European  equilibrium.  If  other 
conditions  were  imposed  upon  France,  peace  would  be 
of  short  duration. 

"  The  plenipotentiaries  of  the  allies  at  Chatillon  have 
presented  a  note,  the  knowledge  of  which  would  fill  France 
with  the  greatest  indignation  ;  it  is  the  realisation  of  the 
dream  of  Burke,  who  wished  France  to  disappear  from  the 
map  of  Europe.  There  are  no  Frenchmen  who  would 
not  prefer  death  to  conditions  which  would  render  them 
the  slaves  of  England,  and  would  strike  them  out  of  the 


APPEAL   TO    AUSTRIA.  323 

list  of  the  great  Powers.  Your  Majesty  cannot  approve  of 
these  conditions,  which  are  certainly  not  in  the  interest  of 
your  monarchy.  One  can  understand  that  England  should 
wish  to  destroy  Antwerp,  and  put  an  everlasting  obstacle 
to  the  re-establishment  of  the  French  fleet !  But  you,  sire, 
you,  what  interest  can  you  take  in  this  ?  Your  Majesty, 
by  the  bases  which  you  proposed  at  Frankfort,  became  a 
maritime  Power.  Do  you  wish  your  flag  to  be  insulted  and 
violated  by  England,  as  it  has  constantly  been  ?  What 
interest  can  your  Majesty  have  in  placing  the  Belgians 
under  a  Protestant  prince,  one  of  whose  sons  will  ascend 
the  throne  of  England  ? 

"  However,  these  hopes,  these  projects,  are  beyond 
the  power  of  the  coalition.  The  battle  about  to  take 
place  against  the  army  of  your  Majesty,  were  it  lost,  could 
be  repaired,  for  I  have  resources  enough  in  Paris  to  fight 
two  more ;  and  if  Paris  were  taken,  the  rest  of  France 
would  never  support  the  yoke  proposed  in  the  treaty 
which  the  policy  of  England  seems  to  have  inspired. 
The  convulsions  of  the  nation  would  quadruple  the 
energy  and  strength  of  our  resistance. 

"  Never  will  I  yield  up  Antwerp  and  Belgium.  A  peace 
founded  on  the  bases  of  Frankfort  can  alone  be  sincere,  and 
place  France  in  a  position  to  turn  her  attention  solely  to 
the  re-establishment  of  her  marine  and  her  commerce.  If 
your  Majesty  persists  in  subordinating  your  own  interests 
to  the  policy  of  England,  and  to  the  resentment  of  Russia  ; 
and  if  arms  will  only  be  laid  down  on  the  fearful  con- 
ditions proposed  by  the  Congress,  the  genius  of  France  and 
Providence  will  be  on  our  side. 

"  This  thirst  for  vengeance  on  the  part  of  the  Emperor 
Alexander  is  not  justified.  Before  entering  Moscow  I 
offered  him  peace.  At  Moscow  I  did  all  I  could  to 
extinguish  the  fire  lighted  by  his  orders. 

"  Besides,  200,000  men  are  in  arms  in  Paris.  They  have 
learned  by  what  the  Russians  have  done  how  fallacious  are 
their  promises.     They  know  the  lot  that  awaits  them.  .  .  . 

Y  2 


324  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

May  I  be  permitted  to  tell  your  Majesty  that,  in  spite  of 
all  you  have  done  since  the  invasion  of  my  territory,  and 
the  little  attention  you  have  paid  to  the  bonds  which 
unite  us  and  the  mutual  interests  of  our  states,  my  feel- 
ings towards  you  have  not  changed,  and  that  I  cannot  see 
with  indifference  that  if  you  refuse  peace,  this  refusal  will 
render  your  own  life  unhappy,  and  will  produce  misfortune 
for  all,  whilst  with  a  word  you  can  stop  everything,  con- 
ciliate everything,  and  restore  durable  tranquillity  to  the 
world  ?  If  I  had  been  sufficiently  cowardly  to  accept  the 
English  and  Russian  proposals,  you  should  have  dissuaded 
me  from  it,  for  you  must  know  that  what  degrades 
30,000,000  men  cannot  be  durable.  .  .  . 1 

"  I  presume  that  your  Majesty  will  not  ask  why  I 
address  myself  to  you.  I  cannot  address  myself  to  the 
English,  who  aim  at  the  destruction  of  my  marine,  or  to 
the  Emperor  Alexander,  who  is  animated  with  feelings 
of  passion  and  vengeance.  I  can  therefore  address  myself 
to  your  Majesty  alone,  lately  my  ally,  who,  looking  at 
the  force  of  your  army  and  the  size  of  your  empire,  is 
considered  the  chief  Power  of  the  coalition ;  lastly,  to 
your  Majesty,  who,  no  matter  what  your  momentary 
feelings  may  be,  has  French  blood  in  your  veins. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"Chartres,  iyd  February,  1814. 
"  Write  to  Marshal  Soult  that  with  his  fine  troops  he 
ought  to  beat  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  but  that  under 
present  circumstances  a  little  more  decision  and  vigour 
are  necessary.  "Napoleon." 

1  It  is  a  pity  that  Napoleon  did  not  reflect  upon  this  before,  in 
opposition  to  the  advice  of  Talleyrand,  he  imposed  degrading  con- 
ditions upon  Austria,  as  well  as  upon  all  the  other  countries  which  he 
overran  and  subdued,  and  also  before  he  imposed  his  continental 
system,  which  was  degrading  for  every  country  in  Europe.  That 
Napoleon  was  right  in  what  he  now  said  was  proved  by  the  alacrity 
with  which  his  yoke  was  cast  off  as  soon  as  an  opportunity  offered. 


FRESH    NEGOTIATIONS   PROPOSED.  325 

In  a  letter  to  King  Joseph,  of  the  same  date,  the 
Emperor  scolded  him  for  taking  so  gloomy  a  view  of 
affairs.  He  afterwards  said — "  As  for  the  idea  of  doubling 
the  National  Guard,  since  you  disapprove  of  it,  I  renounce 
that  measure.  If  I  had  listened  to  my  ministers  I  should 
not  have  created  a  National  Guard,  and  I  should  have 
distrusted  Paris.  ...  I  have  had  Augereau  written  to.  I 
have  told  the  Empress  to  speak  to  his  wife.  I  think  that 
you  will  do  well  to  speak  to  her  also,  and  to  get  the  '  ladies 
of  the  palace '  to  speak  to  her.  He  must  march  ;  let  him 
do  as  I  do,  and  gain  honour.  The  enemy  are  falling  back 
in  all  directions,  and  seem  no  longer  to  dream  of  Paris. 
Prince  Liechtenstein,  aide-de-camp  to  Prince  Schwartzen- 
berg,  with  whom  I  have  had  a  long  conversation,  has 
allowed  it  to  escape  that  the  allies  are  greatly  frightened 
by  the  movement  of  Augereau." 

It  is  certain,  to  judge  from  an  extract  from  a  letter 
addressed  to  Comte  de  Montalivet,  Minister  of  the 
Interior,  that  Napoleon  was  now  well  aware  of  the 
state  of  public  opinion,  which  was  decidedly  in  favour  of 
peace.  He  wrote,  on  the  road  to  Troyes,  on  the  24th : — 
"I  have  received  your  letter.  If  the  French  were  as 
despicable  as  you  suppose  I  should  blush  for  shame. 
You  and  the  Minister  of  Police  know  no  more  of  France 
than  I  know  of  China."  And  he  added — "  Orleans  was 
threatened  yesterday;  to-day  Platoff  is  turned,  and  will 
perhaps  escape  with  difficulty.  Thus  at  any  moment  all 
these  alarms  may  disappear."  Napoleon,  on  his  side,  was 
endeavouring  to  excite  resistance  by  continually  referring 
to  the  horrors,  committed  by  the  enemy,  and  warning 
the  country  what  it  might  expect  at  the  hands  of  the 
Cossacks.  At  the  same  time  he  had  resumed  his  old 
confidence,  for  the  main  body  of  the  allies  was  retiring 
in  disorder  before  him.  On  the  24th,  in  fact,  the  Emperor 
received  from  Prince  Schwartzenberg  proposals  for  an 
armistice.  These  proposals  he  accepted  ;  Lusigny  was 
the  place  appointed  for  the  negotiations,  and  the  following 


326     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

instructions  were  given  to  General  Flahault,  who  was 
charged  to  represent  France  : — "  Flahault  will  go  to 
Lusigny  to  negotiate,  conclude,  and  sign  an  armistice 
between  the  two  armies.  It  must  be  understood  that 
during  the  conferences  there  is  to  be  no  armistice.  .  .  . 
I  cannot  agree  to  an  armistice  until  I  am  certain  ol  peace. 
I  cannot  be  certain  of  peace  until  the  allies  have  consented 
to  the  bases  proposed  at  Frankfort.  .  .  .  General  Flahault 
must  speak  with  politeness  but  firmly,  and  say — We  know 
the  forces  of  the  enemy,  but  they  do  not  know  ours ; 
every  day  we  receive  10,000  men  from  Paris  clothed  and 
equipped,  2,000  being  for  the  cavalry ;  our  army  is  300,000 
strong.  The  Old  Guard,  which  is  composed  of  men  who 
have  at  least  sixteen  years  service,  has  been  tripled,  and 
formed  into  three  divisions  of  sixteen  battalions  each  ; 
all  the  men  who  had  left  the  Guard  have  been  called  upon 
to  rejoin,  and  it  now  consists  of  30,000  men.  It  is  true 
that  we  have  50,000  men  who  are  not  in  uniform,  but 
their  effects  are  about  to  arrive.  .  .  .  The  horrors  com- 
mitted by  the  Cossacks  have  excited  the  population  to 
the  highest  degree,  and  the  whole  country  is  in  arms. 
Therefore  we  believe  that  all  the  chances  are  in  our  favour, 
and  it  is  only  our  determination  to  make  peace  on  the 
bases  of  Frankfort  which  can  induce  us  to  agree  to  a 
suspension  of  arms.  .  .  ." 

On  the  evening  of  the  same  day  Napoleon  wrote  to 
King  Joseph,  saying  : — "  I  have  entered  Troyes.  The 
enemy  besiege  me  with  demands  for  an  armistice.  .  .  . 
I  have  had  several  cavalry  affairs,  and  have  captured 
2,000  prisoners  and  eight  guns.  I  have  written  to  the 
Empress  to  have  a  salute  of  thirty  guns  fired  in  honour  of 
these  little  events  and  the  delivery  of  the  capital  of  Cham- 
pagne. ...  If  I  had  had  twenty  boats  to  cross  the  Seine 
the  Austrian  army  would  no  longer  exist.  A  few  days 
ago  the  enemy  thought  that  I  had  no  army  ;  now  their 
imagination  runs  wild,  and  400,000  men  are  not  sufficient 
for  me.  .  .  .  This  is  what  comes  of  terror.     It  is  neces- 


ORDERS    TO    SOULT.  327 

sary  for  the  Paris  newspapers  to  write  in  the  sense  of 
these  fears.  The  newspapers  are  no  more  history  than 
are  the  bulletins.  One  should  always  lead  the  enemy  to 
believe  that  one  has  immense  forces.  .   .  .  " x 

On  the  25th  the  Emperor,  writing  from  Troyes,  sent 
instructions  to  General  Clarke  for  Marshal  Soult  to 
resume  the  offensive  and  to  fall  upon  one  of  the  wings  of 
the  enemy.  "  Should  he  have  only  20,000  men,  by  select- 
ing the  right  moment  and  acting  with  boldness,  he  should," 
said  his  Majesty,  "  gain  an  advantage  over  the  English 
army.  He  has  talent  enough  to  understand  what  I 
mean." 

Blucher  was  once  more  to  be  placed,  thanks  to  the  Czar, 
in  command  of  a  formidable  army,  which  was  to  march 
upon  Paris.  It  had  been  agreed  that  the  army  of  Silesia, 
reinforced  by  the  corps  of  Winsingerode,  Woronsow,  and 
Bulow,  detached  from  the  forces  under  the  command  of 
Bernadotte,  should  push  forward  to  the  French  capital. 

In  another  letter,  written  by  Napoleon  on  the  24th 
February,  he  said  to  King  Joseph — "As  soon  as  I  can 
make  out  what  Blucher  is  after  I  shall  try  and  fall  upon 
his  rear.  ...  It  is  said  that  Bernadotte  is  at  Cologne. 
Could  you  not,  on  your  own  account,  send  some  one  to 
him  to  point  out  the  madness  of  his  conduct  and  to  induce 
him  to  change  it  ?  Try  this,  but  without  mixing  me  up  in 
the  matter."    Joseph  and  Bernadotte  were  brothers-in-law. 

And  the  next  day,  in  another  letter  to  King  Joseph,  the 
Emperor  said — "  It  appears  that  the  allies  have  not  yet 
ratified  the  treaty  with  the  King  of  Naples.  I  beg  that 
you  will  send  some  one  in  hot  haste  to  the  king;  that 
you  will  write  to  him  frankly  on  the  iniquity  of  his  con- 
duct, offering  to  be  his  intermediary.  ...  I  need  hardly 
tell  you  what  to   say.     The   English  themselves  do  not 

1  In  a  letter  from  Napoleon  to  Joseph,  10th  December,  1809,  which 
is  given  in  the  Memoirs  of  King  Joseph,  the  Emperor  said  :  "  Military- 
men  whose  opinion  is  of  value  judge  from  what  they  know,  and  pay- 
little  attention  to  orders  of  the  day,  proclamations,  &c." 


328     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

acknowledge  him  as  king.  There  is  still  time  to  save 
Italy  and  to  re-establish  the  viceroy  on  the  Adige.  Write 
also  to  the  queen  on  her  ingratitude,  which  disgusts  even 
the  allies.  .  .  ." 

On  the  27th  Napoleon  wrote  thus  to  Caulaincourt,  who 
was  still  at  the  Congress  of  Chatillon: — "I  am  going  to 
Arcis-sur-Aube,  as  Blucher,  York,  Winzingerode,  and  other 
reinforcements  are  marching  on  Fert6  Gaucher.  I  am 
going  to  fall  upon  their  rear.  .  .  .  You  must  say  that  I 
am  at  Bar-sur-Aube,  for  it  is  of  the  greatest  importance 
that  the  enemy  should  not  know  that  I  am  between 
Bar-sur-Aube  and  Vendeuve." 

-On  the  2nd  March  the  Emperor  forwarded  to  Caulain- 
court a  declaration  which  he  was  to  make  at  the  Congress, 
and  in  which  Napoleon  repeated  that  in  no  case  would 
France  renounce  her  natural  limits — the  Rhine,  the  ocean, 
the  Alps,  and  the  Pyrenees.  The  instructions  were  long 
and  arrogant,  but  at  the  same  time  Caulaincourt  was  told 
that  he  might  tone  them  down. 

On  the  previous  day  the  allies  had  signed  the  treaty 
of  Chaumont  to  this  effect,  that  if  Napoleon  did  not  accept 
the  terms  which  had  been  offered  to  him,  viz.,  the  reduc- 
tion of  France  to  the  limits  of  the  old  monarchy,  as  before 
the  Revolution,  the  four  allied  powers  of  Austria,  Russia, 
Prussia,  and  England  should  each  maintain  150,000  men 
in  the  field,  and  that  England  should  provide  an  annual 
subsidy  of  5,000,000/.  to  be  equally  divided  between  the 
three  Continental  Powers,  &c,  &c. 

This  treaty  virtually  dissolved  the  negotiations  at  Lusigny 
and  the  Congress  at  Chatillon,  for  Napoleon  obstinately 
refused  to  entertain  the  idea  of  accepting  the  France  of 
Louis  XIV.1 

1  Concerning  this  Congress  of  Chatillon,  Lord  Holland,  who  was 
certainly  no  adversary  of  Napoleon,  has  written  as  follows  in  his 
Reminiscences  (p.  294)  : — "  I  have  seen  the  official  correspondence 
with  Caulaincourt  when  he  was  employed  at  CMtillon  in  18 14.  It 
gave  me  the  highest  opinion  of  the  abilities,  integrity,  and  pacific 


FRENCH    NAVAL    OPERATIONS.  329 

To  GENERAL  CLARKE. 

"Jouarre,  2nd  March,  18 14. 
"  Write  to  Marshal  Soult  that  with  troops  like  his  he 
should  beat  the  enemy,  if  he  will  only  exhibit  pluck  and 
place  himself  at  the  head  of  the  troops.  Let  him  under- 
stand that  we  have  reached  a  period  when  more  than 
ordinary  resolution  and  vigour  are  required.  If  he 
manoeuvres  with  activity  and  sets  the  example  of  being 
the  first  at  the  post  of  danger,  he  should,  with  the  troops 
he  has,  beat  double  the  number  of  the  enemy. 

"  Napoleon." 

to  vice-admiral  decres. 

"Jouarre,  ind March,  1 8 14. 
"  I  have  seen  with  pleasure  the  conduct  of  the  three 
ships.  It  is  my  intention  to  give  the  crews  forty  decora- 
tions of  the  legion  of  honour,  twenty-five  of  them  for  the 
Romulus.  Express  my  satisfaction  to  the  officers  in 
command. 

"  The  English  papers  talk  of  some  rich  prizes  captured 
by  our  frigates  which  sailed  from  Nantes  ;  it  appears  that 
one  of  these  was  recaptured  on  arriving  in  French 
waters. 

"  Napoleon." 

His  Majesty,  as  far  as  the  navy  was  concerned,  had  to 
be  thankful  for  small  mercies. 

principles  of  the  negotiator.  It  did  not,  I  confess,  raise  my  opinion 
of  the  Emperor  Napoleon.  It  was  full  of  subterfuge  and  artifice  on 
the  part  of  the  Government.  There  seemed  an  intention  not  only  of 
violating  faith  with  the  confederates,  but  in  case  of  need  of  disavowing 
and  sacrificing  the  honour  of  the  negotiator,  who  was  serving  his 
country  with  zeal,  talent,  and  fidelity.  Caulaincourt  reasonably  and 
honestly  endeavoured  to  work  on  the  predilections  of  Austria  to 
procure  good  terms  of  peace  for  Napoleon,  but  that  prince  and  his 
immediate  advisers  were  more  disposed  to  avail  themselves  of  any 
favourable  disposition  in  Austria  to  sow  dissensions." 


330  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

According  to  James  a  French  squadron  of  three  ships 
of  the  line  and  three  frigates  had  gone  out  of  Toulon  to 
meet  a  seventy-four  expected  from  Genoa.  This  squadron 
was  chased  by  Admiral  Pellew's  fleet,  and  the  leading 
British  vessel,  the  Boyne,n'mety-eight,  engaged  the  Romulus, 
the  enemy's  rear  ship.  The  Romulus,  however,  managed 
to  effect  her  escape,  although  she  lost  seventy  men  in 
killed  or  wounded,  and  the  Adrienne,  who  was  also  under 
fire,  eleven.  "  The  Romulus"  says  James, "  was  undoubtedly 
manoeuvred  in  a  very  skilful  manner,  and  her  captain, 
whose  name  we  regret  not  being  able  to  give,  deserves 
credit  as  well  for  that  as  for  not  striking  his  colours  to  so 
powerful  an  adversary  as  the  Boym!'  The  Romulus,  be  it 
mentioned,  was  protected  by  the  French  batteries,  and 
ran  so  close  in  shore  that  the  Boyne  could  not  cut 
her  off. 

In  a  second  letter  written  to  King  Joseph  on  the  2nd 
March  the  Emperor  said  : — "  The  bridge  at  La  Ferte"  will 
be  re-established  this  evening.  At  midnight  I  shall  be  in 
pursuit  of  the  enemy.  They  are  said  to  be  in  difficulties 
in  the  mud.  ...  I  ask  night  and  day  for  pontoons ;  this 
is  my  great  want,  for  the  army  of  Schwartzenberg  would 
have  been  destroyed  if  I  had  possessed  pontoons  at  Mery, 
and  that  of  Blucher  if  I  had  possessed  them  here.  I  am 
preparing  to  carry'  the  war  into  Lorraine,  where  I  shall 
rally  all  the  troops  who  are  in  the  fortresses  of  the  Meuse 
and  the  Rhine." 

On  the  4th  March  Napoleon  in  another  letter  to  his 
brother  complained  bitterly  of  the  inactivity  of  General 
Maison  in  Holland,  and  of  Marshal  Augereau  at  Lyons. 
Writing  to  the  Minister  of  War,  too,  he  said  :  "  I  see  that 
Marshal  Soult  has  allowed  his  position  to  be  forced.  Let 
me  know  how  many  troops  he  has  under  his  orders.  I 
cannot  conceive  such  results.  Send  instructions  to 
Marshal  Moncey  and  General  Dejean  to  make  a  flank 
march  to  cover  the  Garonne.  The  English  will  not 
advance   as  long  as  they  fear  being  cut  off.      I    cannot 


CAPITULATION    OF    SOISSONS.  331 

conceive  how,  with  troops  like  his,  Marshal  Soult  has 
been  beaten.  Write  to  him  strongly  and  firmly.  He 
already  committed  a  great  fault  in  allowing  himself  to  be 
attacked.  .  .  ." 

It  was  not  until  the  4th  March  that  Napoleon  took  any 
notice  of  the  engagement  at  Bar-sur-Aube.  He  then 
wrote  to  King  Joseph  complaining  of  the  false  rumours 
circulated,  and  adding:  "The  fact  is  that  Bar-sur-Aube 
was  not  a  position  to  hold.  It  was  necessary  to  advance  or 
to  retire.  After  the  movement  which  I  made  on  the  Marne 
it  was  necessary  to  retire.  We  had  an  affair  in  which  we 
lost  700  or  800  men,  but  the  enemy  lost  double  that 
number,  and  we  evacuated  the  town  during  the  night." 
The  fact  is  that  as  soon  as  Napoleon  left  Troyes  a  force 
of  35,000  men,  under  Generals  Wittgenstein  and  Wrede, 
fell  upon  Oudinot,  who  had  only  17,000  men  under  his 
command.  The  French  made  a  gallant  resistance,  but 
they  were  driven  out  of  Bar-sur-Aube  with  a  loss  of  3,000 
men.     The  loss  of  the  allies  was  nearly  as  heavy. 

A  few  days  afterwards  Schwartzenberg  inflicted  a  sharp 
defeat  upon  Marshal  Macdonald,  driving  him  out  of 
Troyes  with  the  loss  of  3,000  men  and  nine  guns. 

To  MARSHAL  BERTHIER. 

"  Fismes,  \th  March,  18 14. 
"  Write  to  Soissons  to  inform  General  Moreau,  who 
commands  there,  that  I  have  reached  Fismes,  and  to  tell 
him  to  send  me  news  of  Marshals  Marmont  and  Mortier, 
who  were  to  march  upon  Soissons.  He  must  also  tell  me 
what  he  knows  of  the  movements  of  the  enemy. 

"  Napoleon." 

Alas,  Soissons  had  capitulated  on  the  3rd,  and  on  the 
4th,  the  day  upon  which  the  above  letter  was  written, 
Blucher,  who  was  in  great  difficulties  and  threatened  with 
utter  destruction,  managed,  thanks  to  the  capitulation  of 


332     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Soissons,  to  get  across  the  Aisne  and  effect  his  junction 
with  Bulow  and  Winzingerode.  This  Soissons  incident  had 
an  immense  influence  on  the  fate  of  the  campaign.  Baron 
Jean  Claude  Moreau  was  condemned  to  death  by  court- 
martial,  but  the  sentence  was  not  carried  out. 

To  KING  JOSEPH. 

"  Fismes,  $th  March,  1814. 
"  Put  the  following  note  in  the  Moniteur. 
" '  The  Emperor  had  his  head-quarters  on  the  5th  at 
Berry-au-Bac.  The  army  of  the  enemy  under  Blucher, 
Sacken,  York,  Bulow,  and  Winzingerode  were  retreating  ; 
but  for  the  treason  of  the  commandant  of  Soissons,  who 
opened  its  gates,  they  were  lost.  General  Corbineau 
entered  Rheims  on  the  5th.  We  have  beaten  the  enemy 
in  the  actions  of  Lizy-sur-Ourcq  and  of  May,  capturing 
4,000  prisoners,  with  guns  and  baggage.' 

"  Napoleon." 

In  a  second  letter  of  the  same  date  the  Emperor 
said  : — 

"  The  general  who  commanded  at  Soissons  had  the  infamy 
to  evacuate  the  place  without  firing  a  shot.  He  withdrew 
with  all  the  honours  of  war  ;  he  is  now  at  Villers-Cotterets. 
I  have  sent  orders  to  the  War  Minister  to  arrest  him,  to 
have  him  tried  by  court-martial,  and  executed.  He  must 
be  shot  in  the  middle  of  the  Place  de  Greve,  and  a  great 
deal  of  importance  must  be  given  to  this  execution.  Five 
generals  must  be  appointed  to  try  him.  This  affair  has 
done  us  incalculable  harm.  I  should  have  been  at  Laon 
to-day,  and  the  army  of  the  enemy  would  have  been 
dispersed.  .  .  ." 

On  the  evening  of  the  5  th  Napoleon  wrote  to  General 
Clarke,  saying  : — 

"  Winzingerode's  corps  wished  to  hinder  us  from  passing 
the  Aisne,  but  we  crossed  the  handsome  bridge  at  the 
double  at  Berry-au-Bac.     We  captured  Prince  Gargarine, 


THE  BATTLE  OF  CRAONNE.         333 

who  commanded  the  rear  guard.  This  is  a  little  set  off  for 
the  great  harm  done  by  the  treason  of  the  commandant  of 
Soissons." 

The  next  day  his  Majesty,  in  a  letter  to  the  general, 
said  : — 

"  You  all  think  in  Paris  that  France  is  lost ;  but  when 
one  sees  the  disposition  of  the  peasants  and  of  the  people 
one  does  not  share  this  idea.  It  would  be  impossible  to 
be  more  satisfied  than  I  am  with  all  the  peasants,  who 
only  ask  for  vengeance  and  to  rush  to  'arms.  .  .  .  The 
army  which  is  at  Troyes  experienced  no  check.  The 
action  of  Bar-sur-Aube  was  an  ordinary  one,  where  the 
enemy  lost  as  many  men  as  we  did.  .  .  .  The  enemy  have 
lost  heavily;  the  peasants  kill  a  great  many  men.  .  .  . 
Order  General  Maison  to  take  the  field.  Reiterate  orders 
to  General  Durutte  at  Metz,  to  General  Morand  at 
Mayence,  and  to  other  generals  to  do  the  same." 

To  KING  JOSEPH. 

"  L'Ange  Gardien,  %th  March,  18 14. 
"  Yesterday  I  beat  Winzingerode,  Langeron,  and 
Woronsow,  united,  with  the  remains  of  Sacken's  army. 
I  made  2,000  prisoners.  The  battle  of  Craonne  is  glorious. 
Marshals  Victor  and  Grouchy  were  wounded.  I  have  700 
or  800  killed  or  wounded.  The  loss  of  the  enemy  is  from 
5,000  to  6,000  men.  .  .  .  * 

"Napoleon." 

1  The  following  letter  describes  the  effect  which  the  movements  of 
the  allies  created  in  Paris,  which  was  evidently  alive  to  the  danger 
of  the  situation  : — 

Joseph  to  Napoleon. 

"  Paris,  gth  March,  18 14. 

"I  received  news  of  the  victory  of  Craonne' from  Marshal  Macdonald. 
.  .  .  Detachments  of  the  enemy  have  advanced  even  to  Coulommiers. 

"  Yesterday  the  funds  fell  to  fifty-one  francs.  The  movements  of 
the  enemy  against  Marshal  Soult  cause  the  greatest  alarm  for  Bor- 
deaux, which  would  easily  become  the  focus  of  a  civil  war. 

"After  the  new  victory  which  you  have  gained  you  might  sign  a 


334  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

Such  was  the  brief  and  false  account  given  by  the 
Emperor  of  one  of  the  most  stubborn  fights  on  record.  The 
Russians  had  21,000  and  the  French  29,000  men  engaged. 
Napoleon  in  this  case  did  not  over-estimate  the  loss  of  the 
enemy,  but  he  greatly  under-estimated  his  own.  The 
Russians  occupied  a  very  strong  position,  and  before  they 
retired  from  it  upon  Laon  the  French  had  lost,  not  700 
or  800,  but  7,000  or  8,000  men. 

His  Majesty  does  not  appear  to  have  written  any  letter 
on  the  9th  March,  but  on  the  10th,  having  reached 
Chavignon,  he  bethought  himself  once  more  of  Pius  VII., 
and  sent  the  following  orders  to  Savary  : — 

"...  Write  to  the  officer  of  gendarmes,  who  is  attached 
to  the  Pope,  to  take  him  by  Asti,  Tortona,  and  Placentia, 
to  Parma,  where  he  must  hand  him  over  to  the  Neapolitan 
outposts.  The  officer  must  inform  the  Holy  Father  that 
I  have  consented  to  his  demand  to  return  to  his  See,  and 
that  I  have  given  orders  for  him  to  be  handed  over  to  the 
Neapolitan  outposts. " 1 

This  was  a  bad  symptom. 

glorious  peace  with  our  ancient  limits.  .  .  .  There  would  be  nothing 
dishonouring,  as  France  would  lose  no  territory.  .  .  .  After  having 
saved  France  from  anarchy  and  from  Europe  coalesced  against  us, 
you  will  become  the  father  of  your  people,  and  you  will  be  as  be- 
loved as  Louis  XII.,  after  having  been  as  much  admired  as  Henri  IV. 
and  Louis  XIV.  In  order  to  accumulate  so  much  glory  it  is  neces- 
ary  only  to  desire  the  welfare  of  France  and  your  own." 

The  Emperor  sent  no  reply  to  this  last  appeal. 

A  few  days  before  Joseph  had  written   thus  to  the  chief  of  the 

staff:  — 

Joseph  to  Berthier. 

"  $ik  March,  1814. 
" .  .  .  .  The  news  you  send  is  always  good,  and  a  great  deal  of  it  is 
required  to  counterbalance  the  bad  effect  produced  by  the  retreat  of 
Marshal  Soult,  of  Marshal  Oudinot,  and  the  fall  of  Soissons  ! " 

1  "The  following  anecdote,"  says  Colonel  Baudus  {Etudes  sur 
NapoUon,  vol.  i.  p.  57),  "  will  give  an  idea  of  the  deplorable  state  in 
which  the  chief  of  Christendom  found  himself ;  at  the  same  time,  it 
will  prove  into  what  hands  he  was  exposed  to  fall  when  forced  to 


MARMONT    SURPRISED.  335 

To  KING  JOSEPH. 

"  Chavignon,  \oth  March,  1814. 
"  The  army  which  I  beat  at  Craonne  was  the  Russian 
army.  It  lost  heavily,  and  fell  back  upon  Laon,  where  it 
was  joined  by  the  corps  of  Bulow,  York,  and  Kleist, 
forming  the  Prussian  army.  The  position  of  Laon  was 
very  favourable  to  them,  and  I  contented  myself  yester- 
day in  observing  and  reconnoitring  it.  This  army  is  more 
dangerous  for  Paris  than  the  army  of  Schwartzenberg. 
However,  I  am  going  to  approach  Soissons  so  as  to  be 
nearer  to  Paris.  .  .  .  Marshal  Marmont,  who  was  marching 
from  Berry-au-Bac  to  Laon,  has  arrived.  He  constantly 
drove  off  the  enemy,  but  at  night  there  was  a  raid  made 
on  his  corps  which  threw  his  infantry  into  disorder:  the 
soldiers  lost  their  heads,  and  he  was  obliged  to  fall  back 
for  several  leagues  in  slight  disorder,  and  abandoning 
several  guns.  This  is  merely  an  accident  of  war,  but 
very  unfortunate  at  a  moment  when  I  required  good 
luck.  It  is  this  which  has  determined  me  not  to  attack 
to-day.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

And  the  next  day  his  Majesty  wrote  once  more  to  King 
Joseph,  saying : — 

"  I  reconnoitred  the  enemy's  position  at  Laon.  It  was 
too  strong  to  be  attacked  without  heavy  loss.  I  have 
therefore  made  up  my  mind  to  return  to  Soissons.1     It  is 

make  a  long  and  dangerous  voyage.  On  arriving  at  a  station  at  the 
foot  of  the  Alps,  where  his  escort  was  to  be  changed,  the  command- 
ant who  had  conducted  him  thus  far,  in  accordance  with  orders, 
claimed  a  receipt  from  the  officer  called  upon  to  replace  him  in  this 
odious  mission.  This  officer,  alarmed  at  the  fearful  state  in  which  the 
august  captive  was  handed  over  to  him,  and  persuaded  that  he  would 
die  on  the  road,  protested  against  the  inhumanity  of  torturing  a  dying 
man  ;  and  resigned  himself  to  take  charge  of  him  only  after  drawing 
up  the  receipt  exacted  from  him  in  these  accusing  terms — 'Received, 
a  Pope  in  a  very  bad  condition.' " 
1  Evacuated  by  the  allies  after  Craonne. 


336     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

probable  that  the  enemy  would  have  evacuated  Laon, 
through  fear  of  being  attacked,  but  for  the  accident  to 
Marmont,  who  behaved  like  a  sub-lieutenant.1  The  enemy 
have  suffered  enormous  losses.  Yesterday  they  attacked 
the  village  of  Clacy  five  times,  and  were  constantly 
repulsed. 

"  The  Young  Guard  melts  away  like  snow.  The  Old 
Guard  resists.  My  Mounted  Guard  also  melts  away  a 
good  deal.  .  .  .  You  must  give  orders  for  the  redoubts 
at  Montmartre  to  be  commenced." 

From  Soissons,  on  the  12th,  the  Emperor  with  his  own 
hand  wrote  as  follows  to  King  Joseph  : — 

"I  regret  that  you  have  spoken  to  my  wife  of  the 
Bourbons,  and  of  the  propositions  which  the  Emperor  of 
Austria  may  make  to  them.  I  beg  that  you  will  avoid 
these  conversations.  I  do  not  wish  to  be  protected  by 
my  wife.  This  idea  would  spoil  her,  and  would  make  us 
disagree.  And  why  speak  to  her  thus  ?  Allow  her  to 
live  as  she  lives ;  speak  to  her  only  about  matters  which 
she  must  sign,  and  above  all,  avoid  anything  which  can 
lead  her  to  suppose  that  I  can  consent  to  be  protected  by 
her  or  by  her  father.  Never,  during  four  years,  has  the 
word  Bourbon '  or  Austria  been  pronounced  by  me. 
Besides,  that  can  only  disturb  her  repose  and  spoil  her 
excellent  temper. 

"  You  always  write  as  if  peace  depended  upon  me  ;  and 
yet  I  have  sent  you  all  the  documents.  If  the  Parisians 
wish  to  see  the  Cossacks  they  will  repent  of  it ;  but  still 
they  must  be  told  the  truth. 

"  I  have  never  sought  the  applause  of  the  Parisians.  I 
am  not  a  character  in  an  opera.  Besides,  one  must  be 
more  practical  than  you  are  in  order  to  know  the  opinion 

1  Marmont,  in  this  nocturnal  attack  on  his  camp,  lost  forty  guns 
and  131  caissons;  not  many  men  were  killed,  but  2,500  prisoners 
were  made,  and  the  whole  corps  was  dispersed  and  utterly  dis- 
organised. 


CAPTURE    OF    RHEIMS.  337 

of  Paris,  which  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  passions  of 
three  or  four  thousand  persons  who  make  a  great  noise.  It 
would  be  simple,  and  more  expeditious,  to  declare  that 
you  cannot  make  a  levy. 

"  The  Emperor  of  Austria  can  do  nothing  because  he  is 
weak  and  led  by  Metternich,  who  is  in  the  pay  of  England  : 
this  is  the  secret  of  everything.     I  embrace  you. 

"  Napoleon." 

It  is  estimated  that  at  Craonne,  Soissons,  and  Laon  the 
French  lost  16,000  men,  and  their  position  was  now  more 
desperate  than  ever. 

To  KING  JOSEPH. 

"Soissons,  i 3/ 'h March,  1814. 
"  Before   commencing    the    fortifications   of    Paris  the 
plan  must  be  known,  that  which  has  been  presented  to 
me  appears  to   be  very  complicated  ;    more   simplicity  is 
required. 

"  I  receive  complaints  from  all  quarters  against  the 
mayors  and  the  bourgeois,  who  prevent  the  people  from 
defending  themselves.  I  see  the  same  thing  in  Paris.  The 
people  possess  energy  and  honour.  I  fear  that  there  be 
certain  chiefs  who  do  not  wish  to  fight.  After  the  event 
they  will  look  very  foolish  at  what  will  happen  to  them. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  KING  JOSEPH. 

"  Rheims,  14th  March,  1814. 
"  I  have  arrived  at  Rheims,  which  General  St.  Priest  had 
occupied  with  three  Russian  divisions  and  a  Prussian 
division  which  had  just  arrived  from  Stettin.  I  beat  them  ; 
I  retook  the  town,  20  guns,  a  great  deal  of  baggage,  and 
.  made  5,000  prisoners.  General  St.  Priest  was  mortally 
wounded.  What  is  remarkable  is  that  General  St.  Priest 
was  hit  by  the  same  pointer  who  killed  General  Moreau. 
One  may  well  exclaim,  '  Providence  !  Providence  ! ' 

"  Napoleon." 

vol.  in.  z 


338  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

The  capture  of  Rheims  with  a  dispirited  army,  which 
had  just  met  with  a  heavy  reverse,  has  been  justly  con- 
sidered as  an  admirable  military  exploit.  St.  Priest, 
knowing  what  had  happened  to  Marmont's  corps,  insisted 
for  some  time  in  believing  that  he  was  being  attacked  by 
the  remnant  of  that  force  ;  and  it  was  not  until  he  saw  the 
bearskins  of  the  Guard  that  he  became  aware  of  the 
presence  of  Napoleon.  Taken  by  surprise  and  over- 
matched, the  allies  seem  to  have  lost  3,500  men,  and  the 
French  only  800  in  this  affair. 

To  MARSHAL  MARMONT. 

"Rheims,  15//?  March,  1814. 

"  Marshal  Mortier  writes  that — ■'  The  enemy  are  in  full 
retreat,  and  seem  to  be  falling  back  upon  Laon.  I  have 
sent  some  cavalry  to  follow  their  march,  which  is  being 
made  in  good  order.'.  .  Send  some  peasants  to  try  and  find 
out  if  the  enemy  are  in  force  at  Craonne.  .  .  .  Try  and 
recruit  men  in  the  villages  by  writing  to  the  mayors  to 
furnish  so  many  men,  and  by  sending  officers  and  soldiers 
to  recruit.  A  great  many  peasants  who  have  been  ruined 
ask  for  nothing  better  than  to  serve.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

The  remains  of  St.  Priest's  corps  did  fall  back  upon 
Laon,  and  joined  Blucher,  who  then  found  himself  at  the 
head  of  109,000  men,  of  whom  29,000  were  cavalry,  and 
265  guns. 

In  spite  of  his  success  at  Rheims,  Napoleon  must  have 
considered  his  position  almost  hopeless,  to  judge  from  the 
following  letter. 

To  KING  JOSEPH. 

"Rheims,  idth  March,  1814. 

"  In  conformity  with  the  verbal  instructions  which  I 
gave  you,  and  with  the  spirit  of  my  letters,  you  must, 


THE  ARMY  OF  THE  GARONNE.         339 

under  no  circumstances,  allow  the  Empress  and  the  King 
of  Rome  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  I  am  going 
to  manoeuvre  in  such  a  way  that  you  will  possibly  have  no 
news  of  me  for  several  days.  If  the  enemy  advance  upon 
Paris  in  such  strength  that  resistance  is  impossible,  send 
away  the  Regent,  my  son,  the  high  dignitaries,  the 
ministers,  the  officers  of  the  Senate,  the  Presidents  of  the 
Council  of  State,  the  grand  officers  of  the  Crown,  the 
Baron  de  la  Bouillerie,  and  the  treasure.  Do  not  abandon  my 
son,  and  remember  that  I  should  sooner  know  him  in  the 
Seine  than  in  the  hands  of  the  enemies  of  France.  The 
fate  of  Astyanax,  prisoner  among  the  Greeks,  has  always 
appeared  to  me  as  the  most  unfortunate  in  history. 

"  Napoleon." 

to  king  joseph. 

'•'  Rheims,  ijth  March,  1814. 
"  I  have  received  news  that  the  enemy  are  falling  back 
in  the  direction  of  Nogent.  ...  I  shall  manoeuvre  accord- 
ing to  the  intelligence  that  I  receive.  .  .  .  See  the  Regent, 
Cambaceres,  and  the  War  Minister.  Find  out  where  the 
10,000  men  of  Marshal  Suchet  are,  and  forward  5,000  or 
6,000  men  by  post  to  the  Dordogne.  All  the  forces 
that  can  be  drawn  from  Rochefort  and  the  cavalry  depots 
beyond  the  Loire  must  be  concentrated  there,  so  that, 
Marshal  Soult  resuming  the  offensive  and  drawing  Wel- 
lington away,  our  troops  may  re-enter  Bordeaux.  As  this 
is  a  matter  requiring  resolution,  a  safe  man  must  be  found 
to  take  the  command.  You  might  send  Suchet  himself 
orders  to  take  the  command  of  the  army,  which  can  be 
called  the  Army  of  the  Garonne.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  GENERAL  CAULA.INCOURT,  at  Chatillon. 

"Rheims,  iyth  March,  1814. 
"I    have   received    your    letters    of    the    13th.      I    have 
directed   M.   Maret  to   reply    to   you   in    detail.      I   give 

z  2 


34°     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

you  authority  to  make  such  concessions  as  may  be 
indispensable  for  keeping  up  the  negotiations  so  as  to 
learn  the  ultimatum  of  the  allies ;  of  course  the  treaty 
must  have  for  result  the  evacuation  of  our  territory  and 
the  liberation  of  the  prisoners  made  on  both  sides. 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  same  day  the  Emperor  wrote  to  General  Clarke 
to  this  effect — "  To-morrow  I  am  going  to  march  to  Arcis- 
sur-Aube,  and  from  thence  to  Mery  or  to  Troyes,  in  order 
to  fall  upon  the  rear  of  the  enemy.  .  .  .  Blucher,  who  has 
evidently  suffered  heavily,  will  not  be  able,  most  probably, 
to  march  for  two  days,  and  then,  as  he  will  have  the  Aisne 
to  cross,  Marmont  and  Mortier  will  be  there  to  dispute  the 
passage.  The  movement  which  I  am  making  will  cause 
great  embarrassment  in  the  enemy's  rear.  .  .   ." 

What  really  accounted  for  Blucher's  inactivity  was  his 
serious  illness — he  was  unable  to  mount  on  horseback  during 
the  remainder  of  the  campaign  ;  his  army  too  was  suffering 
from  exhaustion  and  the  difficulty  of  procuring  food.  In  a 
letter  to  Winzingerode  the  old  field-marshal  said — "  The 
object  of  our  stay  here  is  not  a  military  one.  The  only 
design  I  have  in  view  is  to  give  repose  to  a  harassed  army, 
and,  as  far  as  possible,  to  provide  it  with  bread." 

On  the  1 8th  the  Emperor  wrote  to  King  Joseph  to  tell 
him  that  he  was  marching  on  Arcis,  and  that  he  had 
opened  up  communications  with  Metz  and  Verdun,  which 
places  were  going  to  furnish  him  with  12,000  men. 

TO  KING  JOSEPH. 

"  Plancy,  20th  March,  1814.  6  a.m. 
"  Yesterday  I  crossed  the  Aube  at  Plancy,  and  at  once 
marched  upon  Mery.  I  attacked  the  town,  which  was 
carried  at  7  P.M.  .  .  .  The  Emperor  Alexander  was  at 
Arcis  on  the  18th.  He  remained  there  only  a  hour;  we 
were  nearly  face  to  face.     He  returned  to  Troyes,  which 


THE    MARCH    OH    ST.    DIZIER.  34 1 

was  at  once  evacuated  by  the  general  headquarters.  .  .  . 
The  enemy  are  flying  in  all  directions.  .  .  .  Put  the 
inclosed  note  in  the  Moniteur. 

"  Napoleon." 

NOTE. 

"  The  enemy  who  crossed  the  Seine  at  Pont  and  at 
Nogent,  having  learned  that  the  Emperor,  master  of 
Rheims  and  of  Chalons,  was  marching  on  their  rear,  com- 
menced to  retreat.  The  Emperor  of  Russia  and  the  King 
of  Prussia  were  with  the  column  which  was  marching  from 
Arcis-sur-Aube  to  Villenauxe ;  this  column  narrowly 
escaped  being  cut  off.  At  the  approach  of  the  French 
army  the  Emperor  of  Russia  hastily  fell  back  on  Troyes, 
from  whence  the  headquarters  of  the  Emperors  were 
removed  to  Bar-sur-Aube." 

To  MARSHAL  BEETHIER. 
"Chateau  du  Plessis,  23rd March,  1814.  3  a.m. 
"  Send  a  gendarme  in  disguise  to  Metz,  one  to  Bar,  and 
another  to  Nancy,  with  letters  to  the  mayors.  Tell  them 
that  we  are  marching  on  the  rear  of  the  enemy  ;  that  the 
moment  has  come  to  rise  en  masse,  to  sound  the  tocsin,  to 
arrest  the  commandants  and  the  commissioners  of  the 
enemy,  to  fall  upon  the  convoys,  &c.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

The  fact  is  that,  on  learning  the  approach  of  Napoleon, 
the  allies,  thanks  to  the  energy  displayed  by  the  Czar, 
at  once  concentrated,  and  the  consequence  was  that  the 
French  Emperor,  instead  of  falling  on  the  rear  of  a  flying 
enemy,  speedily  found  himself,  not  only  confronted,  but 
attacked,  by  the  grand  allied  army.  A  desperate  engage- 
ment ensued,  which  lasted  with  varied  success  on  each  side 
all  through  the  2 1st.  The  battle  maybe  said  to  have 
been  drawn  ;  the  losses  on  both  sides  were  equal,  but  on 
the  22nd  Napoleon  fell  back,  and  this  retrograde  move- 


342     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

ment,  which  strongly  contrasted  with  the  news  forwarded 
to  Paris,  greatly  damaged  the  prestige  of  the  Emperor. 

Napoleon  had  no  time  for  writing  on  the  21st,  but  on  the 
22nd  he  wrote  to  Clarke  telling  him  to  give  orders  for  a 
convoy  of  eighty  waggons,  on  the  road  to  Arcis,  to  stop  at 
Suzanne ;  that  the  enemy  were  at  Arcis,  and  that  he  was 
marching  to  St.  Dizier,  where  he  was  about  to  try  and 
stop  the  advance  of  Schwartzenberg  by  throwing  himself 
on  his  rear  and  threatening  his  communications. 

Upon  the  same  day  the  Emperor,  much  perplexed, 
wrote  a  second  letter  from  Sezanne  to  the  Minister 
of  War,  saying — "  My  outposts  are  in  the  vicinity  of  Vitry  ; 
it  is  said  that  the  town  is  well  fortified  and  prepared  to 
defend  itself.  In  that  case  I  shall  throw  a  bridge  over  the 
river  at  Frignicourt,  and  shall  march  on  St.  Dizier." 

The  commandant  at  Vitry  having  declined  to  surrender 
that  town  in  spite  of  the  threat  of  the  garrison  being  put 
to  the  sword,  Napoleon  turned  aside  and  continued  his 
fatal  march  on  St.  Dizier,  leaving  180,000  men  between 
Paris  and  himself,  for  Blucher  at  this  moment  formed  his 
junction  with  Schwartzenberg. 

On  the  23rd  March,  at  10  A.M.,  the  Emperor  sent  a 
despatch  to  Marshal  Ney  in  which  he  said — "  Having 
learned  that  the  Emperor  Alexander  slept  at  Montierender, 
I  am  going  to  St.  Dizier,  because  I  suppose  that  it  is  at 
that  point  that  he  wishes  to  attack  us.  ...  If  the  enemy 
wish  to  interfere  with  my  movement,  it  is  upon  St.  Dizier 
that  they  will  march  to-morrow." 

The  allies  adopted  a  very  different  resolution,  that  of 
pushing  forward  to  Paris. 

On  the  23rd  the  Emperor  also  wrote  to  the  Treasurer  of 
the  Crown  telling  him  to  pay  the  Empress  Josephine  in 
future  by  instalments,  1 5,000  francs  a  month,  and  to  pay  all 
salaries  over  120/.  a  year  in  the  same  way.  "  I  suppose," 
he  added,  "  that  you  have  ceased  paying  for  building, 
furniture,  &c." 

For   several   days  Napoleon   was  in  ignorance   of  the 


ATTEMPT    TO    TREAT.  343 

intentions  of  the  allies.  On  the  27th  he  announced  to 
Berthier  his  intention  of  attacking  Vitry  and  carrying  that 
place  by  assault.  After  this  letter  comes  a  silence  of  three 
days  during  which  Napoleon  was  hurrying  back  to  defend 
the  capital,  only  to  hear  at  ten  o'clock  on  the  evening  of 
the  30th,  on  approaching  Fontainebleau,  that  Paris  had 
capitulated.  He  at  once:  determined  to  try  and  re-open 
negotiations. 

To  GENERAL  CAULAINCOURT. 

"La  Cour  de  France,  $oth  March,  1814, 

"We  order  the  Due  de  Vicence,  our  Master  of  the 
Horse  and  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  to  go  to  the  allied 
sovereigns  and  to  the  general-in-chief  of  the  allied 
armies,  to  recommend  our  faithful  subjects  of  the  capital 
to  them. 

"We  invest  him  for  the  present  with  power  to  negotiate 
and  to  conclude  peace,  promising  to  ratify  anything  that 
he  may  sign  for  the  good  of  our  service. 

"  In  case  of  necessity,  we  also  invest  him  with  military 

powers.    .    .    . 

"  Napoleon." 

In  a  letter  to  Berthier,  dated  from  Fontainebleau,  31st 
March,  Napoleon  instructed  the  Marshal  to  write  to  the 
Prefect  of  Orleans — "  To  announce  the  unfortunate  news  of 
the  occupation  of  Paris  by  the  enemy,  which  my  arrival 
would  have  prevented  had  it  been  delayed  for  three 
hours.  Warn  him  of  the  concentration  which  is  about 
to  take  place  at  Orleans,  and  direct  him  to  prepare 
provisions  for  the  troops.  .  .  .  Send  a  courier  this  evening 
to  Tours  1  to  announce  our  plans  to  King  Joseph  and  to 
his  ministers.   ..." 

On  the  1st  April  the  Emperor,  who  still  dreamed  of 
resisting,  wrote  a  series  of  military  orders.     There  is  no 

1  Whither  Joseph  had  fled  with  Marie  Louise,  the  King  of 
Rome,  &c. 


344     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

letter  or  despatch  in  The  Correspondence  on  the  '2nd  April, 
but  on  the  3rd  we  find  under — 

ALLOCUTION  TO  THE  OLD  GUARD. 

"  Officer,  sub-officers,  and  soldiers  of  the  Old  Guard  ! 
The  enemy  stole  three  marches  upon  us.  They  have 
entered  Paris.  I  offered  the  Emperor  Alexander  a 
peace  purchased  by  great  sacrifices ;  France,  within  her 
ancient  limits,  giving  up  all  ideas  of  conquest,  and  losing 
all  that  she  gained  since  the  Revolution.  Not  only  did 
he  refuse  it,  he  went  further;  at  the  suggestions  of  some 
perfidious  Emigre's,  whose  lives  I  spared,  and  whom  I 
loaded  with  favours,  he  has  authorised  them  to  wear  the 
white  cockade,  and  soon  it  will  be  substituted  for  our 
national  cockade.  In  a  few  days  I  shall  march  to  attack 
Paris.  I  count  upon  you."  (There  was  silence.  The 
Emperor  resumed.)  "Am  I  right?"  (Suddenly  there 
were  shouts  of  "  Vive  I Empereur  !  A  Paris  !"  Then  the 
Old  Guard  were  silent,  thinking  it  useless  to  reply.)  "  We 
will  go  and  prove  that  the  French  know  how  to  be  masters 
at  home  ;  that,  if  we  have  long  been  masters  abroad,  we 
shall  always  remain  so  in  our  own  country;  and,  finally, 
that  we  are  capable  of  defending  our  cockade,  our 
independence,  and  the  integrity  of  our  territory." 

To  MARSHAL  BERTHIER. 

"  FONTAINEBLEAU,  ^th  April,  J  8 1 4. 

"  Send  orders  to  Marshals  Marmont,  Mortier,  Oudinot, 
and  Serrurier,  and  to  Generals  Belliard,  Gerard,  Sorbier, 
Sebastian!,  &c,  &c,  to  come  to  the  palace  this  evening  at 
ten  o'clock,  and  to  adopt  measures  so  that  they  may  be 
back  at  their  posts  before  daybreak. 

"  Napoleon." 

declaration  of  the  4th  april,  1814. 

"  The  allied  Powers  having  proclaimed  that  the  Emperor 
Napoleon  is  the  sole  obstacle  to  the  re-establishment  of 
peace  in   Europe,  the  Emperor  Napoleon,  faithful  to  his 


REPROACHES    ADDRESSED    TO    THE    SENATE.       345 

oath,  declares  that  he  is  ready  to  descend  from  the  throne, 
to  leave  France,  and  even  to  die,  for  the  welfare  of  the 
country,  which  cannot  be  separated  from  the  rights  of 
his  son,  those  of  the  Regency,  of  the  Empress,  and  the 
maintenance  of  the  laws  of  the  Empire." 

On  the  5th  the  Emperor  issued  a  series  of  orders  to 
Berthier  in  connection  with  his  proposed  march  upon 
Paris  ;  but  they  could  not  be  executed  in  consequence 
of  the  defection  of  Marmont,  who  was  in  command  of 
the  sixth  corps.  Later  on  in  the  day  he  issued  this 
proclamation  — 

TO  THE  ARMY. 

"  The  Emperor  thanks  "the  army  for  the  attachment 
which  it  has  shown  to  him,  and  chiefly  because  it  re- 
cognises that  France  is  on  his  side  and  not  with  the 
people  of  the  capital.'1  The  soldier  follows  the  fortune 
and  the  misfortune  of  his  general ;  his  honour  is  his 
religion.  Marshal  Marmont  has  not  inspired  his  comrades 
with  these  sentiments  ;  he  has  gone  over  to  the  allies.  The 
Emperor  cannot  approve  of  the  condition  upon  which  he 
has  taken  this  step ;  he  cannot  accept  life  and  liberty  at 
the  hands  of  a  subject.2 

"The  Senate  has  permitted  itself  to  dispose  of  the 
French  Government  :  it  forgets  that  it  owes  to  the 
Emperor  the  power  it  now  abuses ;  that  it  was  the  Em- 
peror who  saved  a  portion  of  its  members  from  the  storms 
of  the  Revolution,  and  who  drew  from  obscurity  and  pro- 
tected the  other  portion  from  the  hatred  of  the  nation. 
The  Senate  makes  use  of  the  articles  of  the  Constitution  in 
order  to  overthrow  the  Constitution.     It  does  not  blush  to 

1  The  allied  troops  had  just  been  received  with  the  greatest  enthu- 
siasm in  Paris,  where  they  were  hailed  as  liberators,  amid  shouts  of 
"  Vive  Alexander  ! "  and  "  Vive  le  Roi  de  Prusse  !  " 

2  Marmont,  previous  to  his  defection,  obtained  the  assurance  that 
the  life  of  the  Emperor  was  in  no  danger,  and  that  there  was  no 
intention  of  treating  him  with  harshness. 


346     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

reproach  the  Emperor,  without  remarking  that,  as  the  first 
body  in  the  State,  it  took  part  in  all  that  has  happened. 
It  has  even  been  bold  enough  to  accuse  the  Emperor  of 
having  altered  official  documents  ;  every  one  knows 
that  he  did  not  require  to  resort  to  such  artifices ;  a 
sign  was  an  order  for  the  Senate,  which  always  did  more 
than  was  desired  of  it.  The  Emperor  was  always  accessible 
to  the  remonstrances  of  his  ministers,  and  he  expected 
from  them,  on  the  present  occasion,  the  most  undeniable 
justification  of  his  measures.  If  enthusiasm  was  mingled 
with  addresses  and  public  discourses,  then  the  Emperor 
was  deceived  ;  but  those  who  held  this  language  should 
attribute  to  themselves  the  consequences  of  their  flattery. 
The  Senate  does  not  blush  to  speak  of  libels  published 
against  foreign  governments  ;  it  forgets  that  they  were 
drawn  up  in  its  centre.  As  long  as  fortune  showed  itself 
faithful  to  their  sovereign,  these  men  remained  faithful, 
and  no  complaints  were  made  respecting  an  abuse  of 
power.  If  the  Emperor  had  despised  men,  as  he  is  re- 
proached with  doing,  every  one  will  acknowledge  to-day 
that  there  exist  good  reasons  for  his  contempt.1  He  holds 
his  dignity  from  God  and  from  the  nation  :  they  alone  can 
deprive  him  of  it ;  he  has  always  considered  the  throne  as 
a  burden,  and,  when  he  accepted  it,  it  was  in  the  conviction 
that  he  alone  was  able  to  fill  it  worthily. 

"  The  welfare  of  France  appeared  to  be  linked  with  the 
destiny  of  the  Emperor.  Now  that  fortune  has  decided 
against  him,  the  will  of  the  nation  can  alone  persuade 
him  to  remain  upon  the  throne.  If  he  is  to  consider  him- 
self as  the  sole  obstacle  to  peace,  he  will  willingly  make 
this  last  sacrifice  to  France.  He  has  consequently  sent 
Marshal  Ney,  Marshal  Macdonald,  and  General  Caulain- 
court  to  Paris  to  open  negotiations.  The  army  may  rest 
assured  that  the  honour  of  the  Emperor  will  never  be 
in  contradiction  with  the  welfare  of  France." 

1  "  Plus  vil  que  le  pourceau  qui  dans  logout  se  vautre, 

Son  senat,  qui  l'avait  adord,  l'insultait." — Victor  HUGO. 


LETTERS    TO    MARIE    LOUISE.  347 

ACT  OF  ABDICATION. 

"  The  allied  Powers  having  proclaimed  that  the  Emperor 
Napoleon  Bonaparte  is  the  only  obstacle  to  the  re-estab- 
lishment of  peace  in  Europe,  the  Emperor  Napoleon, 
faithful  to  his  oath,  declares  that  he  renounces,  for  himself 
and  his  heirs,  the  thrones  of  France  and  Italy,  and  that 
there  is  no  personal  sacrifice,  even  that  of  his  life,  which  he 
is  not  ready  to  make  in  the  interest  of  France. 

"Done  at  the  Palace  of  Fontainebleau,  nth  April,  18 14." 

No  more  letters  until  the  19th,  with  the  exception  of 
the  following,  written  on  the  13th,  to  one  of  his  favourite 
aides-de-camp : — ■ 

"  GENERAL  CORBINEAU, — I  cannot  leave  you  without 
expressing  the  satisfaction  I  have  constantly  derived  from 
your  services.  You  will  uphold  the  good  opinion  I  have 
formed  of  you  by  serving  the  new  sovereign  of  France 
with  the  same  fidelity  and  the  same  devotion  which  you 
have  shown  towards  me. 

"Napoleon." 

"Fontainebleau,  igth  April,  1814. 

"  My  GOOD  LOUISE, — I  have  received  your  letter,  and 
see  all  your  pain,  which  increases  mine.  I  perceive  with 
pleasure  that  Corvisart  encourages  you.  I  am  infinitely 
obliged  to  him  ;  he  justifies  by  this  noble  conduct  the  high 
opinion  I  always  entertained  of  him.  Tell  him  this  from 
me,  and  let  him  send  me  frequent  bulletins  concerning 
your  state  of  health.  Try  and  go  as  soon  as  possible  to 
the  waters  at  Aix,  which,  they  tell  me,  Corvisart  has 
advised  you  to  take.  Take  care  of  yourself  and  preserve 
your  health  for  [blank  in  the  text],  and  for  your  son,  who 
requires  your  care.  I  am  about  to  start  for  the  island  of 
Elba,  from  which  place  I  will  write  to  you.  I  shall  do 
all  in  my  power  to  see  you  again. 

"  Write  to  me  often,  and  address   your  letters   to  the 


348  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

viceroy  and  to  your  uncle,  if,  as  they  say,  he  has  been 

made  Grand  Duke  of  Tuscany. 

"Adieu,  my  good  Marie  Louise. 

"  Napoleon." 

It  is  strange  that  Napoleon  should  have  written  the 
above  letter  on  the  day  he  endeavoured  to  poison  himself! 

TO  THJ£  EMPRESS  MARIE  LOUISE. 

"  Fontainebleau,  ioth  April,  1814.  9  A.M. 
"  My  GOOD  FRIEND, — I  am  starting  in  order  to  sleep 
at  Briare  this  evening.  I  shall  leave  that  place  -to-morrow 
morning,  and  shall  -not  stop  until  I  reach  St.  Tropez. 
Beausset,  who  will  hand  you  this  letter,  will  give  you  news 
of  me,  tell  you  that  I  am  in  good  health,  and  that  I 
hope  your  health  will  hold  up,  and  that  you  will  come  and 
join  me.  Montesquieu,  who  started  at  2  A.M.,  should  have 
arrived.  I  received  no  news  of  you  yesterday,  but  I  hope 
that  the  prefect  of  the  palace  will  overtake  me  this  evening 
and  give  me  some.  Adieu,  my  good  Louise.  You  can 
always  reckon  upon  the  courage,  the  calm,  and  the 
friendship  of  your  husband.1  "NAPOLEON." 

FAREWELL  TO  THE  GUARD. 

"  Soldiers  of  the  Old  Guard, — I  bid  you  farewell. 
For  the  last  twenty  years  I  have  constantly  found  you  on 
the  road  of  honour  and  glory.  Recently,  as  in  the  days  of 
prosperity,  you  showed  yourselves  to  be  models  of  bravery 
and  fidelity.  With  men  like  you  our  cause  was  not  lost ;  but 
war  would  have  become  interminable  ;  there  would  have 
been  civil  war,  and  France  would  have  been  all  the  more 
unfortunate.  I'have  therefore  sacrificed  all  our  interests 
to  those  of  the  country.     I  leave.     You,  my  friends,  must 

1  A  note  in  The  Correspondence  says  that  the  above  letter  was 
confided  to  M.  de  Beausset,  one  of  the  prefects  of  the  palace,  who, 
being  unable  to  overtake  Marie  Louise,  kept  it.  It  is  in  Napoleon's 
handwriting,  and  forms  part  of  a  collection  of  autographs  belonging  to 
M.  de  la  Jarriette. 


TAKING    POSSESSION    OF    ELBA.  349 

continue  to  serve  France.  Her  happiness  was  my  only 
thought ;  it  will  always  be  the  object  of  my  wishes.  Do 
not  pity  my  fate ;  if  I  have  consented  to  survive,  it  is  to 
be  useful  to  your  glory  :  I  wish  to  write  the  great  things 
that  we  have  done  together !  Farewell,  my  children  !  I 
would  willingly  press  you  all  to  my  heart ;  allow  me  at 
least  to  embrace  your  standard !  .  .  .  "  (At  these  words 
General  Petit,  seizing  an  eagle,  advanced.  Napoleon 
received  the  general  in  his  arms  and  kissed  the  colours. 
The  silence  which  this  grand  scene  inspired  was  broken 
only  by  the  sobs  of  the  soldiers.  Napoleon,  making  a 
visible  effort  to  stifle  his  emotion,  continued  with  a 
firm  voice  :) 

"  Farewell  once  more,  my  old  comrades  !  Let  this  last 
kiss  pass  into  your  hearts  !  " 

"20th  April,  1 8 14." 

To  GENERAL  COUNT  DALESME.1 

"  Frejus,  27th  April,  1 8 14. 

"Circumstances  having  induced  me- to  renounce  the 
throne  of  France,  sacrificing  my  rights  to  the  interests  of 
the  country,  I  reserved  for  myself  the  sovereignty  of  the 
island  of  Elba,  which  has  met  with  the  consent  of  all  the 
Powers.  I  therefore  send  you  General  Drouot  so  that  you 
may  hand  over  to  him  the  said  island,  with  the  military 
stores  and  provisions,  and  the  property  which  belongs  to 
my  imperial  domain.  Be  good  enough  to  make  known 
this  new  state  of  affairs  to  the  inhabitants,  and  the  choice 
which  I  have  made  of  their  island  for  my  sojourn  in  con- 
sideration of  the  mildness  of  their  manners,  and  the 
excellence  of  their  climate.  I  shall  take  the  greatest 
interest  in  their  welfare.2 

"  Napoleon." 

1  Commandant  of  the  island  of  Elba. 

2  Perhaps  Joseph  Philip  Arrighi,  canon  of  Pisa  and  Florence,  and 
vicar  of  Ajaccio,  Elba,  and  Piombino,  had  seen  this  letter  when  he 


3 SO  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

To  BARON  CORVISART. 

"Frejus,  i%th  April,  1 8 14. 
"  I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  22nd  April.  Your 
conduct  during  recent  times,  when  so  many  others  behaved 
badly,  has  given  me  great  pleasure.  .  I  thank  you,  and  this 
confirms  the  opinion  I  had  conceived  of  your  character. 
Give  me  news  of  Marie  Louise,  and  never  doubt  my  feelings 
towards  you.     Do  not  give  yourself  up  to  melancholy. 

"  Napoleon." 

And  on  the  29th  Napoleon  wrote  this  brief  note  to 
M.  Aune,  who  was  attending  Pauline  Borghese  at  the 
castle  of  Luc  in  the  Var — 

"Your  conduct  towards  my  sister,  and  the  attentions 
which  you  bestowed  at  a  critical  moment 1  on  him  who 
wished  to  make  France  the  first  nation  in  the  world,  but 
who  did  not  succeed,  fully  entitle  you  to  my  gratitude. 

"  Napoleon." 

Having  been  landed  at  Elba  from  the  Ufidaunted, 
Captain  Usher,  the  Emperor  at  once  began  to  organise 
the  island  and  to  address  letters  and  orders  to  General 
Count  Drouot,  the  governor,  and  to  General  Count  Ber- 
trand,  Grand  Marshal  of  the  Palace,  in  the  same  imperious 

penned  the  following  pastoral  with  which  he  greeted  Napoleon  on  hfs 
arrival  at  Elba.     He  wrote : — 

"  Divine  Providence,  who  in  His  benevolence  disposes  irresistibly 
of  things,  and  who  assigns  to  nations  their  destinies,  has  pleased  that 
in  the  midst  of  the  political  changes  of  Europe  we  should  become  in 
future  the  subjects  of  the  Great  Napoleon.  The  island  of  Elba, 
already  celebrated  for  its  natural  productions,  will  henceforth  be 
illustrious  among  the  nations  of  the  earth,  owing  to  the  homage 
rendered  to  its  new  prince,  whose  glory  is  immortal.  The  island  of 
Elba  assumes  a  rank  among  the  Powers,  and  its  little  territory  is 
ennobled  by  the  name  of  its  sovereign.  Proud  of  this  sublime  honour, 
it  receives  into  its  bosom  the  anointed  of  the  Lord  and  the  other 
distinguished  persons  who  accompany  him." 

1  When  poison  was  taken  at  Fontainebleau. 


PORTO    FERRAJO.  35  I 

style  as   if  they   had    been  dictated    at   the    Tuileries  or 
St.  Cloud. 

In  a  long  letter  to  General  Drouot  dated  Porto  Ferrajo, 
7th  May,  his  Majesty  thus  expressed  himself — "You  must 
find  out  from  the  sub-prefect  in  what  the  civil  government 
of  the  country  consists.  Have  the  flag  of  the  island  run 
up  in  all  the  parishes  on  Sunday,  and  make  a  kind  of 
holiday  of  that  day.  .  .  .  The  hoisting  of  the  flag  should  be 
announced  to  Naples,  Rome,  Tuscany,  and  Genoa."  And 
the  Emperor  then  entered  into  a  number  of  military, 
naval,  and  civil  questions.  The  Grand  Marshal  was  to 
settle  the  household  expenses  every  week,  even  "  a  leaf  of 
salad  or  a  bunch  of  grapes  should  be  mentioned."  Under 
the  head  of  "  military  organisation  "  are  numerous  details. 
The  whole  force  at  the  disposal  of  the  Emperor  consisted 
of  1,523  men  :  or,  first  battalion  404  men  ;  battalion  of  Elba 
400  men,  Guard  400,  Poles  80,  gendarmes  19,  veterans 
20,  gunners  109,  sailors  100.  It  was  the  intention  of 
Napoleon  to  lay  in  a  store  of  meal,  rice,  biscuit,  oil,  and 
salt  meat,  together  with  wine  and  brandy,  so  as  to  be  able 
to  stand  a  siege  at  Porto  Ferrajo. 

To  GENERAL  BERTRAND. 

"Porto  Ferrajo,  loth  June,  1814. 
"  It  is  my  intention  to  appoint  the  mayor  of  Porto 
Longone  commandant  of  my  palace  at  Porto  Longone. 
He  must  perform  the  functions  of  commandant,  concierge, 
keeper  of  the  robes,  and  overseer  of  the  gardens.  He 
will  receive  a  salary  of  600  francs.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

In  another  letter  dated  Porto  Ferrajo,  17th  June,  the 
Emperor  said — "  As  the  theatre  is  to  be  demolished  some 
day,  it  is  not  my  intention  to  do  anything  which  will 
greatly  increase  the  expenses  ; "  and  a  few  days  later — 
"  I  return  you  the  plan  of  the  house.  .  .  .  There  is  not 
room  on  the  first  floor  for  more  than  three  apartments  ;  a 


352  THE    CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

large  apartment  of  eight  rooms,  one  of  six  rooms  for  the 
Empress,  and  another  of  three  rooms.  .  .  ." 

NOTE  FOR  THE  GRAND  MARSHAL. 

"  PORTO  FERRAJO,  17//Z  July,  1 8 14. 
"  Write  to  my  brother  Lucien  that  I  have  received  his 
letter  of  the  nth  June  ;  that  I  am  pleased  with  the  senti- 
ments which  he  expresses  ;  that  he  must  not  be  astonished 
if  he  does  not  receive  a  reply  from  me,  because  I  write  to 
no  one.  I  have  not  written  even  to  Madame  [his  mother]." 

In  a  letter  of  the  28th  the  Emperor  said — "  I  keep  up 
three  schooners  with  sixteen  sailors  each,  and  a  brig  which 
has  sixty.  This  naval  force  is  necessary  to  watch  the 
coasts,  and  to  drive  off  the  Algerian  corsairs.  .  .  ."  And 
on  the  same  day — "  As  I  am  not  yet  sufficiently  well 
lodged  to  give  fetes,  I  shall  await  the  arrival  of  the  Empress 
and  the  Princess  Pauline,  whom  I  expect  in  the  first  days 
of  September,  to  have  fireworks.  I  wish  the  parish  to 
pay  the  expenses  of  a  ball  to  be  given  in  the  public 
square,  where  a  ball-room  in  wood  can  be  constructed,  and 
the  officers  of  the  Imperial  Guard  be  invited.  In  the 
neighbourhood  of  this  ball-room  an  orchestra  must  be 
established  for  the  soldiers  to  dance  to,  and  the  parish 
must  take  care  to  have  some  barrels  of  wine  for  them  to 
drink.  I  also  wish  the  parish  to  arrange  the  wedding  of 
two  young  people  whom  it  must  endow.  The  Grand 
Marshal  and  the  authorities  must  be  present  at  this 
marriage,  which  must  take  place  after  high  mass." 

To  GENERAL  COMTE  BERTRAND. 

"  Porto  Ferrajo,  gtk  August,  18 14. 
"  Colonel  Laczinski,  who  is  going  to  leave  to-day  for 
Leghorn,  will  go  from  there  to  Aix,  and  will  take  with  him 
a  letter  from  me  to  the  Empress.  Write  to  Meneval 
to  inform  him  that  I  expect  the  Empress  at  the  end  of  the 
month,  that  I  wish  her  to  send  me  my  son,  and  that  it  is 


LA    MADONE.  353 

singular  that  I  have  no  news  of  her,  which  comes  from 
letters  being  intercepted  ;  that  this  ridiculous  order  is 
probably  due  to  some  subaltern,  and  cannot  come  from  her 
father ;  at  all  events,  that  no  one  has  any  authority  over 
the  Empress  and  my  son.  "Napoleon." 

In  another  letter  to  General  Bertrand  the  Emperor  gave 
orders  for  the  captain  of  the  Guard,  who  was  leaving  the 
island,  to  "  seize  every  opportunity  of  writing  to  Meneval 
and  to  Madame  de  Brignole,  to  give  them  news  of  me,  to 
say  that  Madame  Mere  has  arrived,  and  that  I  expect  the 
Empress  in  September.  .  .  .  Give  a  month's  leave  to 
Captain  Hureau,  whose  wife  is  in  the  service  of  the 
Empress.  Let  him  sail  this  evening,  go  to  Aix,  or  wher- 
ever the  Empress  may  be.  .  .  .  I  will  receive  him  at  four 
o'clock,  and  will  give  him  instructions  and  letters." 

To  GENERAL  COMTE  BERTRAND,  Grand  Marshal  of 
the  Palace. 

"La  Madone,  2yd August,  1814. 

"  I  arrived  here  at  nine  o'clock  ;  it  is  now  five,  and  I  am 
going  out  shooting.  One  does  not  feel  the  heat  here. 
Two  shutters  are  wanting  for  my  bedroom  ;  try  and  send 
them  to-morrow.  Also  send  me  two  lanterns  to  put  at 
the  door  of  my  tent.  There  are  three  iron  beds  here.  I 
have  ordered  one  to  be  brought  from  Marciana  for  Madame. 
There  are  fifteen  mattresses,  with  blankets  and  sheets, 
which  is  all  that  is  required.  Madame  can  come  to  Mar- 
ciana, if  she  likes,  and  lodge  in  the  house  of  the  mayor. 
She  might  start  on  Thursday,  at  5  A.M.  .  .  .  Send  on  a 
valet  de  chambre,  a  footman  and  a  lady's  maid,  a  cook  and 
Cipriani,  to  get  her  house  and  her  breakfast  ready.  In  the 
mayor's  house  Madame  will  have  a  room  for  herself  and 
one  for  her  ladies,  one  for  her  maids  and  one  for  her 
men  servants.  If  the  Sieur  Colonna  accompanies  Madame 
he  will   be  lodged  in  the  town.     In  this  house  there  is 

VOL.  III.  A  A 


354    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

sufficient  furniture.  I  have  had  a  chest  of  drawers  placed 
in  her  apartments.  There  is  enough  linen  for  both  of  us. 
Major  Roul  will  be  attached  to  me  as  orderly  officer.  His 
pay  will  be  200  francs  a  month.  He  will  accompany 
Madame,  as  well  as  the  chamberlain,  Ventini.  I  think  there 
are  things  enough  for  Madame's  kitchen  and  mine.  There 
are  also  candles  and  lights  enough.  The  kitchen  can  be 
established  in  the  house.  Send  three  curtains  for  Madame's 
room.  The  rods  are  here.  Send  us  also  fire-irons,  tongs, 
shovels,  &c.  I  think  those  people  are  right  who  say  that  it 
is  necessary  to  have  fires  of  an  evening. 

"  Napoleon. 

"  P.S.  The  valet  de  chambre  has  some  stuff  for 
making  curtains,  which  he  is  going  to  take  to  Madame's 
house." 

To  GENERAL  BERTRAND. 

"  La  Madone,  26th.  August,  1814. 
"  I  think    that    I    asked   you  to  write   to    the   Princess 
Pauline  not  to  bring  her  piano  master  with  her,  but  only  a 
good  singer  and  a  good  songstress,  seeing  that  we  have 
here  a  good  violin  player  and  a  good  pianist. 

"  Napoleon." 

And  on  the  same  day  to  the  same  address  : — 

"  One  of  my  mules  was  recently  drowned,  which  is  a 
loss  ;  this  was  due  to  there  not  being  a  small  pump  in  the 
stable  ;  have  one  of  those  in  store  repaired." 

It  is  difficult  to  imagine  what  kind  of  stable  this  could 
have  been. 

On  the  28th  the  Emperor,  seemingly  in  high  glee,  wrote 
to  the  Grand  Marshal  of  his  palace,  saying — "  Send  off 
Beausset's  courier,  and  tell  De  Beausset  that  I  received 
news  of  the  Empress  up  to  the  10th,  that  I  should  have 
been  charmed  had  he  come  on  here,  that  it  would  not  have 
been   much  out  of  his  way.     Tell  him  that  the  Empress 


THE   GRAND    DUKE    OF   TUSCANY.  355 

should  write  to  me  through  M.  Senno  of  Genoa.  M.  de 
Beausset  will  be  the  bearer  of  the  inclosed  letter  to  the 
Empress." 

After  reading  the  above,  one  is  at  a  loss  to  know  how  it 
came  that  M.  de  Beausset  kept  the  letter  which  the 
Emperor  wrote  to  Marie  Louise  on  the  20th  April,  as  he 
was  leaving  Fontainebleau. 

To  GENERAL  BERTRAND. 

"  La  Madone,  ind  September,  1814.  ■ 
"  Write  to  the  Princess  Pauline  that  I  have  received  all 
the  letters  from  Naples  ;  tell  her  that  I  feel  much  hurt 
that  my  letters  should  have  been  forwarded  open,  as  if  I 
were  a  prisoner;  that  I  find  this  conduct  ridiculous  and 
insulting.  .  .  , 

"  Napoleon." 

to  general  bertrand. 

"  Porto  LONGONE,  gt/i  September,  18 14. 

"  I  thank  you  for  the  pamphlets  which  I  have  just 
received  ;  make  a  collection  of  those  which  are  for  and 
those  which  are  against ;  one  of  these  days  I  will  run  over 
them  all. 

"  I  have  received  a  very  tender  letter  from  the  King  of 
Naples  ;  he  pretends  having  written  to  me  several  times, 
but  I  doubt  it  ;  it  appears  that  affairs  between  France  and 
Italy  turn  his  head  and  make  him  tender. 

"  Send  me  a  list  of  the  persons  whom  the  Princess 
Pauline  is  bringing  with  her.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 


To  FERDINAND  JOSEPH,  Grand  Duke  of  Tuscany, 
at  Florence. 

"Porto  Ferrajo,  10th  October,  1814. 

"Sir,  my  Brother,  and  very  dear  Uncle, — Not 
having   received   any   news   of  my   wife   since   the    10th 

A  A  2 


356       CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

August,  nor  of  my  son  for  six  months,  I  send  you  this 
letter  by  the  Chevalier  Colonna.  I  beg  your  Royal  High- 
ness to  inform  me  if  you  will  permit  me  to  send  you  a 
letter  every  week  for  the  Empress,  and  if  you  will  send  me 
in  return  news  of  her  and  the  letters  of  Madame  de 
Montesquiou,  the  governess  of  my  son.  I  flatter  myself 
that  in  spite  of  the  events  which  have  changed  so  many 
individuals,  your  Royal  Highness  retains  some  friendship 
for  me.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

During  the  remainder  of  the  year  no  letters  of  interest 
were  written  by  the  Emperor,  or  at  least  none  have  been 
made  public,  but  it  is  certain  that  active  negotiations  were 
being  carried  on  in  his  name  for  his  return  to  France, 
chiefly  through  the  instrumentality  of  his  sister,  Pauline 
Borghese. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

THE  YEAR  1815. 

When  the  year  181 5  opened  Napoleon  was  still  at  Elba, 
carefully  concealing  his  intrigues  and  his  intentions ;  the 
Congress  of  Vienna  was  sitting,  and  the  question  of 
removing  the  French  Emperor  to  a  greater  distance  from 
the  Continent  had  been  more  than  once  raised ;  it  was 
contemplated  sending  him  to  the  Canary  Islands,  to  St. 
Lucia,  or  to  St.  Helena.  The  Czar,  however,  was  opposed 
to  a  violation  of  the  treaty  of  Fontainebleau.  On  the 
7th  February  the  news  reached  Vienna  that  Napoleon 
had  secretly  left  Elba,  and  this  intelligence,  communicated 
to  the  Congress  by  Prince  Metternich,  fell  upon  it  like 
a  thunderbolt,  and  hushed  all  its  dissensions.  It  was 
instantly  determined  to  wage  war  against  Napoleon ;  the 
treaty  of  Chaumont  was  revived  and  ratified  on  the 
25th  April.  The  allies  agreed  not  to  lay  down  arms  until 
they  had  completed  the  destruction  of  the  common  enemy. 

They  at  once  prepared  to  invade  France  with  an  over- 
whelming force.  In  round  numbers  they  set  on  foot 
700,000  men.  Schwartzenberg  commanded  the  army  of 
the  Upper  Rhine,  260,000  strong  ;  Blucher  had  under  his 
orders  150,000  Prussians  and  Saxons  ;  Wellington  had 
nearly  an  equal  number  of  English,  Belgians,  &c. ;  while 
the  Russians,  under  Barclay  de  Tolly,  numbered  160,000. 
The    Swiss,   the    Spaniards,    and    the    Portuguese    were 


358     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

anxious  to  co-operate,  and  La  Vendue  was  in  a  blaze. 
To  meet  all  these  difficulties,  Napoleon,  who  arrived  in 
Paris  on  the  2 1st  March,  after  a  triumphal  march  from 
the  Gulf  of  Juan,  set  to  work  to  reorganise  his  army  with 
marvellous  rapidity.  Siborne  says  that  he  never  worked 
greater  wonders  during  his  wonderful  career  than  when 
preparing  for  his  last  campaign.  He  proposed  to  have  an 
army  of  560,000  men  by  the  1st  June,  and  800,000  by  the 
1st  October  ;  he  calculated  too  that  the  National  Guard 
reorganised  throughout  the  country  would  yield  2,250,000 
men  for  home  service.  It  is  true  that  this  gigantic  scheme 
was  only  partially  carried  out.  All  old  soldiers  were 
called  upon  to  rejoin,  even  those  beyond  the  Rhine,  and 
who  had  served  the  French  Empire  in  the  days  of  the 
Confederation.  Paris  was  fortified  on  the  north  side,  but 
not  on  the  south. 

A  good  deal  has  been  written  about  the  enthusiasm 
with  which  Napoleon  was  greeted  on  his  arrival  in  France, 
but  that  enthusiasm  was  almost  entirely  confined  to  the 
lower  orders  and  to  the  soldiery.  The  middle  classes  had 
an  instinctive  dread  that  matters  would  terminate  badly, 
and  that  the  allies  could  make  France  pay  dearly  for  this 
escapade.  Comte  Miot  de  Melito,  who  was  sent  into  the 
provinces  to  observe  the  feeling  in  the  country,  was 
obliged  on  his  return  to  make  an  unfavourable  report.  He 
told  the  Emperor  that  he  had  everywhere  found  the  women 
opposed  to  him,  and  he  submitted  that  it  would  be  of 
immense  importance  to  procure  the  return  of  the  Empress. 
The  fact  of  the  women  being  against  him,  Napoleon  said, 
was  because  he  had  never  permitted  them  to  meddle  with 
his  affairs.  There  were  other  reasons,  the  bella  matribus 
detestata  ;  a  sufficient  number  of  children  had  already  been 
sacrificed  to  the  Minotaur.  Then  the  women  were  influ- 
enced by  the  priests,  and  the  priests  were  opposed  to  the 
persecutor  of  the  Church. 

The  crowning  feature  of  18 1 5  was  the  brief  and  decisive 
campaign  which  lasted  only  a  few  days,  and  which  ended 


THE    CAMPAIGN    OF    1 8 1  5.  359 

in  the  total  overthrow  of  the  most  remarkable  man  the 
world  has  ever  seen.  Napoleon  broke  into  Flanders  on 
the  15th  June  at  the  head  of  122,000  men — said  to  have 
been  the  finest  army  that  ever  marched  out  of  France. 
He  defeated,  but  did  not  route  the  Prussians  at  Ligny  on 
the  1 6th.  He  himself  made  the  fatal  mistake  of  over- 
rating his  success,  and  supposing  at  first  that  Blucher  had 
fallen  back  on  Namur  with  the  intention  of  re-crossing  the 
Rhine.  On  the  17th,  Napoleon,  after  wasting  many  hours, 
sent  Grouchy  in  pursuit  of  the  Prussians,  and  marched 
himself  with  about  80,000  men  to  attack  the  Duke  of 
Wellington.  Beaten  on  the  18th  the  Emperor  fled,  and 
did  not  draw  rein  till  he  reached  Philippeville,  ten  leagues 
from  Mont  St.  Jean.  Passing  through  Charleroi,  he  was 
at  Laon  on  the  20th,  and  from  that  place  dictated  his  last 
bulletin. 

After  several  futile  attempts  to  regain  power,  and  then 
to  secure  the  throne  for  his  son,  the  Emperor  went  to 
Rochefort  with  the  intention  of  going  to  the  United 
States.  The  Minister  of  Marine,  Admiral  Decres,  had 
placed  two  frigates  at  his  service,  but  there  were  eleven 
English  vessels  cruising  off  the  port,  and  so  Napoleon 
surrendered   himself  to  Captain  Maitland. 

Both  during  his  stay  at  Elba  and  afterwards,  no  corre- 
spondence was  permitted  between  the  Emperor  and  Marie 
Louise.  On  landing  in  the  gulf  of  St.  Juan  he  wrote  a 
note  to  Marie  Louise  to  join  him,  and  he  afterwards 
appealed  to  the  Emperor  of  Austria,  but  in  vain,  to  have 
his  wife  and  child  restored  to  him.  For  some  time 
Napoleon  thought  that  he  would  be  able  to  secure  at 
least  the  neutrality  of  Austria,  but  this  was  not  to  be. 

The  Congress  of  Vienna  had  busied  itself  considerably 
with  putting  down  the  slave  trade.  On  the  29th  March 
Napoleon,  by  an  imperial  decree,  abolished  that  infamous 
traffic. 


360  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

NOTE  FOR  THE  BALLS  TO  BE  GIVEN  DURING  THE 
CARNIVAL. 

"PORTO  Ferrajo,  yd  January,  1815. 

"  Sunday,  the  8th,  there  will  be  a  ball  in  the  grand 
saloon.  It  is  necessary  that  the  invitations  should  be 
made  out  to-morrow,  and  the  list  submitted  to  his 
Majesty.  The  invitations  should  extend  all  over  the 
island,  without  however  comprising  more  than  200 
persons.  They  must  be  issued  for  nine  o'clock.  There  will 
be  refreshments  without  ices,  seeing  the  difficulty  there  is 
in  procuring  them.  There  will  be  a  supper  served  at 
midnight.     All  this  must  not  cost  more  than  40/. 

"  Sunday,  the  15th,  the  Academy  can  open  its  theatre 
and  give  a  fancy  ball.  The  22nd  following  I  can  give 
another  ball.  The  29th  the  theatre  can  give  a  < .  jcond 
fancy  ball.  During  the  holidays  there  can  be  two  fancy 
balls  given,  one  at  the  theatre,  and  one  at  the  palace.  .  .  ." 

General  Bertrand  having  submitted  for  the  approbation 
of  his  Majesty  a  bill  for  eight  blinds  for  the  drawing- 
room  of  the  Princess  Pauline,  Napoleon  decided — 

"Porto  Ferrajo,  31  st  January,  1815. 
"  Not  having  ordered  this  expense,  which  has  not  been 
carried  to  the  budget,  the  princess  must  pay  it.     It  will  be 
the  same  with  all  expenses  of  this  kind  made  before  they 
have  been  approved. 

"  NAPOLEON." 

The  princess  having  furnished  the  linen,  the  whole 
expense  was  about  2/.  \os. 

On  the  3rd  February  came  another  note  of  considerable 
length  which  began  thus — "  I  see  that  the  Cardinal  pro- 
poses an  expenditure  of  5,600  francs  for  the  opera  of 
Porto  Ferrajo.  Inquire  if  the  band  of  the  guard  could 
not  form  the  orchestra,  and  Gaudiano  be  leader ;  that 
would  reduce  the  expense  to  2,600  francs  a  month.     The 


FAREWELL    TO    ELBA.  36 1 

note  gives  a  list  of  four  men  only,  who  cannot  form  a 
company.  There  must  be  women  ;  the  Cardinal  announced 
several.  .  .  ." 

By  a  note  of  the  16th  February  it  appears  that  the  mili- 
tary estimates  of  Elba,  in  18 14,  amounted  to  689,317 
francs  78  centimes. 

To  GENERAL  LAPI. 

"Porto  Ferrajo,  26th  February,  1815. 
"  I  am  leaving  the  island  of  Elba.  I  have  been  ex- 
tremely satisfied  with  the  conduct  of  the  inhabitants.  I 
confide  to  them  the  safety  of  this  country,  to  which  I 
attach  a  great  importance.  I  cannot  give  them  a  greater 
mark  of  confidence  than  in  leaving  my  mother  and  my 
sister  in  their  care,  after  the  departure  of  the  troops. 
The  members  of  the  Junta,  and  all  the  inhabitants  of  the 
island,  may  count  upon  my  affection  and  upon  my  special 
protection. 

"Napoleon." 

Having  thus  taken  farewell  of  Elba,  his  Majesty,  some- 
what prematurely,  set  sail  for  France,  and  once  more, 
as  on  his  way  to  Egypt  and  back,  escaped  the  English 
cruisers.  His  return  to  France  had  a  magical  effect  on  the 
Congress  of  Vienna,  where  all  differences  respecting 
Poland  and  Saxony  were  at  once  laid  aside,  and  where 
preparations  were  made  and  engagements  undertaken  to 
meet  the  common  danger.  It  was  at  once  felt  by  all  the 
assembled  sovereigns  and  diplomatists  that  a  firebrand  had 
been  let  loose,  and  that  there  would  be  no  peace  in  Europe 
with  Napoleon  on  the  throne. 

TO  THE  FRENCH  PEOPLE. 

"Gulf  of  Juan,  is t March,  1815. 
"FRENCHMEN, — The    defection    of  Marshal    Augereau 
delivered    Lyons,   without  defence,  to  our  enemies.     The 
army  which  I  confided  to  him  was  strong  enough  to  beat 


362     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

the  Austrians,  and  to  fall  upon  the  rear  of  the  left  wing 
of  the  army  which  threatened  Paris. 

"The  victories  of  Champaubert,  Montmirail,  Chateau 
Thierry,  Vauchamps,  Mormant, 1  Montereau,  Craonne, 
Arcis-sur-Aube,  and  St.  Dizier,  the  insurrection  of  the 
brave  peasants  in  Lorraine,  Champagne,  Alsace,  Franche 
Comte  and  Burgundy,  and  the  position  which  I  had  taken 
up  on  the  rear  of  the  enemy,  separating  them  from  their 
magazines,  their  artillery  reserves,  and  their  baggage, 
placed  them  in  a  desperate  situation.  The  French  were 
never  on  the  point  of  becoming  more  powerful,  and  the 
pick  of  the  enemy's  army  was  lost  beyond  resource.  It 
would  have  found  a  grave  in  the  vast  provinces  which  it  so 
ruthlessly  sacked,  when  the  treason  of  Marshal  Marmont 
handed  over  the  capital  and  disorganised  the  army. 

"The  unexpected  conduct  of  these  two  marshals  who 
betrayed  at  the  same  time  their  country,  their  prince,  and 
their  benefactor,  changed  the  destiny  of  the  war.  Such 
was  the  disastrous  situation  of  the  enemy,  that  at  the  close 
of  the  action  before  Paris  they  had  no  more  ammunition, 
owing  to  having  been  separated  from  their  reserve  parks. 

"  Under  new  and  important  circumstances  my  heart  was 
broken,  but  my  soul  remained  unshaken.  I  consulted 
only  the  interests  of  my  country  ;  I  exiled  myself  to  a 
rock  in  the  middle  of  the  sea  ;  my  life  had  been  and 
might  again  be  useful  to  you.  I  did  not  permit  the  great 
number  of  citizens  who  wished  to  accompany  me,  to  share 
my  fate  ;  I  believed  their  presence  useful  to  France,  and  I 
took  with  me  only  a  handful  of  gallant  men  necessary  for 
my  protection.  ...  «  NAPOLEON." 

A  somewhat  similar  appeal  was  addressed  to  the  army. 
In  it  the  Emperor  said — 

"  Soldiers, — In  my  exile  I  heard  your  voice.     I  have 
arrived  after  overcoming  numerous  obstacles  and  perils. 
"  Your  general,  called  to  the  throne  by  the  voice  of  the 
1  Better  known  as  Nangis. 


IMPERIAL   PROCLAMATIONS.  363 

people  and  raised  upon  your  shields,  is  restored  to  you  ; 
come  and  join  him.  Throw  away  the  colours  which  the 
nation  has  prescribed,  and  which  for  twenty-five  years 
have  served  as  a  rallying  point  for  the  enemies  of  France  ! 
Show  that  tricoloured  cockade  which  you  wore  in  our 
days  of  splendour ! 

"  We  must  forget  that  we  have  been  masters  of  the 
continent ;  but  we  must  not  permit  any  one  to  meddle  with 
our  affairs.  Resume  the  eagles  which  you  had  at  Ulm,  at 
Austerlitz,  at  Jena,  at  Eylau,  at  Friedland,  &c,  &c.  Do 
you  think  that  this  handful  of  Frenchmen,  to-day  so 
arrogant,  will  be  able  to  support  their  view  ?  They  will 
return  whence  they  came. 

"  Your  rank,  your  fortune,  your  glory  ;  the  rank,  the 
fortune,  and  the  glory  of  your  children,  have  no  greater 
enemy  than  these  princes  whom  the  foreigners  wish  to 
impose  upon  us.  .  .  . 

"Soldiers,  come  and  range  yourselves  under  the  standard 
of  your  chief;  his  existence  is  composed  of  yours  ;  his  in- 
terests, his  honour,  and  his  glory  are  yours.  Victory  will 
march  at  double  quick  time.  The  eagle  with  the  national 
colours  will  fly  from  steeple  to  steeple  to  the  towers  of 
Notre  Dame.  Then  you  will  be  able  to  show  your  scars 
with  honour ;  then  you  will  be  able  to  boast  of  what  you 
have  done  ;  you  will  be  the  liberators  of  the  country.   .  ." 

Another  proclamation  was  addressed  to  the  Imperial 
Guard,  in  which  the  Bourbons  were  accused  of  having 
forgotten  nothing  and  learned  nothing,  and  of  having 
carried  to  England  the  patrimony  of  the  army,  amounting 
to  16,000,000/. 

Similar  language  was  employed  by  the  Emperor  in  re- 
plying to  the  congratulatory  addresses  presented  to  him 
on  his  road  to  Paris;  at  Gap  on  the  6th  March,  Grenoble 
on  the  9th,  Lyons  on  the  i8th,  &c,  till  he  entered  "his 
good  city  of  Paris"  on  the  21st,  without  having  en- 
countered any  resistance,  in  spite  of  all  the  armies  sent 
forth  to  arrest  his  triumphal  progress.     Everywhere  the 


364     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

troops  melted  away  from  their  leaders,  such  was  the  fasci- 
nation once  more  exercised  by  the  name  of  Napoleon, 
and  then  many  of  the  leaders,  like  Marshal  Soult  and  Ney, 
went  with  the  current. 

On  the  21st  March,  at  noon,  the  Emperor  held  a  review 
of  the  army  of  Paris,  and  said : — "  Soldiers,  I  came  to 
France  with  600  men  because  I  counted  upon  the  love  of 
the  people  and  upon  the  souvenirs  of  the  old  soldiers.  I 
was  not  deceived  in  my  expectation.  Soldiers,  I  thank 
you.  The  glory  of  what  we  have  just  done  belongs  to  the 
people  and  to  you ;  mine  is  reduced  to  having  known  and 
appreciated  you. 

"Soldiers,  the  throne  of  the  Bourbons  was  illegitimate, 
because  it  was  re-erected  by  foreign  hands.  .  .  . 

"  Soldiers,  we  are  going  to  drive  these  auxiliary  princes 
of  the  foreigner  from  the  country  ;  not  only  will  the  nation 
second  us  with  its  wishes,  but  it  will  follow  our  impulse.  .  . 
We  do  not  wish  to  meddle  with  the  affairs  of  foreign 
nations,  but  woe  to  those  who  meddle  with  ours." 

The  Emperor  then  presented  the  battalion  which  had 
accompanied  him  to  Elba,  and  the  army  swore  allegiance. 
There  could  be  no  mistake  about  the  enthusiasm  of  the 
army,  but  there  was  very  little  enthusiasm  beyond  the 
soldiery  and  the  lower  classes.  The  body  of  the  nation 
held  aloof,  and  contemplated  the  return  of  Napoleon  with 
feelings  of  distrust  and  apprehension. 

To  M.  FOUCHE,  Due  d'Otrante.i 

"Paris,  21st  March,  1815. 
"According    to  the    first    information    which   I   have 
received,  the  Due  de  Bourbon  has  gone  to  La  Vendee, 

1  After  Napoleon  landed,  Fouche",  seeing  that  resistance  would  be 
useless,  told  Louis  XVIII.  that  he  intended  to  take  office  under  the 
Emperor,  but  that  he  would  correspond  with  him  (the  King).  More 
than  once,  during  the  Hundred  Days,  Napoleon  was  on  the  point  of 
having  Fouchd  shot  as  a  traitor,  and  he  was  only  prevented  carrying 
his  threat  into  execution  by  Carnot,  who  showed  him  that  such  a 


GENERAL    CLARKE.  365 

where  he  is  organising  some  Chouans ;  the  Due  d'Orleans 
has  gone  to  Besancon,  and  the  King  appears  to  be  in  the 
direction  of  the  Somme.  .  .  Send  agents  in  these  three 
directions.  .  .  .  "Napoleon." 

General  Caulaincourt,  Due  de  Vicence,  wished  to  refuse 
the  foreign  office,  but  it  was  thrust  upon  him.  On  the 
23rd  March  the  Emperor  wrote  to  him  thus  :  "  I  desire 
to  have  an  analysis  of  all  the  despatches  written  by  M.  de 
Talleyrand  and  by  the  King  (Louis  XVIII.)  against  the 
King  of  Naples,  so  as  to  be  able  to  communicate  them  to 
him." 

This  note  is  important  as  showing  that  Napoleon 
evidently  made  an  attempt  to  work  upon  the  feelings 
of  his  brother-in-law,  whose  subsequent  action  he  strongly 
condemned. 

To  GENERAL  COMTE  BERTRAND,  Grand    Marshal   of 
the  Palace. 

"Paris,  2yd March,  181 5. 
"  Send  Bernotti  with  the  news  to  the  island  of  Elba. 
Write  to  Lapi  to  have  the  tricolour  hoisted.  Have  all 
my  things  which  are  worth  being  removed  sent  here.  I 
attach  great  importance  to  my  Corsican  horse,  if  he  be  not 
sick.  The  yellow  travelling  carriage,  the  big  carriage,  and 
the  gala  carriages  are  worth  bringing  back,  as  well  as  the 
body  linen.  I  make  a  present  of  my  library  to  the  town, 
also  my  house,  which  can  serve  as  a  casino. 

"  Napoleon." 

General  Clarke  having  left  Paris  with  the  Bourbons  the 
war  office  was  handed  over  to  Marshal  Davoust. 

measure  would  lose  him  the  support  of  the  Jacobins.  His  Majesty 
put  the  matter  off  for  a  more  convenient  season,  which  never  arrived. 
Had  Napoleon  returned  in  triumph  from  Waterloo  no  mercy  would 
have  been  shown  to  Fouche",  and  of  this  the  ex-regicide  priest  was 
perfectly  well  aware. 


366  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF   NAPOLEON. 

To  MARSHAL  DAVOUST. 

"Paris,  xjth  March,  1815. 

"  Send  me  a  plan  for  enabling  Soissons,  La  Fere,  and 
Chateau  Thierry  to  resist  a  sudden  attack.  It  appears 
that  the  Due  d'Angouleme  was  at  Avignon  on  the  23rd 
I  suppose  that  events  in  Paris  made  him  feel  the  necessity 
of  falling  back.  However,  as  he  has  Spain  behind  him,  it 
will  be  necessary  to  disperse  this  gathering.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

His  Majesty  wrote  no  less  than  five  letters  to  his  War 
Minister  on  the  27th.  He  also  wrote  a  despatch  to 
Marshal  Ney,  who,  after  having  promised  Louis  XVIII. 
to  bring  Napoleon  to  Paris  in  an  iron  cage,  now  joined  his 
old  master. 

To  MARSHAL  SUCHET,  at  Strasburg. 

"Paris,  27M  March,  1815.    ' 

"  I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  14th.  You  know 
the  esteem  which  I  have  always  borne  you  since  the  siege 
of  Toulon.  Your  patriotic  conduct  during  recent  circum- 
stances has  given  me  great  pleasure.  I  shall  be  glad  to 
see  you  in  Paris  in  order  to  renew  the  expression  of  my 
sentiments. 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  28th  was  issued  a  decree,  the  first  article  of 
which  ran  thus : — "  The  Emperor  calls  upon  all  the  sub- 
officers  and  soldiers  who,  for  no  matter  what  reason,  have 
left  the  army,  to  rejoin  their  corps  and  to  hasten  to  the 
defence  of  their  country.  He  gives  them  a  special 
promise  that  as  soon  as  the  existing  peace  has  been 
consolidated  those  men  who  have  rejoined  owing  to  the 
present  decree  shall  be  the  first  to  obtain  leave  to  return 
home." 


LETTER    TO    MURAT.  367 

On  the  same  day  the  Emperor  wrote  to  Caulaincourt 
ordering  him  to  have  a  history  written  of  the  various 
treaties  concluded  during  his  reign,  such  as  Campo 
Formio,  Luneville,  Amiens,  Presburg,  Tilsit,  Vienna,  and 
the  affair  of  Bayonne  !      His  Majesty  added  : — 


"  It  is  necessary  that  you  should  send  articles  every  day 
to  the  Moniteur  dated  from  various  countries  to  make 
known  what  is  going  on  ;  for  example,  the  differences 
between  Sweden  and  Denmark  v/ith  regard  to  Pomerania ; 
the  differences  with  Saxony,  with  Bavaria,  with  the  Prince 
of  Orange,  who  will  not  cede  his  states  in  Germany,  &c. 
You  must  also  satisfy  public  curiosity  and  draw  attention 
to  the  avidity  of  the  various  Powers. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  the  KING  OF  NAPLES. 

"Paris,  March,  1815. 

"  I  have  arrived.  I  have  traversed  France.  The  army 
and  the  people  of  country  and  of  town  came  out  to  meet 
me.  I  entered  Paris  on  the  20th  March  at  the  head  of  the 
'camp  of  Essonne,'  upon  which  the  King  counted.  He 
retired  to  Lille,  and  then  went  to  England  with  his  whole 
family. 

"  All  France,  with  the  exception  of  Marseilles,  of  which 
I  have  no  news,  has  hoisted  the  national  colours.  There 
is  enthusiasm  everywhere.  The  old  soldiers  are  hastening 
in  crowds  to  rejoin  their  colours,  and  the  provinces  are 
ready  to  make  any  sacrifices. 

"  I  have  an  army  in  Flanders,  one  in  Alsace,  one  in  the 
interior,  and  one  which  is  forming  in  Dauphiny. 

"  Up  to  the  present  I  am  at  peace  with  every  one. 

"  I  shall  support  you  with  all  my  forces.  I  count  upon 
you.  As  soon  as  Marseilles  hoists  the  tricoloured  cockade 
send  some  ships,  there,  so  that  we  may  correspond,  for  I 


368     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

fear  that  correspondence  by  way  of  Italy  may  become 
difficult.  Send  me  an  ambassador ;  I  will  send  you  one 
shortly  on  board  of  a  frigate.1 

"  Napoleon." 

This  letter  was  entirely  in  the  handwriting  of  the 
Emperor. 

On  the  31st  March  the  Emperor  wrote  to  his  Chan- 
cellor of  the  Exchequer  for  information  concerning  the 
finances. 

1  Murat  had  no  sooner  learned  that  the  Emperor  had  made  his 
escape,  and  had  reached  Lyons,  than  he  took  up  arms  against  Austria 
with  the  idea  of  making  himself  master  of  Italy.  The  Austrians  at 
first,  taken  by  surprise,  fell  back  upon  the  Po,  but  they  soon  rallied 
and  inflicted  a  crushing  defeat  on  the  Neapolitan  army.  The  conse- 
quence was  that  Murat  lost  his  throne,  and  had  to  fly  for  refuge  to 
France.  This  affair  is  enveloped  in  some  obscurity.  Who  instigated 
this  sudden  attack  on  the  part  of  Murat,  who  had  cast  in  his  lot 
with  the  allies  the  year  before  ?  Was  it  Fouch^,  as  some  people  say  ? 
Napoleon  sent  him  word  as  he  was  leaving  Elba  that  he  would  oblite- 
rate the  past  from  his  memory,  and  would  guarantee  him  his  throne 
in  exchange  for  his  alliance  ;  but  at  the  same  time  he  begged  of  him 
not  to  molest  the  Austrians,  with  whom  he  intended  to  negotiate. 
The  position  of  Murat,  too,  was  excellent  with  Austria.  In  a  minute 
on  the  Congress  of  Vienna  Prince  Metternich  said  :  "France  shows  a 
natural  interest  to  resume  her  old  influence  in  Italy  through  the  re- 
establishment  of  the  dispossessed  branches  of  the  Bourbons  in  Parma, 
and  especially  in  Naples  ;  while  it  is  the  duty  of  Austria  first  of  all  to 
consolidate  her  own  power  and  then  to  preserve  Parma,  which  a 
recent  and  formal  convention  has  assured  to  the  Empress  Marie 
Louise  ;  lastly,  to  support  the  King  of  Naples,  whose  cause  she  has 
espoused  for  the  wisest  and  most  powerful  motives."  Prince  Metter- 
nich also  said,  in  a  memorandum,  that  Austria  had  signed  a  treaty 
with  the  King  of  Naples,  which  had  been  approved  of  by  England, 
promising  him  aid  and  protection  against  all  his  enemies.  It  is 
difficult  to  suppose  that  Murat  could  have  fallen  on  the  Austrians 
without  having  been  secretly  prompted  to  do  so.  He  was  beaten,  and 
was,  of  course,  disavowed.  At  St.  Helena  Napoleon  said  :  "  It  was 
the  destiny  of  Murat  to  damage  us — he  first  of  all  worked  our  ruin  by 
abandoning  us  in  1814,  and  then  by  embracing  our  cause  too  warmly 
in  1815." 


REQUESTS    THE    RETURN    OF    THE    EMPRESS.       369 

In  consequence  of  the  economy  of  the  Bourbons,  the 
financial  condition  of  France  was  in  a  comparatively  pros- 
perous condition  when  Napoleon  returned,  and  he  was 
soon  able  to  lay  hands  on  over  3,000,000/.  With  this  sum, 
and  with  money  borrowed  at  various  rates  of  interest 
reaching  as  high  as  17  per  cent.,  the  Imperial  Government 
managed  to  struggle  on  until  Waterloo. 

To  the  EMPEROR  OF  AUSTRIA. 

"Paris,  1st  April,  1815. 

"  Sir,  my  Brother  and  very  dear  Father-in- 
Law, — At  the  moment  that  Providence  restores  me  to  my 
capital,  the  most  earnest  of  my  wishes  is  to  see  once  more 
the  objects  of  my  most  tender  affection- — my  wife  and  my 
son ;  as  the  long  separation  which  circumstances  have 
occasioned  has  made  me  experience  the  most  acute  feeling 
which  ever  afflicted  my  heart,  and  as  the  virtuous  princess 
whose  destiny  your  Majesty  united  to  mine  must  also  be 
impatient  for  our  meeting.  If  the  dignity  of  the  conduct 
of  the  Empress,  during  the  time  of  my  misfortune,  has 
increased  the  tenderness  of  your  Majesty  for  a  daughter 
already  so  beloved,  you  will  understand,  Sire,  how  much  I 
must  desire  to  see  the  moment  arrive  when  I  shall  be  able 
to  assure  her  of  all  my  gratitude.  It  will  be  my  happiness 
to  see  her  receive  once  more  the  homages  of  a  loving  nation 
which,  to-day  more  than  ever,  will  know  how  to  love  and 
appreciate  her  virtues. 

"  My  efforts  tend  solely  towards  consolidating  this 
throne  which  the  love  of  my  people  has  preserved  for  me 
and  restored  to  me,  and  to  leave  it  one  day,  firmly  founded, 
to  the  child  whom  your  Majesty  has  surrounded  with  your 
parental  kindness. 

"  The  duration  of  peace  being  essentially  necessary  to 
attain  this  important  and  sacred  object,  I  have  no  greater 
desire  than  to  remain  upon  friendly  terms  with  all  the 
Powers,  and  especially  with  your  Majesty. 

"I  wish  the  Empress  to  come  by  way  of  Strasburg, 

VOL.  III.  B  B 


37°     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

orders  having  been  given  for  her  reception  on  this  line  in 
my  states.  I  am  too  well  acquainted  with  the  principles 
of  your  Majesty,  I  know  too  well  the  value  which  you 
attach  to  family  affections,  not  to  feel  confident  that  you 
will  hasten,  no  matter  what  the  plans  of  your  cabinet  and 
of  your  policy,  to  aid  in  the  reunion  of  a  wife  with  her 
husband,  and  of  a  son  with  his  father.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

to  general  caulaincourt. 

"  Paris,  ^rd  April,  1815. 

"  I  suppose  that  you  have  sent  secret  agents  to  Sweden 
to  rally  her  to  our  side.  I  suppose  that  you  have  also  sent 
others  to  Naples,  to  the  Hague,  to  the  Prince  of  Orange,  to 
the  various  princes  of  Germany,  to  the  King  of  Saxony, 
and  to  the  Swiss  cantons  which  have  remained  attached 
to  us. 

"  The  multiplicity  of  my  affairs  does  not  permit  me  to 
enter  into  details ;  it  is  for  you  to  take  care  that,  with- 
out delay,  the  courts  of  Bavaria,  Wurtemberg,  Baden,  the 
Princes  of  Hesse-Darmstadt,  of  Nassau,  of  Tuscany,  Rome, 
Spain,  Portugal,  &c,  may  learn,  through  frequent  insinu- 
ations on  the  part  of  secret  agents,  my  good  intentions 
with  regard  to  them.     Spain  is  very  important.  .  „  . 

"  Napoleon." 

circular  to  the  sovereigns. 

"  Paris,  &,th  April,  1815. 
"  Sir,  my  Brother, — You  will  have  learned  my 
return  to  France,  my  entry  into  Paris,  and  the  departure 
of  the  Bourbons.  The  true  nature  of  these  events  must 
now  be  known  to  your  Majesty.  They  are  the  work  of  an 
irresistible  force,  the  work  of  the  unanimous  will  of  a  great 
nation  which  understands  its  duties  and  its  rights.  The 
dynasty  which  was  forced  on  the  French  nation  was  not 
suited  to  it.  The  Bourbons  would  associate  themselves 
neither   with  its    feelings   nor   its   customs.     France  was 


CIRCULAR    TO    THE    SOVEREIGNS.  7>7 l 

obliged  to  separate  herself  from  them.  She  demanded  a 
liberator ;  the  expectations  which  led  me  to  make  the 
greatest  of  sacrifices  [to  go  into  exile]  were  deceived.  I 
returned,  and  from  the  spot  where  I  landed  the  love  of  my 
people  bore  me  to  the  bosom  of  my  capital.  The  first  desire 
of  my  heart  is  to  repay  so  much  affection  by  maintaining 
an  honourable  tranquillity.  The  re-establishment  of  the 
Imperial  throne  was  necessary  for  the  happiness  of 
Frenchmen.  My  fondest  hope  is  to  render  it  at  the  same 
time  useful  in  consolidating  the  repose  of  Europe.  Enough 
glory  has  turn  about  illustrated  the  standards  of  various 
nations  ;  the  vicissitudes  of  fate  have  seen  great  reverses 
succeed  to  great  successes.  A  fairer  arena  is  now  opened 
to  sovereigns,  and  I  shall  be  the  first  to  descend  into  it- 
After  having  exhibited  to  the  world  the  spectacle  of  great 
battles,  it  will  be  more  satisfactory  henceforth  to  indulge 
in  nothing  but  peaceful  rivalry,  in  no  other  strife  but  that 
sacred  strife  waged  for  the  welfare  of  the  people.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  M.  MARET  {Secretary  of  State). 

"Paris,  yh  April,  1815. 

"  Send  word  to  Lyons  by  telegraph  that  we  have 
entered  Bordeaux,  which  has  hoisted  the  tri-coloured 
flag.  .  .  .  The     Duchesse     d'Angouleme     embarked     on 

the  1  st  April.1 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  9th  April  the  Emperor  thus  addressed  his  troops 
in  the  Carrousel :— "  Soldiers,  I  have  just  received  informa- 
tion that  the  tri-colour  has  been  hoisted  at  Toulouse  and 
all  through  the  south.  The  commandants  of  Perpignan 
and  of  Bayonne  declared  that  they  would  not  obey  th 
orders  given  by  the  Due  d'Angouleme  to  deliver  those 
places  to  the  Spaniards,  who  have  since  stated  that  they 

1  On  board  an  English  frigate. 

B   B   2 


>.e 


372     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

have  no  desire  to  meddle  with  our  affairs.1     The  white 
flag  now  flies  over  Marseilles  alone.   .  .  ." 

The  next  day  his  Majesty  announced  to  Admiral 
Decres,  who  was  once  more  Minister  of  Marine,  that 
Marseilles  had  accepted  the  tri-coloured  cockade,  and  the 
admiral  was  directed  to  send  a  frigate  to  Porto  Ferrajo 
to  bring  Madame  Mere  back  to  France. 

To  MARSHAL  DAVOUST. 

"Paris,  10th  April,  1815. 
"  You  must  efface  Berthier,  Marmont,  Victor,  Perignon, 
Augereau,  and  Kellermann  from  the  list  of  marshals.    You 
must    present    me   a  report,   so  that  a  pension    may    be 
granted  to  those  marshals  who  have  no  fortune.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

To  COMTE  MOLLIEN  {Minister  of  the  Treasury). 

"Paris,  \\th  April,  1815. 

"  There  are  5  per  cents,  consolidated  due  to  the  Princesse 
Borghese,  to  the  Princesse  Eliza,  and  to  the  princes  of  my 
House.  They  should  be  paid.  The  500,000  francs  of 
Prince  Louis  were  given  to  him  in  exchange  for  his 
property  in  Holland  .  .  .  There  can  be  no  doubt  about 
this  sum  belonging  to  Prince  Louis,  and  it  must  be 
paid.  .  .  . 

"  Apart  from  pensions  to  the  house  of  Spain,  there  were 
pensions  for  the  House  of  Carignan,  for  the  King  of  Pied- 
mont, and  for  several  princes  of  the  left  bank  of  the  Rhine  ; 
there  was  one,  I  think,  for  the  Princesse  d'Orleans.  You 
must  make  me  a  report  on  all  this. 

"  Napoleon." 

It  appears  strange  that  Napoleon  should  have  paid  a 
pension  to  the  Duchesse  d'Orleans.2 

1  It  was  not  until  a  month  later  that  Ferdinand  consented  to  join 
the  allies. 

2  In  March  1884  the  fact  of  the  mother  of  Louis  Philippe  having 
received  a  pension   from  Napoleon  was  discussed  by  several   Paris 


THE    ORLEANS    FAMILY.  373 

NOTE. 

"Paris,  15th  April,  181 5. 

"The  Emperor  asks  the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  for 
a  report  concerning  the  King  of  Naples,  embracing  all 
the  events  of  the  last  campaign,  and  the  harm  he  then 
did  to  France. 

"The  Emperor  did  not  receive  any  mark  of  interest 
from  him  during  his  stay  in  the  Isle  of  Elba.  It  was 
not  in  accordance  with  the  dignity  of  the  Emperor  in 
misfortune  to  make  advances. 

newspapers.  From  that  discussion  it  appears  that  it  was  at  the  earnest 
entreaty  of  the  Queen  Hortense  (the  mother  of  Napoleon  III.)  that 
the  pension  was  accorded.  The  Princesse  d'  Orleans  seems  to  have 
solicited  the  intervention  of  the  Queen  Hortense  in  two  letters  pub- 
lished by  a  Bonapartist  journal.     The  first  ran  thus— 

"  Madame, — La  gracieuse  bienveillance  que  Votre  Majesty  m'a 
te'moigne'e  me  donne  l'espoir  que  vos  bons  offices  obtiendront  de 
l'Empereur  une  decision  qui  est  devenue  si  ne'cessaire  et  si  urgente 
dans  la  cruelle  position  ou  je  me  trouve.  Je  craindrais  de  fatiguer  Sa 
Majeste"  l'Empereur  par  le  detail  des  raisons  qui  me  paraissent  de 
nature  a  pouvoir  influencer  sa  magnanimity.  Je  me  plais  a  croire  que 
votre  bontd,  &c.  .  .  . 

"  Louise- Amelie-Adelaide  de  Bourbon-Penthie.vre." 

The  second  was  still  more  pressing. 

"  Madame, — L'interet  dont  Votre  Majesty  a  bien  voulu  me  rditerer 
le  timoignage,  dans  son  aimable  lettre  du  29  mars,  me  confirme 
l'espoir  que  l'Empereur  adoucira  ma  si  cruelle  position.  Le  ministre 
des  Finances  Fayant  mise  sous  ses  yeux,  il  sera  bien  consolant  pour 
moi  de  devoir  a  la  ge'ne'rosite'  de  l'Empereur  et  a  votre  obligeante 
entreprise  d'obtenir  ce  que  ma  position,  dont  je  ne  pourrai  assez  vous 
exprimer  la  gene,  sollicite  si  instamment.  Agreez  encore  une  fois, 
madame,  &c.   .  .  . 

"  Louise,  &c." 

Of  course  this  pension  was  never  paid,  but  that  was  the  fault  of  the 
allies  and  not  of  Napoleon.  It  is  strange  to  reflect  that  one  of  the 
first  acts  of  the  nephew  of  Napoleon  I.,  and  the  son  of  the  Queen 
Hortense,  on  attaining  power,  should  have  been  to  despoil  the  Orleans 
princes. 


374     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

"  The  palace  of  Naples  was  furnished  with  the  most  pre- 
cious objects  which  the  Emperor  had  collected  in  his 
palace  of  Rome.  The  only  communication  into  which 
the  Emperor  entered  with  the  King  of  Naples  was  to 
ask  him  to  receive  Madame  Mere.  .  .  .  Show  that  the 
King  of  Naples  wished  to  seize  upon  Italy,  and  that  he 
attacked  the  Austrians  at  a  moment  when  he  was  entirely 
ignorant  of  the  situation  of  the  Emperor.  This  proves  con- 
clusively that  there  was  no  agreement  between  them.  .  .  ." 

The  above  note  was  to  form  the  substance  of  a  letter 
intended  to  tranquillise  Austria,  and  persuade  her  that 
Napoleon  had  nothing"  to  do  with  Murat's  aggression  ; 
that  the  Emperor  was  no  firebrand ;  and  that  he  wished  to 
remain  at  peace,  especially  with  his  father-in-law. 

On  the  1 6th  April  Marshal  Davoust  was  ordered  to 
have  salutes  of  one  hundred  guns  fired  at  the  Invalides,  at 
Lille,  at  Strasburg,  and  all  the  frontier  towns,  in  honour  of 
the  surrender  of  Marseilles  to  the  Imperial  troops.  The 
telegram  was  to  be  published  in  profusion.  Brest  and  the 
other  ports  were  also  to  fire  salutes. 

To  MARSHAL  MASSENA,  at  Marseilles. 

"  Paris,  iZth  April,  1815. 
"  I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  14th,  and  have  read 
your  proclamation  with  pleasure.  I  thank  you  for  having 
preserved  Toulon  and  Antibes.  I  shuddered  at  the  passage 
in  your  letter  where  I  saw  the  order  which  ,you  received 
from  the  Due  dAngouleme  to  hand  over  that  precious 
deposit  to  the  English.  At  the  first  moment  I  sent 
Marshal  Brune  to  command  in  the  8th  division. 
"  I  greatly  desire  to  see  you.  .  .  -1 

"  Napoleon." 

1  Both  Massena  and  Brune  had  been  for  some  time  under  a  cloud, 
and  yet  they  joined  their  old  chief,  laying  aside  their  rancour.  Before 
the  end  of  the  year  the  people  of  Marseilles  rose  and  slaughtered  the 
Mamelukes,  much  as  the  rabble  of  Paris  had  slaughtered  the  Swiss 
Guard,  while  Marshal  Brune  was  assassinated  at  Avignon,  and  his 
body  tossed  in  the  waters  of  the  Rhone. 


MANUFACTURE    OF    PIKES.  375 

On  the  22nd  his  Majesty  wrote  to  his  Minister  of 
Marine,  saying  that  it  was  a  matter  of  no  importance 
having  no  ships  ready  for  sea,  but  that  he  could  not 
leave  so  many  gallant  officers  without  employment;  it 
was  therefore  his  intention  to  raise  between  60,000  and 
80,000  men  along  the  coast  to  serve  ashore  under  the  said 
officers. 

On  the  same  day  the  Emperor  forwarded  to  King 
Joseph  a  copy  of  the  new  Constitution  or  Additional 
Act,  which  he  was  going  to  submit  to  the  Chambers, 
and  upon  which  he  asked  his  brother's  advice. 

To  COMTE  CARNOT. 

"  Paris,  24A&  April,  1815. 
"It   would   be  well  to    order  in  each   department   the 
fabrication    of   a    certain     number    of    pikes.       Select    a 
model.     They  will  be  of  use  in   default  of  muskets  and 
scythes. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  MARSHAL  DAVOUST. 

"  Paris,  26th  April,  1815. 

"Tell  Marshal  Suchet,  if  he  is  still  at  Lyons,  to  remain 

there,  and  if  he  has  left  send  him  a  courier,  so  that  he  may 

return.     I  give   the   command  of  the  army   of  •■  the"  Alps 

definitively  to  that  marshal.  .  .  .     Tell  Marshal  Grouchy 

that  as  soon  as  he  has  been  replaced  by  Marshal  Suchet 

he  must  come  to  Paris.  .  .  . 

"  Napoleon." 

On  the  30th  April  was  issued  a  decree  for  the  formation 
of  four  armies — Army  of  the  North,  Army  of  the  Moselle, 
Army  of  the  Rhine,  and  Army  of  the  Alps,  and  three 
corps  of  observation.  On  the  same  day  his  Majesty  wrote 
to  Marshal  Davoust — "  If  we  have  war,  and  I  am  obliged  to 
absent  myself,  I  intend  leaving  you  in  Paris  as  Minister  of 
War,  governor  of  Paris,  commander-in-chief  of  the  National 


376     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Guard,  &c.  I  have  no  idea  of  leaving  yet,  nor  do  I  suppose 
that  the  enemy  will  attack  us  during  the  whole  month  of 
May.  However,  I  wish  you  to  place  the  city  at  once  in  a 
state  of  defence.  You  will  have  in  Paris  thirty  batteries 
of  eight  guns  each.  .  .  .  Choose  a  general  officer  of  engi- 
neers. But  you  must  not  take  Rogniat,  nor  Haxo,  nor 
Marescot,  who  are  required  for  the  armies.  Your  infantry 
will  be  composed  of  90,000  men — 30,000  National  Guards, 
20,000  Marines,  20,000  men  from  the  depots,  and  20,000 
men  detained  from  the  levie  en  masse." 

On  the  3rd  May 'the  Emperor  wrote  to  his  Minister  of 
War  saying  that  it  would  be  necessary  to  raise  another 
150,000  men  in  addition  to  the  old  soldiers  called  upon  to 
rejoin  their  colours  ;  and  to  the  Minister  of  Marine,  rating 
him  for  not  having  appointed  the  post  captains,  who  were 
to  command  regiments,  the  captains  who  were  to  command 
battalions,  and  the  lieutenants  who  were  to  command 
companies. 

To  MARSHAL  DAVOUST. 

"  Paris,  7.1st  May,  1815. 
"  I  approve  of  Marshal  Soult  receiving  a  salary  of 
40,000  francs  as  Marshal  of  the  Empire,  and  40,000  francs 
as  General-in-Chief.  I  approve  of  him  receiving  6,000 
francs  a  month  for  staff  and  office  expenses,  and  20,000 
francs  for  travelling,  which  must  be  renewed  by  degrees 
as  they  are  expended.1  «  NAPOLEON." 

1  Soult,  after  having  been  made  War  Minister  by  Louis  XVIII., 
rejoined  his  old  master,  but  not  before  making  certain  pecuniary  con- 
ditions of  an  advantageous  nature.  The  Emperor,  perhaps,  paid 
more  for  Soult  than  he  was  worth  ;  he  certainly  did  not  approach 
Berthier  as  chief  of  the  staff,  in  which  capacity  he  was  now  called  to 
act,  and  after  Waterloo  he  hurried  back  to  Paris  instead  of  remaining 
with  the  army.  In  this,  however,  he  merely  imitated  his  chief.  He  was 
proscribed  after  Waterloo,  and  took  refuge  at  Dusseldorf,  but  in  1819 
he  was  allowed  to  return  to  France,  and  his  bdton  was  restored  to  him. 
He  served  successively  Louis  XVIII.,  Charles  X.,  and  Louis  Philippe, 
and  died  a  few  months  before  the  declaration  of  the  Second  Empire. 


THE    CONDUCT    OF    AUSTRIA.  377 

In  some  notes,  dictated  at  a  cabinet  council  held  upon 
the  same  date,  the  Emperor  said — 

"  It  cannot  be  disguised  that  civil  war  has  really  broken 
out  in  La  Vendee,  and  that  military  measures  must  at 
once  be  adopted  to  put  down  the  rebellion.  If  measures 
be  not  taken  in  Normandy  also,  plots  will  soon  be  hatched 
in  secret  against  the  public  tranquillity.  ..." 

To  MARSHAL  DAVOUST. 

"  Paris,  27th  May,  181 5. 
"  It  is  probable  that  the  Guard  will  soon  march  ;  there 
will  then  remain  no  troops  in  Paris.  It  is  important  that 
by  the  1st  June,  at  the  latest,  the  quartermaster-generals, 
colonels,  majors,  captains,  &c,  of  the  National  Guard 
should   receive  their  commissions.    .    .    . 

"  Napoleon." 

note  to  the  minister  of  foreign  affairs. 

"  It  is  possible  that  the  Chamber  may  make  a  motion 
with  regard  to  the  King  of  Rome,  tending  to  expose  the 
horror  which  the  conduct  of  Austria  ought  to  inspire. 
This  would  have  a  good  effect. 

"  Meneval  should  make  a  report  dated  from  the  time 
of  his  arrival.  He  must  trace  the  conduct  of  Austria 
and  of  the  other  Powers  towards  the  Empress,  from  her 
arrival  at  Orleans  until  her  departure  for  Vienna ;  the 
violation  of  the  treaty  of  Fontainebleau,  since  they  tore 
her,  as  well  as  her  son,  from  the  Emperor.  He  must 
direct  attention  to  the  indignation  shown  by  her  grand- 
mother, the  Queen  of  Sicily,  on  this  subject,  at  Vienna. 
He  should  dwell  especially  on  the  separation  of  the  Prince 
Imperial  from  his  mother  and  from  Madame  de  Montes- 
quiou,  on  his  tears  at  leaving  her,  and  on  the  fears  of 
Madame  de  Montesquiou  for  the  safety  and  the  existence 
of  the  young  prince.  He  must  treat  this  point  in  a 
delicate  manner.  He  must  speak  of  the  grief  ex- 
perienced by  the  Empress  when  she  was  torn  away  from 


37§     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

the  Emperor.  She  was  thirty  days  without  sleeping  on 
the  occasion  of  his  Majesty  leaving  France.  He  must  lay 
stress  on  the  fact  that  the  Empress  is  really  a  prisoner, 
since  they  will  not  permit  her  to  write  to  the  Emperor, 
and  that  she  has  been  even  obliged  to  pledge  her  word  of 
honour  that  she  will  never  write  a  word  to  him.  Meneval 
must  embody  in  this  report  all  the  details  which  he  has 
given  to  the  Emperor." 

Baron  Meneval  quotes  an  interesting  letter,  written  by 
Marie  Louise  while  Napoleon  was  at  Elba,  throwing  light 
upon  the  personal  feelings  of  the  Empress.  She  much 
wished  to  retain  Isabey,  the  painter,  in  her  service,  but 
Isabey's  terms  were  too  high.  Her  Majesty  wrote  to  the 
baron  on  the  subject,  and  said  :  "  Besides,  were  he  to  come 
to  Parma  for  nothing,  I  should  never  permit  myself  to 
take  him  without  having  first  of  all  obtained  the  consent 
of  the  Emperor.  You  are  aware  of  his  prejudices  against 
him,  and  these  I  should  respect ;  although  separated  from 
him,  I  am  none  the  less  responsible  to  my  husband  for 
my  conduct." 

On  the  ist  June  the  Emperor  met  the  electors  of  France 
at  the  Champ  de  Mai,  the  preparations  for  the  ceremony 
being  much  the  same  as  when  the  unfortunate  Louis  XVI., 
on  the  14th  July,  1790 — anniversary  of  the  taking  of  the 
Bastille — took  the  oath  to  the  nation.  The  new  constitu- 
tion or  "  Additional  Act  "  was  approved  of  by  the  immense 
majority  of  the  electors,1  and  after  the  announcement  of  the 
numbers  the  Emperor  pronounced  the  following  discourse — 

"  Emperor,  consul,  and  soldier,  I  owe  everything  to  the 
people.  In  prosperity,  in  adversity,  on  the  battle-field,  on 
the  throne,  in  exile,  France  has  been  the  sole  object  of  my 
thoughts  and  actions.  Like  the  King  of  Athens  I  have 
sacrificed  myself  for  the  people  in  the  hope  of  seeing  the 

1  Just  as  on  the  eve  of  the  fall  of  the  Second  Empire  the  immense 
majority  of  the  electors  approved  of  the  liberal  institutions  conceded 
by  Napoleon  III. 


THE   ADDITIONAL    ACT.  379 

promise  realised  that  France  should  retain  her  natural 
limits,  her  honours  and  her  rights.  Indignation  on  seeing 
these  sacred  rights,  acquired  by  twenty-five  years  of 
victory,  disregarded  and  lost  for  ever,  the  cry  of  insulted 
French  honour,  and  the  wishes  of  the  nation,  have  replaced 
me  on  the  throne,  which  is  dear  to  me  because  it  is  the 
palladium  of  the  independence,  of  the  honour,  and  of  the 
rights  of  the  people. 

"  Frenchmen,  while  traversing,  amid  public  enthusiasm, 
the  various  provinces  of  the  empire  in  order  to  reach  my 
capital,  I  counted  upon  a  long  peace  :  nations  are  bound 
by  the  treaties  concluded  by  their  Governments,  no  matter 
what  they  may  be. 

"  My  whole  attention  was  then  turned  to  the  means  of 
founding  our  liberty  by  a  constitution  in  conformity  with 
the  wishes  and  interests  of  the  people.  I  summoned  them 
to  the  Champ  de  Mai. 

"  I  shall  soon  learn  that  the  princes  who  have  disregarded 
all  principles,  and  who  have  despised  the  opinions  and  the 
dearest  interests  of  so  many  countries,  wish  to  declare  war 
against  us.  They  intend  to  enlarge  the  kingdom  of  the 
Low  Countries,  and  to  give  it  for  a  frontier  all  our  fortified 
places  of  the  north,  and  to  reconcile  their  differences  by 
sharing  Alsace  and  Lorraine  between  them.  It  was 
necessary  to  prepare  for  war. 

"  However,  before  running  the  personal  risk  of  taking 
the  field,  my  first  care  was  to  constitute  the  nation 
without  delay. 

"  The  people  have  accepted  the  Act  which  I  have  pre- 
sented to  them. 

"Frenchmen,  when  we  have  repelled  these  unjust 
aggressions,  and  when  Europe  is  convinced  of  what  is  due 
to  the  rights  and  independence  of  twenty-eight  millions 
of  Frenchmen,  a  solemn  law,  made  in  the  form  required 
by  the  Constitutional  Act,  will  harmonise  the  various 
dispositions  of  our  constitutions. 

"Frenchmen,  you  are  about  to  return  to  your  depart- 


380     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

ments.  Tell  citizens  that  circumstances  are  perilous  ;  that 
with  union,  energy,  and  perseverance,  we  shall  come 
victorious  out  of  this  struggle  of  a  great  people  against 
their  oppressors ;  that  generations  to  come  will  severely 
scrutinise  our  conduct;  that  a  nation  loses  everything 
when  it  loses  its  independence.  Tell  them  that  the  foreign 
kings  whom  I  have  seated  on  the  throne,  or  who  owe  to  me 
the  preservation  of  their  crowns,  who  all,  in  the  days  of 
my  prosperity,  solicited  my  alliance  and  the  protection  of 
the  French  people,  to-day  direct  their  attacks  against  my 
person.  If  I  did  not  perceive  that  it  is  against  the 
country  that  they  are  animated,  I  should  sacrifice  this 
existence  to  their  animosity.  But  also  tell  citizens  that, 
as  long  as  Frenchmen  accord  me  those  sentiments  of  love, 
of  which  they  have  given  me  so  many  proofs,  this  rage  on 
the  part  of  our  enemies  will  be  impotent. 

"Frenchmen,  my  will  is  that  of  the  people;  my  rights 
are  theirs  ;  my  honour,  my  glory,  my  happiness,  can  only 
be  the  honour,  the  glory,  and  the  happiness  of  France." 

Here  the  Emperor,  taking  the  Gospels  from  the  hands 
of  the  Archbishop  of  Bourges,  said  :  "I  swear  to  observe, 
and  to  cause  to  be  observed,  the  constitutions  of  the 
Empire."  Then  followed  swearing  on  the  part  of  the  high 
dignitaries,  the  Assembly,  the  National  Guard,  and  the 
Imperial  Guard. 

On  the  3rd  June  the  Emperor  in  a  letter  to  Marshal 
Davoust  said  : — "  Brince  Jerome  will  be  employed  with  the 
army  as  Lieutenant-General." 

In  fact  nearly  all  the  Bonapartes  had  resorted  to  Paris — 
Lucien,  who  had  fled  from  Rome,  and  had  settled  in 
England  ;  Joseph,  whose  crown  had  been  handed  back  to 
its  rightful  owner ;  and  Jerome,  whose  crown  of  Westphalia 
was  past  praying  for.  Of  the  brothers  Louis  alone  was 
absent. 


grouchy's  orders.  381 


To  MARSHAL  DAVOUST. 

"Paris,  yd  June,  1815. 
"  Enclosed  you  will  find  a  copy  of  the  orders  which  I 
have  given  for  the  cavalry  of  the  army.  Marshal  Grouchy 
will  command  it  in  chief.  Give  him  a  chief  of  the  staff, 
and  a  general  of  artillery.  All  the  generals  on  the  un- 
attached list  are  at  his  service.  Give  Marshal  Grouchy 
orders  to  be  at  Laon  .on  the  5  th,  to  pass  an  inspection  of 
his  regiments,  to  provide  for  their  organisation,  and  to 
have  cartridges  served  out  so  that  they  may  be  ready 
to  take  the  field  on  the  10th.  «  NAPOLEON  " 

And  in  a  letter  to  Soult  of  the  same  date  the  Emperor 
said  that  the  enemy  were  threatening  Metz,  and  that  the 
Imperial  Guard  would  be  at  Soissons  on  the  10th,  and 
perhaps  at  Avesnes  on  the  13th.  His  Majesty  also  wrote 
this  short  note  to  Admiral  Decres  : — "  You  must  draw  up 
a  report  of  all  the  insults  which  the  English  have  com- 
mitted at  sea  since  I  disembarked.  You  must  refer  in 
detail  to  the  affair  of  the  Melpombie." 

This  was  a  terrible  affair.  The  40-gun  frigate  Melpombie, 
Captain  Joseph  Collet,  had  been  sent  to  convey  Madame 
Mere  from  Porto  Ferrajo  to  Naples  ;  when  a  few  miles 
north  of  Ischia  she  fell  in  with  the  Rivoli,  which  in  the 
year,  1812,  had  been  captured  by  the  Victorious,  Captain 
John  Talbot,  from  Captain  Jean  Baptiste  Barre.  It  was 
the  Rivoli  now,  a  British  74,  which  captured  the  frigate 
sent  by  Napoleon  for  his  mother.  Madame  Mere  after- 
wards got  clear  away  from  Elba  in  the  Dryade. 

To  MARSHAL  DAVOUST. 

"Paris,  6th  June,  1815. 

"  Give  orders  so  that  there  may  be  at  least  200  guns  in 
position  at  the  different   gates  and  in  the   works  round 


382     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Paris  by  the  12th  June.    Let  me  know  when  the  first  naval 
guns  will  arrive. 

"Napoleon." 

In  1870,  too,  a  number  of  naval  guns  were  sent  to  Paris 
for  the  defence  of  the  capital,  and  several  of  the  detached 
forts  were  manned  by  blue  jackets. 

In  the  midst  of  all  his  preparations  for  war  the  Emperor 
met  the  representatives  of  the  nation,  to  whom  he  addressed 
the  following  discourse  : — 

"  For  the  last  three  months  circumstances  and  the  con- 
fidence of  the  people  have  invested  me  with  unlimited 
power.  To-day  the  most  earnest  wish  of  my  heart  is 
accomplished.  I  have  just  founded  the  constitutional 
monarchy. 

"  Men  have  no  power  to  insure  the  future ;  institutions 
alone  can  consolidate  the  destinies  of  nations.  The 
monarchy  is  necessary  in  France  in  order  to  guarantee 
the  liberty,  the  independence,  and  the  rights  of  the  people. 
.  .  .  My  ambition  is  to  see  France  enjoy  all  the  liberty 
possible  ;  I  say  possible,  because  anarchy  always  brings 
back  an  absolute  government. 

"  A  formidable  coalition  of  kings  is  opposed  to  our 
independence ;  their  armies  are  marching  on  our  frontiers. 

"  The  frigate  La  Melpomene  has  been  attacked  and 
captured  in  the  Mediterranean  by  an  English  74,  after  a 
sanguinary  combat.    Blood  has  been  shed  during  peace  ! 

"  Our  enemies  count  upon  our  intestine  divisions.  They 
excite  and  foment  civil  war.  There  have  been  gatherings 
which  communicate  with  Ghent  [where  Louis  XVIII.  had 
established  his  court],  as  in  1792  with  Coblentz.  .  .  .  The 
finances  would  be  in  a  satisfactory  condition  but  for 
the  increased  expenditure  which  present  circumstances 
necessitate.  .  .  . 

"  It  is  possible  that  the  first  duty  of  the  prince  may 
shortly  call  me  to  place  myself  at  the  head  of  the  children 
of  the  nation  in  order  to  fight  for  our  country. 


NAPOLEON    ABOUT    TO    LEAVE    PARIS.  383 

"You,  peers  and  representatives,  give  the  nation  an 
example  of  confidence,  of  energy,  and  of  patriotism,  and 
like  the  Senate  of  a  great  nation  of  antiquity  make  up 
your  minds  to  die  rather  than  to  survive  the  dishonour  and 
the  degradation  of  France.  The  holy  cause  of  the  country 
will  triumph !  " 1 

On  the  same  day  the  Emperor  feeling  it  so  possible 
that  he  might  have  to  place  himself  at  the  head  of  his 
troops,  ordered  Marshal  Soult  to  start  for  Lille  incognito. 
He  added — "  You  must  come  to  meet. me  on  the  road  to 
Laon,  where  it  is  probable  that  I  shall  be  on  the  12th. 
You  must  obtain  the  latest  information  respecting  the 
position  of  the  enemy  ;  you  must  try  and  create  a  spy 
office  at  Lille,  and  a  company  of  men  well  acquainted  with 
the  roads  of  Belgium.  .  .   ." 

On  the  nth  June  the  Emperor,  replying  to  the  address 
of  the  Lower  House,  said  : — "  I  shall  start  to-night  to  place 
myself  at  the  head  of  my  armies ;  the  movements  of  the 
various  corps  of  the  enemy  render  my  presence  indis- 
pensable. .  .  .  Let  us  not  imitate  the  example  of  the 
Lower  Empire,  which,  threatened  on  all  sides  by  the 
barbarians,  became  the  laughing  stock  of  posterity  by 
indulging  in  abstract  discussions  while  the  battering  ram 
was  breaking  down  the  gates  of  the  city.  .  .  ." 

To  MARSHAL  DAVOUST. 

"Paris,  nt/i  June,  1815. 

"  Inform  Marshal  Suchet,  by  telegraph,  that  hostilities 
will  open  on  the  14th,  and  that  he  can  seize  upon  Mont- 
melian  on  that  day.  If  it  be  indispensable  to  do  so  before 
that  date,  owing  to  the  movements  of  the  enemy,  he  is 
authorised  to  act.  However,  it  is  desirable  that  he  should 
not  take  the  place  before  the  15th. 

"  Napoleon." 

1  This  speech  from  the  throne  gave  rise  to  the  most  adulatory 
addresses  on  the  part  of  the  Chambers. 


384     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

In  a  second  letter  to  the  War  Minister,  the  Emperor 
said : — "  One  hundred  and  fifty  naval  guns  have  arrived  in 
Paris."  In  a  third  letter  of  the  same  date  : — "  Send  for 
Marshal  Ney  ;  if  he  wishes  to  take  part  in  the  first  battles 
which  will  take  place  tell  him  to  be  at  Avesnes  on  the 
14th,  where  I  shall  have  my  head-quarters."  And  in  a 
fourth  letter  : — "  Send  for  Marshal  Massena.  If  he  wishes 
to  go  to  Metz  give  him  the  governorship  of  that  place,  and 
the  command  of  the  third  and  fourth  military  divisions. 
See  that  Belliard  goes  to  the  army  of  the  north." 

Ney  joined  Napoleon  at  Charleroi,  and  the  Emperor 
after  a  few  words  of  welcome  gave  him  the  command  of 
the  left  wing,  and  orders  to  attack  the  enemy.  The 
arrival  of  Ney  was  hailed  with  delight  by  the  troops,  and 
as  the  "  bravest  of  the  brave  "  rode  through  the  battalions 
of  Vandamme's  corps  and  those  of  the  Old  Guard  he  was 
greeted  with  cries  of  "  Voila  le  Rougeot !  "■ — nickname  he 
had  received  owing  to  his  red  hair  and  beard. 

Before  leaving  Paris  Napoleon  signed  the  following 
decree  : — 

'•'Art.  1.  A  pension  of  2,ooo  francs  is  granted  to  the 
widow  of  General  Aubry,  of  the  artillery. 

"Art.  2.  Our  Ministers  of  War  and  of  Finance  are 
charged  with  the  execution  of  this  decree." 

General  Aubry  was,  according  to  a  foot-note  in  The 
Correspondence,  the  member  of  the  Committee  of  Public 
Safety  who  in  1795  deprived  General  Bonaparte  of  his 
command  in  the  army  of  Italy.  This  is  quite  a  mistake  ; 
the  officer  referred  to  above  was  the  Comte  Claude  Charles 
Aubry,  who  distinguished  himself  at  the  crossing  of  the 
Alps,  in  St.  Domingo,  at  Essling,  at  the  passage  of  the 
Beresina,  at  Lutzen,  and  who  fell  at  Leipsic. 

The  next  letter  which  Napoleon  wrote  was  dated  from 
Laon,  1 2th  June.  In  it  the  Emperor  urged  Marshal 
Davoust  to  send  him  500  Polish  infantry  and  500  Polish 
light  horse.  His  Majesty  expressed  the  opinion  that 
these  men  sent  to  the  outposts  would  induce  the  Poles 


POSITION    OF    THE    FRENCH    ARMY.  385 

in  the  ranks  of  the  enemy  to  desert.  On  the  13th 
Napoleon  was  at  Avesnes,  at  which  place  he  dictated 
the  following  order  of  the  day : — 

"POSITION  OF  THE  ARMY  ON  THE  14.TH. 

"  General  head-quarters  will  be  at  Beaumont. 

"The  infantry  of  the  Imperial  Guard  will  be  bivouacked 
a  quarter  of  a  league  in  front  of  Beaumont,  and  will  form 
three  lines— the  Young  Guard,  the  Chasseurs,  and  the 
Grenadiers.  Marshal  Mortier  must  inspect  the  position 
of  this  camp,  and  see  that  everything  is  in  its  place- 
artillery,  ambulances,  military  train,  &c. 

"  The  cavalry  of  the  Imperial  Guard  will  be  placed  to 
the  rear  of  Beaumont,  but  the  most  distant  corps  should 
not  be  a  league  away. 

"  The  second  corps  must  take  up  its  position  at  Leers, 
that  is  to  say,  as  near  the  frontier  as  possible.  .  .  . 

"  The  first  corps  must  take  up  its  position  at  Sobre-sur- 
Sambre,  and  will  also  bivouac  on  several  lines,  taking 
care,  as  well  as  the  second  corps,  that  its  fires  cannot 
be  seen  by  the  enemy  ;  that  no  one  leaves  the  camp.1  .  .  . 

1  "  During  the  night  of  the  13th,"  says  Siborne  (vol.  i.  p.  54),  "  the 
light  reflected  on  the  sky  by  the  fires  of  the  French  bivouacs  did  not 
escape  the  vigilant  observation  of  Zeithen's  outposts,  whence  it  was 
communicated  to  the  rear  that  these  fires  appeared  to  be  in  the 
direction  of  Beaumont ;  and  on  the  following  day  intelligence  was 
received  of  the  arrival  of  Napoleon  and  his  brother  Jerome.  .  .  . 
The  vigilance  of  Zeithen  on  the  14th,  and  the  arrangements  made  by 
Blucher  during  that  night  afford  a  complete  refutation  of  the  charge 
so  frequently  brought  against  the  allied  commanders  that  the  French 
attack  took  them  by  surprise." 

"  Blucher  had  already  ordered  the  concentration  of  his  troops  upon 
a  first  warning  received  from  a  drummer  of  the  Old  Guard,  who 
deserted  on  the  13th.  The  presence  of  the  Old  Guard  was  a  certain 
and  sufficient  indication  to  open  the  eyes  of  the  enemy." — Jomini, 
Campagne  rtfe  1815  (p.  146). 

The  English  did  not  receive  notice  of  the  French  irruption  so  soon, 
as  is  shown  by  the  following  letter  : — 

Duke  of  Wellington  to  Lord  Lynedoch. 

"Brussels,  13th  June,  1815. 

"We  have  accounts  of  Buonaparte  joining  the  army  and  attacking 

VOL.   III.  C  C 


386  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF   NAPOLEON. 

"  To-morrow  the  third  corps  will  take  up  its  position 
a  league  in  front  of  Beaumont,  as  near  the  frontier  as 
possible,  without,  however,  crossing  it,  nor  allowing  it  to 
be  violated  by  any  of  the  enemy's  detachments.  General 
Vandamme  must  keep  all  his  men  at  their  posts,  and  must 
take  care  that  his  fires  are  not  perceived  by  the  enemy. 
.   .  .   He  must  be  ready  to  move  on  the  15th,  at  3  A.M. 

"  The  sixth  corps  will  bivouac  two  leagues  in  advance 
of  Beaumont,  on  two  lines.  .  .  . 

"  Marshal  Grouchy,  with  the  first,  second,  third,  and 
fourth  cavalry  corps,  will  establish  his  bivouacs  between 
Beaumont  and  Walcourt,  also  causing  the  frontier  to  be 
respected,  &c.  He  must  hold  himself  in  readiness  to 
march  upon  Charleroi  the  day  after  to-morrow,  at  3  A.M., 
in  order  to  form  the  advanced  guard  of  the  army.  .  .  ." 

To  PRINCE  JOSEPH. 

"Avesnes,  \A,thJune,  1815. 
"  I  am  going  to  transfer  my  imperial  head-quarters  this 
evening  to  Beaumont.  To-morrow,  the  15th,  I  shall  move 
to  Charleroi,  where  the  Prussian  army  is ;  this  will  give 
rise  to  a  battle  or  to  the  retreat  of  the  enemy.  The 
army  is  splendid  and  the  weather  fine  enough ;  the 
country  is  very  well  disposed.  .  .  ."     (Not  signed.) 

On  the  same  day  Napoleon  wrote  a  series  of  instruc- 
tions for  his  War  Minister.  Suchet  was  to  seize  upon 
Montmelian,  and  to  fortify  himself  there ;  the  300  naval 
guns  were  to  be  placed  in  position  in  Paris ;  Lecourbe 
was  to  dispute  first  the  passage  of  the  Rhine,  then  the 
passage  of  the  Vosges  and  the  Jura ;  he  was  to  show 
fight  at  Belfort,  then  at  Langres,  and  to  defend  the  Aube, 
the  Seine,  and  the  Yonne.  Suchet  was  to  defend  Lyons, 
the  Sa6ne,  and  the  Rhone.     Rapp  was  to  defend  Alsace 

us  ;  but  I  have  accounts  from  Paris  of  the  10th,  on  which  day  he  was 
still  there ;  and  I  judge  from  his  speech  in  the  Legislature  that  his 
departure  was  ngt  likely  to  be  immediate.  I  think  we  are  now  too 
strong  for  him  here." — GURWOOD,  xii.  462. 

On  the  night  of  the  13th  the  Emperor  slept  at  Avesnes. 


ADDRESS    TO    THE    ARMY.  387 

as  well  as  possible;  then  the  Vosges;  after  that  the 
Meurthe  and  the  Moselle,  and  finally  the  Meuse  and  the 
Marne.  Having  written  these  gloomy  instructions  which 
foreboded  defeat,  the  Emperor  thus  addressed  the 
army : — 

"  SOLDIERS, — To-day  is  the  anniversary  of  Marengo 
and  Friedland,  which  twice  decided  the  destinies  of 
Europe.  Then,  as  after  the  battle  of  Austerlitz,  as  after 
Wagram,  we  were  too  generous ;  we  believed  in  the  pro- 
testations and  the  promises  of  the  princes  whom  we 
left  on  their  thrones  !  To-day,  however,  coalesced,  they 
threaten  the  independence  and  the  most  sacred  rights  of 
France.  They  have  commenced  the  most  unjust  of 
aggressions.  Let  us  march,  then,  to  meet  them.  Are 
not  we  and  they  the  same  men  ? 

"  Soldiers,  at  Jena,  against  these  same  Prussians  so  arro- 
gant to-day,  you  were  one  against  three;  at  Montmirail 
one  against  six.  Let  those  among  you  who  have  been 
prisoners  of  the  English  tell  the  tale  of  their  hulks  and 
the  frightful  hardships  you  suffered. 

"The  Saxons,  the  Belgians,  the  Hanoverians,  the 
soldiers  of  the  Confederation  of  the  Rhine,  groan  at  being 
obliged  to  fight  for  princes  who  are  the  enemies  of  the 
rights  of  the  people.  They  know  that  this  coalition  is 
insatiable.  After  having  devoured  twelve  millions  of 
Poles,  twelve  millions  of  Italians,  one  million  of  Saxons, 
six  millions  of  Belgians,  they  wish  to  devour  the  secondary 
states  of  Germany. 

"  The  madmen  !  A  moment  of  prosperity  blinds  them. 
The  oppression  and  the  humiliation  of  the  French  people 
are  beyond  their  power.  If  they  enter  France  they  will 
find  their  graves  there. 

"  Soldiers,  we  have  forced  marches  to  make,  battles  to 
fight,  and  perils  to  encounter  ;  but  with  constancy  victory 
will  declare  itself  for  us  :  the  rights,  the  honour,  and  the 
welfare  of  the  country  will  be  reconquered. 

c  c  2 


388  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

"  For  every  Frenchman  with  a  heart  the  moment  has 
come  to  conquer  or  to  die. 

"  Napoleon." 


To  PRINCE  JOSEPH. 

"  Charleroi,  \$th  June,  1815.    9  p.m. 

"  MoNSEIGNEUR, — The  Emperor,  who  has  been  on 
horseback  ever  since  3  A.M.,  has  just  returned  overcome 
by  fatigue.  He  has  thrown  himself  on  a  bed  to  take  a 
few  hours'  repose.  He  is  to  be  on  horseback  again  at 
midnight.  His  Majesty  not  being  able  to  write  to  your 
Highness,  has  directed  me  to  send  you  the  following 
information  : — The  army  forced  the  passage  of  the  Sambre 
near  Charleroi,  and  placed  its  outposts  half-way  between 
Charleroi  and  Namur,  and  half-way  between  Charleroi 
and  Brussels.  We  have  made  1,500  prisoners  and  cap- 
tured six  guns.  Four  Prussian  regiments  were  extirpated.1 
The  Emperor  lost  very  few  men.  But  he  experienced 
a  loss  which  he  feels  deeply  ;  his  aide-de-camp,  General 
Letort,  was  killed  on  the  plateau  of  Fleurus  while  com- 
manding a  charge  of  cavalry.  The  enthusiasm  of  the 
inhabitants  of  Charleroi  and  of  all  the  country  through 
which  we  pass  is  beyond  description. 

"  The  Emperor  desires  that  you  will  communicate  this 
news  to  the  ministers. 

"  It    is  possible    that    an   important    action    may   take 
place  to-morrow. 

"  The  First  Secretary  of  the  Cabinet, 

"Baron  Fain." 

General  Hulot,  who  succeeded  Bourmont  after  that  officer 
deserted,  says  in  his  report  of  this  affair :  "  The  enemy,  on  being 
attacked,  fell  back  from  cantonment  to  cantonment  without  being 
broken,  and  the  villages  are  so  close  to  each  other  in  this  country,  and 
the  ground  offers  so  many  obstacles,  that  it  would  have  been  difficult 
for  a  raid,  no  matter  how  well  conducted,  to  have  succeeded  to  the 
extent  of  dispersing  an  army." 


NEY  S    INSTRUCTIONS.  389 

To  PRINCE  JOSEPH. 

"  Charleroi,  16th  June,  1815. 
"  The  bulletin  will  have  acquainted  you  with  what 
happened  yesterday.  I  am  going  to  transfer  my  head- 
quarters to  Fleurus.  We  are  executing  a  movement  on  a 
large  scale.  I  greatly  regret  the  loss  of  General  Letort. 
.  .  .  The  confiscation  of  the  property  of  the  traitors  who 
are  at  Ghent  (with  Louis  XVIII.)  is  necessary. 

"  Napoleon." 

To  MARSHAL  NEY. 

"Charleroi,  16th  June,  1815. 

"  I  send  you  my  aide-de-camp,  General  Flahault,  with 
the  present  letter.  ...  I  wish  to  write  to  you  in  detail 
because  it  is  of  the  greatest  importance. 

"  Marshal  Grouchy  is  marching  on  Sombreffe  with  the 
third  and  fourth  eorps  of  infantry.  I  am  going  to  march 
with  my  Guard  upon  Fleurus  where  I  shall  be  myself 
before  noon.  I  shall  attack  the  enemy  if  I  meet  them, 
and  I  shall  reconnoitre  the  road  as  far  as  Gembloux.  There, 
according  to  what  happens,  I  shall  make  up  my  mind 
about  3  P.M.  or  in  the  evening.  .  .  .  As  soon  as  I  come  to 
a  decision  you  must  be  ready  to  march  upon  Brussels.  I 
will  support  you  with  my  Guard,  which  will  be  at  Fleurus 
or  at  Sombreffe,  and  /  should  like  to  be  at  Brussels  to- 
morrow morning.  [Follow  some  instructions  for  the 
occupation  of  Quatre  Bras.] 

"  I  have  determined  as  a  general  principle  during  this 
campaign  to  divide  my  army  into  two  wings  and  a  reserve. 
Your  wing  will  be  composed  of  four  divisions  of  the  first 
corps,  &c,  from  about  45,000  to  50,000  men.  Marshal 
Grouchy  will  have  about  the  same  force,  and  will  command 
the  right  wing. 

"  The  Guard  will  form  the  reserve,  and  I  shall  throw  my- 
self upon  one  wing  or  the  other,  according  to  circumstances. 


390     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

.  .  .  You  will  appreciate  the  importance  which  I  attach 
to  the  capture  of  Brussels.  ...  So  prompt  a  movement 
will  cut  the  English  off  from  Mons  and  from  Ostend.  .  .  L 

"  Napoleon." 

The  battle  of  Ligny  had  hardly  commenced  when 
Napoleon  sent  orders  to  Ney  to  act  so  as  to  envelop  the 
Prussian  right,  and  so  much  importance  did  he  attach  to 
this  diversion  that  he  wrote  and  sent  him  word  several 
times  that  the  fate  of  France  was  in  his  hands.  (There 
is  no  trace  of  these  despatches  in  The  Correspondence, 
but  Jomini,  in  his  Campagne  de  1815,  p.  170,  quotes  one 
written  by  Soult  at  3.30  from  Fleurus  to  the  above  effect.) 

Ney  replied  that  he  had  the  whole  English  army  on  his 
hands,  and  that  all  he  could  do  was  to  promise  to  hold  it 
in  check.  The  Emperor,  better  informed,  assured  him 
that  he  had  to  deal  merely  with  Wellington's  advanced 
guard,  and  he  once  more  ordered  him  to  drive  back  the 
English  at  no  matter  what  cost,  to  seize  upon  Quatre  Bras, 
and  to  manoeuvre  in  the  direction  of  Bry  and  St.  Amand. 

M.  Fleury  de  Chaboulon,  who  was  acting  as  secretary 
to  the  Emperor,  gives  the  above  details  in  his  Memoirs 
(vol.  ii.  p.  164),  followed  by  a  description  of  Ney's  defeat 
at  Quatre  Bras.  He  says:  —  "Marshal  Ney,  who  had 
with  him  only  20,000  men,  wished  to  call  up  the  first 
corps  which  he  had  left  in  his  rear ;  but  the  Emperor  had 
sent  orders  to  Comte  d'Erlon  to  join  him,  and  the  first 
corps  had  already  moved  off.  Ney,  when  he  received  this 
news,  was  in  a  cross  fire  from  the  enemy's  batteries,  and 
was  terribly  angry.  He  at  once  despatched  positive  orders 
to  Comte  d'Erlon  to  retrace  his  steps,  and  Comte  d'Erlon 
unfortunately  had  the  weakness  to  obey"  (p.  167). 

Therefore  Napoleon,  instead  of  supporting  Ney  with 
his   Guard    as  he   promised    in  his    letter    of   the   16th, 

1  It  was  in  anticipation  of  such  an  attempt  as  this  being  probable 
that  Wellington  would  not  concentrate  until  sure  where  Napoleon 
intended  to  attack. 


MISCALCULATIONS.  39 1 

deprived  him  of  the  first  corps,  which,  ordered  backwards 
and  forwards,  fought  neither  at  Ligny  nor  at  Quatre  Bras, 
which  latter  place  it  did  not  reach  until  Ney  had  been 
driven  back  to  Frasnes. 

And  on  the  same  day  (16th  June)  the  Emperor  gave 
Grouchy  orders  to  march  upon  Sombreffe,  adding — "  If 
the  enemy  are  at  Sombreffe  I  intend  to  attack  them.  I 
will  attack  them  even  at  Gembloux,  and  also  seize  upon 
that  position,  my  intention  being,  after  having  made  myself 
acquainted  with  these  two  positions,  to  start  to-night,  in 
order  to  operate  against  the  English  with  my  left  wing, 
commanded  by  Marshal  Ney.  .  .  .  All  the  information  I 
have  received  shows  that  the  Prussians  cannot  oppose  us 
with  more  than  40,000  men." 

By  the  above  important  orders  it  will  be  seen  what 
Napoleon's  intentions  were,  how  he  miscalculated  and  how 
he  was  foiled.  He  made  sure  of  Ney  being  able  to  sur- 
prise and  beat  the  English  without  any  difficulty.  He 
made  sure  of  being  able  to  drive  the  Prussians  back  across 
the  Rhine  by  way  of  Namur.  It  was  also  his  intention  to 
succour  his  wings  instead  of  receiving  succour  from  them. 
We  shall  see  what  happened.  The  real  force  of  the 
Prussians  at  Ligny  was  about  90,000  men  ;  but  Napoleon, 
as  Jomini  remarks,  at  first  thought  that  he  had  only  one 
corps  to  deal  with.  He  thought  the  Prussians  were  at 
Gembloux,  when  they  had  taken  up  their  position  at  Ligny, 
leaving  a  much  smaller  gap  between  them  and  the  English. 

ORDER. 

"18M  June,  1815.  ii  a.m. 
"  As  soon  as  all  the  army  is  drawn  up  in  battle  array,  at 
about  1  P.M.,  the  moment  the  Emperor  gives  the  order  to 
Marshal  Ney,  the  attack  upon  the  village  of  Mont-St.-Jean, 
where  the  roads  intersect  each  other,  will  commence.  To  this 
effect  the  battery  of  twelve  belonging  to  the  second  corps 
and  that  of  the  sixth  will  unite  with  that  of  the  first  corps. 
These  eighty  guns  will  open  fire  on  the  troops  at  Mont- 


39 2     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

St.-Jean,  and  Comte  d'Erlon  will  commence  the  attack  by- 
throwing  forward  his  left  and  supporting  it  according  to 
circumstances  with  the  divisions  with  the  first  corps. 

"  The  second  corps  will  advance  by  degrees  so  as  to 
keep  on  a  line  with  Comte  d'Erlon. 

"  The  companies  of  the  sappers  of  the  first  corps  must 
be  ready  to  barricade  themselves  at  once  at  Mont-St.- 
Jean." 

As  it  turned  out  the  attack  was  commenced  upon 
Hougomont. 

Napoleon  had  no  time  to  dictate  any  more  letters  or 
despatches  until  he  had  recrossed  the  frontier  as  a  fugitive. 
He  then  drew  up  a  detailed  account  of  the  battles  of 
Ligny  and  Waterloo. 

Laon,  loth  June,  1815. 

On  the  morning  of  the  16th  the  army  occupied  the 
following  positions : — 

The  left  wing,  commanded  by  Marshal  Ney,  and  com- 
posed of  the  first  and  second  infantry  and  the  second 
cavalry  corps,  occupied  the  position  of  Frasnes. 

The  right  wing,  commanded  by  Marshal  Grouchy,  and 
composed  of  the  third  and  fourth  infantry  and  the  third 
cavalry  corps,  occupied  the  heights  behind  Fleurus. 

The  head-quarters  of  the  Emperor  were  at  Charleroi 
with  the  Imperial  Guard  and  the  sixth  corps. 

The  left  wing  had  orders  to  march  upon  Quatre  Bras, 
and  the  right  wing  on  Sombreffe. 

Marshal  Grouchy 's  columns,  while  on  the  march,  per- 
ceived, after  passing  Fleurus,  the  army  of  the  enemy  com- 
manded by  Field-Marshal  Blucher,  occupying  the  table- 
lands to  the  left  of  the  village  of  Sombreffe,  with  its  cavalry 
stretching  along  the  road  to  Namur ;  its  right  was  at  St. 
Amand,  which  was  strongly  occupied,  having  a  ravine  in 
front  of  it. 

The  Emperor  reconnoitred  the  force,  and  the  positions 


BATTLE   OF    LIGNY.  393 

of  the  enemy,  and  determined  to  attack  at  once.  It  was 
necessary  to  make  a  change  of  front,  bringing  the  right 
forward  and  pivotant  on  Fleurus. 

General  Vandamme  marched  upon  St.  Amand,  General 
Gerard  on  Ligny,  and  Marshal  Grouchy  on  Sombreffe. 
The  third  division  of  the  second  corps,  commanded  by 
General  Gerard,  was  in  reserve  behind  the  corps  of  General 
Vandamme.  The  Guard  was  drawn  up  on  the  heights  of 
Fleurus,  as  also  the  cuirassiers  of  General  Milhaud. 

At  3  P.M.  these  movements  were  finished.  The  division 
of  General  Lefol,  forming  part  of  Vandamme's  corps,  was 
the  first  engaged,  and  seized  upon  St.  Amand,  from  which 
the  enemy  were  driven  with  the  bayonet.  It  held  its  own, 
during  the  whole  engagement,  in  the  cemetery  of  St.  Amand. 
But  this  village,  which  is  very  straggling,  was  the  scene  of 
several  struggles  during  the  evening.  The  entire  corps  of 
Vandamme  was  engaged,  and  the  enemy  brought  a  large 
force  into  action. 

General  Girard,  placed  in  reserve,  turned  the  village 
to  the  right,  and  fought  with  his  usual  valour.  The  forces 
on  each  side  were  supported  by  sixty  guns. 

On  the  right  General  Gerard,  with  the  fourth  corps, 
attacked  the  village  of  Ligny,  which  was  taken  and  re- 
taken several  times.  Marshal  Grouchy,  on  the  extreme 
right,  and  General  Pajol  attacked  the  village  of  Sombreffe. 
The  enemy  displayed  from  80,000  to  90,000  men  and  a 
great  number  of  guns. 

At  7  P.M.  we  were  masters  of  all  the  villages  situated 
along  the  ravine  which  covered  the  position  of  the  enemy ; 
but  the  enemy  still  occupied  the  table-land  round  the 
windmill  of  Bussy. 

The  Emperor  marched  with  his  Guard  to  the  village  of 
Ligny;  General  Gerard  ordered  General  P<kheux  to 
debouch  with  what  remained  of  the  reserve,  all  his  troops 
having  been  engaged  in  that  village.  Eight  battalions  of 
the  Guard  debouched  with  fixed  bayonets,  and  to  their  rear 
were  four  squadrons  de  service,  the  cuirassiers  of  General 


394     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Delord,  those  of  General  Milhaud,  and  the  mounted 
grenadiers  of  the  Guard.  The  Old  Guard  charged  the 
enemy's  columns,  which  were  on  the  heights  of  Bussy,  at 
the  bayonet,  and  in  an  instant  strewed  the  battle-field  with 
dead.  The  squadron  de  service  attacked  and  broke  a 
square,  and  the  cuirassiers  drove  the  enemy  in  all  direc- 
tions. By  half-past  seven  we  had  taken  forty  guns,  a  great 
many  waggons,  standards,  and  prisoners,  and  the  enemy 
sought  safety  in  a  precipitate  flight.  At  ten  o'clock 
the  battle  was  over,  and  we  remained  masters  of  the 
entire  field.1 

General  Lutzow  was  captured.  The  prisoners  say  that 
Field-Marshal  Blucher  was  wounded.  The  flower  of  the 
Prussian  army  was  destroyed  in  this  battle.  It  cannot 
have  lost  less  than  15,000  men.  Our  loss  amounts  to 
3,000  killed  or  wounded. 

On  the  left  Marshal  Ney  marched  to  Quatre  Bras  with 
a  division,  which  defeated  an  English  division  posted 
there.  But  attacked  by  the  Prince  of  Orange  with  25,000 
men,  partly  English  and  partly  Hanoverians,  he  fell  back 
upon  his  position  of  Frasnes.  There  a  series  of  engage- 
ments took  place,  the  enemy  vainly  endeavouring  to  force 
it.  Marshal  Ney,  who  was  waiting  for  the  first  corps,  which 
did  not  arrive  until  night,  confined  himself  to  keeping  his 
position.  A  square  having  been  attacked  by  the  eighth 
cuirassiers  the  colours  of  the  69th  English  regiment  fell 
into  our  hands.  The  Duke  of  Brunswick  was  killed.  The 
Prince  of  Orange  was  wounded.     We  are  assured  that  the 

1  General  Gneisenau  says  in  his  official  report :  "  Our  infantry  placed 
to  the  rear  of  Ligny,  although  obliged  to  retreat,  was  not  discouraged 
.  .  .  formed  in  masses  it  repulsed  all  the  charges  of  the  cavalry  with 
coolness,  and  retired  in  good  order.  ...  At  a  quarter  of  a  league 
from  the  field  of  battle  the  army  reformed  ;  the  enemy  did  not  attempt 
a  pursuit.  The  village  of  Bry  remained  in  our  possession  all  night,  as 
well  as  Sombreffe,  where  General  Thielman  had  fought  with  the  third 
corps,  and  from  whence  he  fell  back  leisurely  at  daybreak  on 
Gembloux,  where  the  fourth  corps,  under  General  Bulow,-had  at  last 
arrived." 


WATERLOO.  395 

enemy  had  a  great  number  of  generals  of  note  either 
killed  or  wounded.  The  loss  of  the  English  is  set  down 
at  from  4,000  to  5,000  men  ;  ours  on  this  side  was  very 
heavy;  it  amounted  to  4,500  men  killed  or  wounded. 
Night  put  an  end  to  the  combat.  Lord  Wellington 
afterwards  evacuated  Quatre  Bras,  and  fell  back  upon 
Gemappe. 

On  the  morning  of  the  17th  the  Emperor  advanced  to 
Quatre  Bras,  from  whence  he  marched  to  attack  the 
English  army ;  he  drove  it  back  to  the  border  of  the 
forest  of  Soignies  with  his  left  wing  and  the  reserve.  The 
right  wing  marched  by  Sombreffe  in  pursuit  of  Field- 
Marshal  Blucher,  who  was  marching  upon  Warres,  where 
he  appeared  desirous  of  taking  up  his  position. 

At  10  P.M.  the  English  army  occupying  Mont-St.-Jean 
with  its  centre  took  up  its  position  in  front  of  the  forest 
of  Soignies  ;  it  would  have  required  three  hours  to  prepare 
to  attack  it ;  it  was  necessary  to  wait  till  the  next  day. 

The  Emperor  established  his  head-quarters  at  the  farm 
of  the  Caillou,  near  Plancenoit.  The  rain  was  falling  in 
torrents. 

BATTLE  OF  MONT-ST.-JEAN. 

At  9  A.M.,  the  rain  having  somewhat  diminished,  the  first 
corps  began  to  move,  and  took  up  its  position  with  its  left 
on  the  Brussels  road,  and  opposite  the  village  of  Mont- 
St.-Jean,  which  appeared  to  be  the  centre  of  the  enemy's 
position.  The  second  corps  rested  its  right  on  the  Brussels 
road,'and  its  left  on  a  little  wood  within  cannon  shot  of 
the  English  army.  The  cuirassiers  were  in  reserve  to  the 
rear,  and  the  Guard  in  reserve  on  the  heights.  The  sixth 
corps,  with  the  cavalry  of  General  Domon,  under  the 
orders  of  Comte  Lobau,  was  destined  to  take  up  its 
position  to  our  right  rear,  to  resist  a  Prussian  corps  which 
appeared  to  have  escaped  from  Marshal  Grouchy,  and  to 
have  the  intention  of  falling  upon  our  right  flank — inten- 
tion which  had  been   revealed   to  us   by  the  letter  of  a 


396     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Prussian  general  captured  by  one  of  our  scouts.  The 
troops  were  in  high  glee. 

The  strength  of  the  English  army  was  set  down  at 
80,000  men  ;  it  was  supposed  that  the  Prussian  corps 
which  might  come  up  in  the  evening  was  about  15,000 
strong.  The  forces  of  the  enemy  therefore  amounted  to 
over  90,000  men,  and  ours  were  less  numerous. 

At  noon  the  preparations  were  terminated,  and  Prince 
Jerome,  commanding  a  division  of  the  second  corps, 
destined  to  form  the  extreme  left,  attacked  the  wood,  a 
portion  of  which  was  held  by  the  enemy.  The  artillery 
opened  fire  ;  the  enemy  supported  the  troops  whom  they 
had  sent  to  hold  the  wood  with  thirty  guns.  At  one 
o'clock  Prince  Jerome  was  master  of  the  whole  wood,  and 
the  entire  English  army  fell  back  behind  some  rising  ground. 
Comte  d'Erlon  then  attacked  the  village  of  Mont-St.-Jean, 
and  his  attack  was  supported  by  eighty  guns.  A  fearful 
artillery  action  took  place,  from  which  the  English  army 
must  have  suffered  heavily'.  One  of  the  brigades  of 
Comte  d'Erlon's  first  division  carried  the  village  of  Mont-St.- 
Jean  ;  a  second  brigade  was  charged  by  a  body  of  English 
cavalry,  which  inflicted  a  serious  loss  upon  it.  At  the 
same  moment  a  division  of  English  cavalry  charged 
Comte  d'Erlon's  battery  on  the  right,  and  disabled  several 
pieces ;  but  Milhaud's  cuirassiers  charged  this  division, 
three  regiments  of  which  were  broken  and  cut  to  pieces.1 

It  was  3  P.M.  The  Emperor  moved  forward  the  Guard 
to  draw  it  up  in  the  plain  upon  the  ground  which  had  been 
occupied  by  the  first  corps  at  the  commencement  of  the 
action,  that  corps  having  pushed  forward.  The  Prussian 
division,  whose  arrival  had  been  foreseen,  was  now  en- 
gaged with  the  skirmishers  of  Comte  Lobau,  firing  into 
our  right  flank.  It  was  necessary,  before  attempting  any- 
thing else,  to  await  the  issue  of  this  attack.     To  this  effect 

1  But  not  before,  as  Jomini  says,  they  had  thrown  the  French 
infantry  into  confusion,  and  rendered  a  portion  of  their  artillery 
useless. 


WATERLOO.  397 

the  whole  reserve  was  held  in  readiness  to  march  to  the 
assistance  of  Comte  Lobau,  and  to  crush  the  Prussian 
corps  when  it  advanced. 

That  accomplished,  the  Emperor  intended  to  open  an 
attack  upon  the  village  of  Mont-St.-Jean,  from  which  he 
hoped  a  decided  success ;  but  by  a  movement  of  im- 
patience, so  frequent  in  our  military  annals,  and  which 
has  been  so  often  fatal,  the  cavalry  reserve  having  per- 
ceived a  retrograde  movement  which  the  English  made  to 
shelter  themselves  from  our  batteries,  from  which  they 
had  already  suffered  so  heavily,  crowned  the  heights  of 
Mont-St.-Jean  and  charged  the  infantry.  This  movement, 
which,  made  at  the  proper  time  and  supported  by  the  re- 
serves, was  to  decide  the  day,  made  alone  and  before  affairs 
on  the  right  were  terminated,  was  disastrous.  Having  no 
means  of  countermanding  it,  the  enemy  showing  numerous 
masses  of  infantry  and  cavalry,  and  the  two  divisions  of 
cuirassiers  being  engaged,  all  our  cavalry  rushed  at  the 
same  moment  to  support  their  comrades.  There  during 
three  hours  numerous  charges  were  executed,  dusing  which 
we  broke  several  squares  of  English  infantry  and  captured 
six  colours — advantage  out  of  proportion  to  the  loss  in- 
flicted on  our  cavalry  by  grape  and  musketry.  It  was 
impossible  to  employ  our  infantry  reserve  until  we  had 
repulsed  the  Prussian  attack  on  our  flank.  This  attack 
continued  to  extend  perpendicularly  on  our  right  flank. 
The  Emperor  despatched  General  Duhesme  there  with 
the  Young  Guard  and  several  reserve  batteries.  The 
enemy  were  checked,  were  repulsed,  and  recoiled ;  they 
had  exhausted  their  strength,  and  there  was  nothing  more 
to  be  feared.  This  was  the  moment  indicated  for  an  attack 
on  the  centre  of  the  enemy. 

As  the  cuirassiers  suffered  from  the  grape,  four  battalions 
of  the  Middle  Guard  were  ordered  to  protect  them,  support 
the  position,  and,  if  possible,  disengage  a  portion  of  our 
cavalry  and  allow  it  to  fall  back  into  the  plain.  Two 
other  battalions  were  sent  to  place  themselves  en  potence 


398     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

on  the  extreme  left  of  the  division  which  had  manoeuvred 
on  our  flank,  so  as  to  relieve  us  of  uneasiness  on  that  side. 
The  remainder  were  drawn  up  in  reserve,  a  portion  to 
occupy  the  potence  to  the  rear  of  Mont-St.-Jean,  a  portion 
on  the  plateau  to  the  rear  of  the  field  of  battle  which 
formed  our  position  in  case  of  retreat. 

In  this  state  of  affairs  the  battle  was  won  :  we  occupied 
all  the  positions  which  the  enemy  had  occupied  at  the 
beginning  of  the  action  ;  but  our  cavalry  having  been  too 
soon  and  incautiously  employed  we  could  hope  for  no 
decisive  result.  But  Marshal  Grouchy,  having  learned  the 
movement  of  the  Prussian  corps,  was  marching  on  the  rear 
of  that  corps,  and  thus  insured  us  a  decisive  success  for 
the  next  day.  After  eight  hours  of  firing,  of  charges  of 
infantry  and  of  cavalry,  the  whole  army  saw  with  satis- 
faction the  battle  gained  and  the  battle-field  in  our 
power. 

About  half-past  eight  the  four  battalions  of  the  Middle 
Guard  which  had  been  posted  on  the  plateau  beyond 
Mont-St.-Jean  in  order  to  support  the  cuirassiers,  being 
harassed  by  the  enemy's  grape,  tried  to  carry  the  batteries 
at   the    bayonet.1       Night   was    coming    on ;     a     charge 

1  Colonel  Baudus,  who  was  one  of  Soult's  aide  ^-de-camp,  has  traced 
a  graphic  description  of  the  Emperor  at  this  critical  moment.  In  a 
work  on  the  battle  of  Waterloo  he  says  : — 

"  After  the  disastrous  result  of  this  attack  there  remained  only  a 
few  regiments  of  the  Old  Guard  who  had  not  been  engaged ;  these 
corps  were  formed  into  a  square  to  protect  the  retreat.  It  was  in  the 
middle  of  one  of  these  squares  that  the  Emperor  placed  himself: 
therefore  only  a  small  number  of  officers  were  admitted,  so  as  not  to 
crowd  upon  him ;  as  for  myself,  I  was  not  allowed  in. 

"  I  will  not  reproach  Napoleon  with  not  having  exposed  himself; 
he  certainly  ran  great  risk  where  he  posted  himself  so  as  to  follow  the 
execution  of  his  last  orders,  since  I  was  wounded  close  to  him  by  the 
splinter  of  a  shell ;  but  when  he  decided  upon  making  that  despairing 
attack  he  ought  to  have  placed  himself  at  the  head  of  his  Guard  and 
have  sought  death  if  it  did  not  succeed. 

"  I  examined  him  attentively  during  this  last  act  of  his  military  life, 
and,  while  thinking  of  all  the  misfortunes  which  this  man  had  drawn 


NAPOLEON  S    FLIGHT.  399 

made  on  their  flank  by  several  English  squadrons  threw 
them  into  disorder ;  the  fugitives  recrossed  the  ravine  ;  the 
neighbouring  regiments  who  saw  some  troops  belonging  to 
the  Guard  disbanded,  thought  that  it  was  the  Old  Guard 
which  had  given  way.  Cries  of  "  Tout  est  perdu  !  La  Garde 
est  repoussie  !"  were  heard.  The  soldiers  pretend  even  that 
at  several  points  malevolent  persons  shouted  "  Sauve  qui 
petit !"  However  that  may  be,  panic  at  once  spread  over 
the  whole  field  of  battle,  and  a  rush  was  made  on  the 
line  of  communications  in  the  greatest  disorder  ;  soldiers, 
gunners,  ammunition-waggons  hurried  to  arrive  there ; 
the  Old  Guard,  which  was  in  reserve,  was  assailed  by 
the  fugitives,  and  was  itself  carried  away  by  them. 

In  an  instant  the  army  was  nothing  but  a  confused 
mass  ;  the  various  branches  were  mixed  together,  and  it  was 
impossible  to  re-form  a  corps.  The  enemy,  who  perceived 
this  astonishing  confusion,  let  loose  their  columns  of 
cavalry;  the  disorder  increased  ;  the  confusion  of  night 
rendered  it  impossible  to  rally  the  troops  and  to  show 
them  their  error. 

Thus  a  battle  terminated,  a  day  finished,  false  manoeuvres 
repaired,  the  greatest  success  insured  for  the  morrow — all 
was  lost  in  a  moment  of  panic.  Even  the  household 
squadrons,  drawn  up  alongside  of  the  Emperor,  were  over- 
thrown and  disorganised  by  the  tumultuous  waves,  and 
there  was  nothing  left  but  to  follow  the  torrent.  The 
reserve  parks,  the  baggage  which  had  not  recrossed  the 
Sambre,  and  everything  that  was  on  the  field  of  battle 
fell  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy.  There  were  not  even 
any  means  of  waiting  for  the  troops  on  our  right ;  it  is  well 

down  upon  my  country,  I  experienced  so  lively  an  indignation,  and  so 
deep  a  pain,  that  I  should  still  reproach  myself  for  the  anguish  I  felt 
lest  he  should  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy  had  there  not  been 
something  more  than  interest  for  his  person  in  this  feeling.  I  should 
have  considered  it  a  blessing  for  my  country  had  he  been  killed,  but  I 
should  have  been  grieved  to  see  him  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy  ; 
this  would  have  dishonoured  the  army  which  had  thrown  itself  into 
his  arms  with  such  enthusiasm.'' 


400     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

known  what  the  bravest  army  in  the  world  is  when  it  is 
clubbed,  and  when  its  organisation  no  longer  exists. 

The  Emperor  passed  the  Sambre  at  Charleroi  on  the 
19th  at  5  A.M.  Philippeville  and  Avesnes  were  chosen  as 
points  of  concentration.  Prince  Jerome,  General  Morand, 
and  other  generals  have  already  rallied  a  part  of  the  army 
there.  Marshal  Grouchy  with  the  right  wing  is  operating 
a  movement  on  the  Lower  Sambre. 

The  loss  of  the  enemy  must  be  very  heavy  to  judge 
from  the  number  of  flags  which  we  captured,  and  the 
retrograde  movements  they  made  :  ours  cannot  be  ascer- 
tained until  after  our  troops  have  rallied.  Before  the 
disorder  broke  out  we  had  already  suffered  heavily, 
especially  our  cavalry,  which  was  so  fatally  and  so  gal- 
lantly brought  into  action.  In  spite  of  its  losses  this 
valiant  cavalry  constantly  kept  the  position  which  it  won 
from  the  English,  and  did  not  abandon  it  until  the  tumult 
and  disorder  of  the  battle-field  forced  it  to  retire.  In  the 
darkness,  and  amid  the  obstacles  which  encumbered  the 
road,  it  was  unable  to  preserve  its  organisation.  The 
artillery  as  usual  covered  itself  with  glory. 

The  head-quarter  carriages  remained  in  their  ordinary 
position,  no  retrograde  movement  having  been  deemed 
necessary.  In  the  course  of  the  day  they  fell  into  the 
hands  of  the  enemy. 

Such  was  the  issue  of  the  battle  of  Mont-St.-Jean, 
glorious  for  the  French  arms,  and  yet  so  disastrous. 

The  closing  scene  at  Waterloo  and  the  sauve  qui  pent 
was  thus  described  in  a  letter  which  Jerome  Bonaparte 
wrote  to  his  wife.  Perhaps  there  is  a  touch  of  romance  in 
it,  as  Jerome  was  fond  of  swagger.  However,  he  wrote 
directly  after  the  battle,  saying,  among  other  things  : — 

"  The  Emperor,  hoping  that  Grouchy  would  arrive,  said 
'  The  battle  is  won  ;  we  must  occupy  the  positions  of  the 
enemy ;  forward  ! '  and  all  with  the  exception  of  six  bat- 
talions of  the  Old   Guard   marched   with   us.      Ney  was 


AFTER   THE    BATTLE. 


40I 


reinforced  by  four  regiments  of  the  Guard,  and  reached 
the  English  guns.     We  supported  him.     Everything  was 
going  well,   when   General  Friand   was   wounded,   and,  I 
know  not  by  what  fatality,  the  attack  of  the  Guard  failed  ! 
The  Guard  was  repulsed,  it  was  necessary  to  retreat,  but  it 
was  too  late.     The  Emperor  wished  to  die  ;  we  were  in  the 
midst  of  the  enemy's  fire.     Wellington,  who  had  his  light 
cavalry  quite  fresh,  let  it  loose  on  the  plain  at  about  8  p.m.  ; 
at  9  a  panic  seized  on  the  army ;  at  10  there  was  a  rout ; 
our  guns  had  no  more  ammunition.     The  Emperor  was 
swept  away  ;  no  orders  were  given  ;  we  ran  till  we  crossed 
the  Sambre.    I  reached  Avesnes  the  next  day,  having  been 
constantly  with  the   rear-guard.     At  this  place    I  found 
neither  the  Emperor  nor  any  of  his  marshals  ;  they  had 
gone  on.     I  made  desperate  efforts  to  rally  the  debris  of 
the  army,  and  I  managed  to  get  together  18,000  infantry, 
3,000  cavalry,  and  twelve  guns,  with  which  force  I  reached 
Laon  on  June  21.     Marshal  Soult  was  there  ;  he  thought  I 
was  alone,  and  could  not  believe  I  had  so  large  a  force  ; 
and  when   one  of  my  orderly  officers  arrived  in   Paris,  to 
give  an  account  of  this  happy  news,  Marshal  Ney,  who  had 
been  there  for  several  days,  declared   in  the   Chamber  of 
Peers  that  it  was  impossible.    .    .    .    On  the  day  of  the 
battle  the  Emperor  was  sublime  up  till  eight  o'clock.  .  .  . 
I  press  you  to  my  heart,  as  well  as  my  son.     When  shall 
we  be  united  ? " 

Capefigue  (vol.  ii.,  p.  213)  says  that  Napoleon  wrote  two 
letters  to  Joseph  after  Waterloo,  dated  from  Charleroi ; 
that  the  first  was  a  long  lie  about  the  battle,  and  was 
intended  for  publicity ;  the  second  letter,  which  was  con- 
fidential, contained  the  whole  truth,  but  insisted  that  all 
was  not  lost.  He  spoke  of  soon  having  300,000  men  to 
oppose  to  the  enemy,  of  raising  1 00,000  conscripts. 

"  I  am  going  to  Laon,"  he  added,  "  where  I  shall  find 

some  troops.  I  have  heard  nothing  of  Grouchy ;  if  he  be  not 

taken  prisoner,  as  I  fear,  I  shall  have  50,000  men  in  three 

days  ;  with  them  I  shall  harass  the  enemy,  and  give  Paris 

VOL.  III..  D  D 


402     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

and  France  time  to  do  their  duty.  The  English  march 
slowly  ;  the  Prussians  are  afraid  of  the  peasants.  .  .  . 
Tell  me  what  effect  this  horrible  battle  has  produced 
on  the  Chamber." 

There  is  no  trace  of  these  letters  in  The  Correspondence, 
or  in  the  Memoirs  of  King  Joseph.  As  for  Grouchy,  he 
fell  back  with  32,000  men,  in  good  order,  on  Namur, 
where  he  learned  that  Napoleon  had  abdicated  for  the 
second  time. 

As  M.  Thiers,  and  other  historians  nearly  as  regardless 
of  facts,  have  blamed  Marshal  Grouchy,  and  attributed 
to  him  the  loss  of  Waterloo,  we  give  a  short  analysis  of 
a  volume  written  in  1864  by  his  son,  the  Marquis  de 
Grouchy,  who  was  present  at  Waterloo. 

Grouchy's  defence  amounts  to  this  : — On  the  evening  of 
the  1 6th  he  expected  to  receive  orders  to  pursue  the 
enemy,  but  he  received  none.  The  Emperor  left  the  field 
of  battle  without  sending  any  order  to  his  right  wing.  He 
returned  to  Fleurus,  which  lies  about  a  league  to  the  south 
of  Ligny.  Grouchy  was  ordered  to  join  the  Emperor,  and 
on  reaching  Fleurus- was  much  astonished,  instead  of  re- 
ceiving orders  to  pursue  the  Prussians,  to  be  told  to  wait 
until  the  next  day  to  learn  the  intentions  of  his  Majesty. 
In  the  meantime  Grouchy  sent  out  his  light  cavalry  north 
and  east  in  order  to  obtain  news  of  the  enemy.  At  day- 
break, on  the  17th,  Grouchy  went  to  head-quarters,  but 
the  Emperor,  who  was  unwell,  was  sound  asleep,  and 
Soult,  in  spite  of  the  solicitations  of  Grouchy,  refused  to 
disturb  him.  He  waited  in  the  ante-room  until  8  A.M., 
when  the  Emperor  sent  him  word  that  he  was  going  to 
visit  the  field  of  battle,  and  that  he  (Grouchy)  was  to  join 
him.  Napoleon  remained  on  the  battle-field  until  one 
o'clock,  and  on  leaving  it  said  to  Grouchy,  "  Go  in  pursuit 
of  the  Prussians,  complete  their  defeat  by  attacking  them 
as  soon  as  you  come  up  with  them,  and  do  not  lose  sight 
of  them.  I  am  going  to  unite  Marshal  Ney's  corps  to  the 
troops  I  have  with  me,  and  to  attack  the  English  if  they 


MARSHAL    GROUCHY.  403 

make  a  stand  on  this  side  of  the  forest  of  Soignies.  You 
must  correspond  with  me  by  the  paved  road  "—i.e.,  the 
road  from  Namur  to  Quatre  Bras. 

Now  the  Prussians,  without  being  disorganised  or  demo- 
ralised, had  fallen  back  from  Ligny  at  9  p.m.  on  the  16th. 
They,  therefore,  had  fourteen  hours'  start  of  Grouchy,  who 
was  not  to  lose  sight  of  them.     Grouchy  pointed  out  this 
and  other  facts  to  the  Emperor.     He  said,  too,  that  many 
of  his  men  had  taken  their  firelocks  to  pieces,  and  were 
washing  them,  and  that  detachments  had  been  sent  out 
in  quest  of  provisions  for  the   men,   and  forage  for  the 
horses.     He  could  not,  therefore,  march  directly.     He  then 
expressed  fears  that  with  30,000  or  32,000  men  he  would 
not  be  able  to  force  Blucher  to  alter  his  line  of  march, 
or  to  complete  the  defeat  of  an  army  of  90,000  men  which 
had  repulsed  the  last  charges  of  cavalry  made  against  it, 
and  had   even,   for   a    short   time,  resumed  the  offensive 
Grouchy  begged  the  Emperor  as  he  was  going  to  fight  the 
English  not  to  order  him  beyond  the  sphere  of  operations, 
and  not  to  send  him  in  the  direction  of  Namur  and  Liege. 
Napoleon,  much  annoyed  at  these  observations,  reiterated 
his  orders,  saying : — "  March  in  the  direction  of  Namur,  for, 
according  to  all  probabilities,  the  Prussians  are  falling  back 
on  the  Meuse ;  it   is,  therefore,   in  that  direction  that  you 
will  find  them,  and  it  is  in  that  direction  that  you  should 
march."  This  error  explains  the  supineness  of  Napoleon,  for 
if  the  Prussians    were    retreating    on    Namur    they  were 
marching  straight  away  from  the  English  army.     It  also 
proves  that  he  had  a  very  incorrect  notion  of  the  situation, 
considered  that  the  Prussian   army  was  demoralised,  and 
was  falling  back  on  its  basis,  and  that  Grouchy  would  have 
nothing  to    do    but    to    harass    its   retreat.      This    fatal 
mistake  was  the  cause  of  the  delay  which  gave  the  enemy 
a  start  of  fourteen  hours.1 

1  The  fact  is,  that  Napoleon  had  lost  the  Prussian  army  as  he  lost 
the  Russians  after  Austerlitz  and  the  allies  after  Lutzen,  not  knowing 
whether  they  had  fallen  back  on  Berlin  or  Breslau. 

D   D   2 


404  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

Grouchy  has  been  blamed  for  not  having  marched  to  the 
scene  of  action,  as  Gerard  and  Excelmans  implored  him 
to  do  when  they  heard  the  battle  raging  at  Waterloo. 
Grouchy's  defence  is  that  the  firing  did  not  astonish  him, 
for  the  Emperor,  when  he  detached  him,  said  that  he  was 
going  to  fight  the  English  ;  that  Napoleon  gave  him  no 
orders  to  join  him  ;  that  if  he  had  attempted  this  cross 
march  he  could  not  have  reached  the  field  of  battle  until 
late  in  the  evening,  with  only  a  portion  of  his  corps,  and 
without  his  artillery,  and  at  the  same  time  he  would  have 
exposed  his  flank  to  Thielman,  and  have  been  unable  to 
stop  Bulow  or  even  Blucher. 

At  10  A.M.  on  the  18th,  Soult  wrote  to  Grouchy  from 
the  farm  of  Caillou,  saying  : — "  The  Emperor  directs  me 
to  warn  you  that  he  is  about  to  attack  the  English  army, 
which  has  taken  up  its  position  at  Waterloo.  Therefore 
his  Majesty  desires  that  you  will  manoeuvre  in  the  direc- 
tion of  WavreSj  so  as  to  approach  us,  establish  communi- 
cations, and  pursue  the  Prussian  army  which  has  fallen 
back  upon,  and  which  may  have  halted  at,  Wavres, 
where  you  should  arrive  as  soon  as  possible.  .  .  ."  It 
was  noon  before  this  despatch  was  finished,  registered, 
and  handed  to  the  Polish  aide-de-camp,  who  had  to  go 
round  by  Gembloux,  according  to  the  directions  of  the 
Emperor,  for  fear  of  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  Prussians  ; 
and  it  was  4  P.M.  before  Zenowicz  was  able  to  hand  it 
to  Grouchy,  who  conceived  that  he  had  rightly  carried  out 
the  orders  of  the  Emperor  in  marching  on  Wavres,  and 
not  on  Namur,  and  in  pursuing  the  Prussians  instead  of 
trying  to  join  him. 

Later  in  the  day  Soult  wrote  another  despatch  to 
Grouchy,  saying : — "  The  movement  on  Wavres  is  in  con- 
formity with  the  instructions  given  to  you  by  his  Majesty. 
However,  the  Emperor  directs  me  to  tell  you  to  manoeuvre 
in  our  direction,  so  as  to  join  us  before  any  corps  of  the 
enemy  can  get  between  us."  A  postscript  added : — "  General 
Bulow  is  going  to  attack  us  in  flank,  therefore  do  not  lose  an 


THE    2C/TH    BULLETIN.  405 

instant,  and  you  will  take  him  in  flagrante  delicto."  .This 
despatch  did  not  reach  Grouchy  until  7  P.M.,  and  this  was 
the  first  intimation  which  he  received  that  his  presence 
was  required  at  Waterloo,  where  he  was  fully  convinced 
that  Napoleon  would  easily  overthrow  Wellington  and 
his  forces. 

Long  before  receiving  this  order  Grouchy  had  attacked 
the  Prussians  at  Wavres,  but  without  being  able  to  drive 
them  out  of  that  place.  Unable  to  pass  the  Dyle  at 
Wavres,  he  tried  to  pass  it  at  Limale,  but  there  again  he 
was  foiled.  Blucher,  in  fact,  had  left  Thielman  behind 
with  30,000  men  to  hold  Grouchy  and  his  30,000  men  in 
check,  and  with  his  remaining  6o,o0o  men  he  had  pushed 
on  as  best  he  could  to  lend  a  helping  hand  to  Wellington.1 
The  fault  of  Grouchy  was,  therefore,  that  with  30,000  men 
he  was  unable  to  prevent  a  portion  of  a  force  three  times 
as  large  as  his  own,  and  which  had  fourteen  hours'  start  of 
him,  from  effecting  its  junction  with  the  English.  The  fact 
is  that  Grouchy  on  the  18th  could  no  more  accomplish  what 
the  Emperor  required  of  him  when  he  found  hinrself  in 
difficulties,  than  Ney  had  been  able  to  accomplish  ^  on 
the  16th.  Ney  received  his  orders  too  late,  and  then 
found  his  hands  too  full  at  Quatre  Bras  to  fall  upon 
the  Prussian  right.  Grouchy  received  his  orders  too 
late,  and  then  found  his  hands  too  full  at  Wavres  to  fall 
on  the  English  left. 

Jomini  has  blamed  Grouchy  for  having  carried  out  the 
orders  of  the  Emperor  when  he  found  that  the  Emperor 
was  mistaken  in  supposing  that  Blucher,  thoroughly 
demoralised,  had  fallen  back  upon  Namur,  instead  of  on 
Wavres  ;  but  Napoleon  himself  did  not  blame  Grouchy 
until  he  got  to  St.  Helena.  In  the  twenty-ninth  bulletin, 
written  at  Laon,  there  is  no  question  of  Grouchy.     Before 

1  It  must  be  remembered  that  the  Prussians  were  reinforced  by 
Bulow's  corps  on  the  evening  of  the  16th,  just  after  Ligny  had  been 
fought.  Grouchy  consequently  had  to  pursue  a  force  equal  to  that 
with  which  Napoleon  had  just  been  engaged. 


406    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

leaving  France,  as  we  shall  see,  the  Emperor  several  times 
attributed  the  loss  of  Waterloo  to  Marshal  Ney,  never 
to  Marshal  Grouchy. 

M.  Fleury  de  Chaboulon  gives  the  following  account  of 
the  bulletin  written  at  Laon,  which  he  wrote  at  the  dictation 
of  the  Emperor: — 

"  When  it  was  terminated  he  called  in  the  Grand 
Marshal,  General  Drouot,  and  the  other  aides-de-camp. 
'  Here,'  said  he,  '  is  the  bulletin  of  Mont-St.-Jean  ;  I  wish 
you  to  hear  it  read.  If  I  have  omitted  any  essential  facts 
you  must  remind  me  of  them  ;  I  do  not  intend  to  dis- 
simulate anything.  As  after  Moscow,  I  must  tell  France 
the  whole  truth.  I  might  have  thrown  upon  Marshal  Ney 
a  portion  of  the  misfortunes  of  this  day;  but  the  harm  is 
done;  it  is  no  use  speaking  about  it.'  [Nothing  about 
Grouchy.]  I  read  out  the  bulletin  ;  a  few  slight  changes 
were  proposed  by  General  Drouot,  and  agreed  to  by  the 
Emperor ;  but  I  cannot  tell  upon  what  grounds  he  was 
at  first  loth  to  acknowledge  that  his  carriages  had  fallen 
into  the  hands  of  the  enemy. — '  When  you  pass  through 
Paris/  said  M.  de  Flahaut,  '  it  will  be  seen  that  they  have 
been  taken.  If  you  hide  it  you  will  be  accused  of  disguis- 
ing more  important  truths.'  The  Emperor,  after  raising 
some  objections,  finished  by  yielding." 

Napoleon  at  first  thought  of  remaining  at  Laon.  Some 
of  his  comrades  said — "  If  you  go  to  Paris  you  will  be 
accused  of  deserting  your  army  again  as  in  Egypt,  in 
Spain,  and  in  Russia."  Others,  however,  insisted  that  his 
presence  was  necessary  in  the  capital,  and  thither  he  set 
out,  very  uncertain  how  he  would  be  received. 

Capefigue  in  his  Cent  Jours  relates  that : — 

"  On  arriving  at  the  Elysee  after  Waterloo,  Napoleon 
said  to  Caulaincourt : — '  The  army  had  performed  prodigies 
when  it  was  seized  with  a  panic,  and  all  was  lost;  Ney 
behaved  like  a  madman  ;  he  caused  all  my  cavalry  to  be 


MESSAGE    TO    THE    CHAMBER.  407 

massacred.  I  am  quite  worn  out.  I  must  have  two  hours' 
repose  before  attending  to  business.'  And  placing  his 
hand  on  his  heart  he  added—'  I  am  stifling  there.'  "  No 
mention  was  made  of  Grouchy. 

MESSAGE  TO  THE  CHAMBER  OF  REPRESENTATIVES. 
"Palace  of  the  Elysee,  21st  June,  1815. 

"  After  the  battles  of  Ligny  and  Mont  St. -Jean,  and 
after  having  provided  for  the  rallying  of  the  army  at 
Avesnes  and  at  Philippeville  for  the  defence  of  the  frontier 
places  and  that  of  Soissons  and  Laon,  I  came  to  Paris  to 
concert  measures  with  my  ministers  for  the  defence  of 
the  nation,  and  to  arrive  at  an  understanding  with  the 
Chambers  as  to  what  is  required  for  the  safety  of  the 
country. 

"  I  have  formed  a  committee  consisting  of  Caulaincourt, 
Carnot,  and  Fouche,  to  renew  and  to  pursue  negotiations 
with  the  foreign  Powers,  so  as  to  ascertain  their  veritable 
intentions,  and  to  put  an  end  to  the  war,  if  that  is  com- 
patible with  the  independence  and  honour  of  France.  But 
the  greatest  amount  of  union  is  necessary,  and  I  reckon 
upon  the  co-operation  and  patriotism  of  the  Chambers, 
and  on  their  attachment  to  my  person. 

"  I   send   Prince   Lucien  and  the  Ministers  of  Foreign 
Affairs,  of  War,  of  the  Interior,  and  of  the  Police,  to  take 
the  present  message  to  the  Chambers,  and  to  communicate 
#all  the  information  which  they  may  desire  to  know. 

"  Napoleon." 

The  French  seem  never  to  tire  of  Waterloo.  It  appears 
a  kind  of  enigma  which  they  cannot  explain  satisfactorily. 
The  names  of  the  soldiers,  the  historians,  and  poets  who 
have  dealt  with  the  memorable  campaign  of  18 15  would 
alone  fill  a  volume,  and  the  Spectateur  Militaire  (1st 
March,  1884)  is  still  discussing  the  treason  of  Bourmont 
and  the  operations  of  Grouchy.     Victor  Hugo,  who  gave  a 


408  THE   CORRESPONDENCE   OF    NAPOLEON. 

very  dashing  picture  of  the  battle  in  Les  Mise'rables,  came 
to  the  conclusion  that  it  was  neither  Napoleon  nor 
Wellington  who  won  the  day,  but  Cambronne.  In  Les 
Chatiments  the  poet  thus  vividly  described  the  sauve  qui 
peut  which,  as  Gneisenau  said,  resembled  the  flight  of 
barbarians.     After  some  preliminary  lines  we  see  that — 

"  Derriere  un  mamelon  la  Garde  e'tait  masse'e, 
La  Garde,  espoir  supreme  et  supreme  pensee  ! 

Comprenant  qu'ils  allaient  mourir  dans  cette  fete, 
Saluerent  leur  Dieu,  debout  dans  la  tempete. 
Leur  bouche,  d'un  seul  cri,  dit :  Vive  l'Empereur  ! 
Puis,  a  pas  lents,  musique  en  tete,  sans  fureur, 
Tranquille,  souriant  a  la  mitraille  anglaise, 
La  Garde  Imperiale  entra  dans  la  fournaise." 

The  Guard  melted  away  like  wax,  and  then — 

"  La  deroute  apparut  au  soldat  qui  s'emeut, 
Et  se  tordant  les  bras,  cria,  Sauve  qui  peut  ! 
Sauve  qui  peut  !  affront !  horreur  !  toutes  les  bouches 
Criaient ;  a  travers  champs,  fous,  e'perdus,  farouches 
Comme  si  quelque  souffle  avait  passd  sur  eux, 
Parmi  les  lourds  caissons  et  les  fourgons  poudreux, 
Roulant  dans  les  fosse's,  se  cachant  dans  les  seigles, 
Jetant  shakos,  manteaux,  fusils,  jetant  les  aigles. 
Sous  les  sabres  pruissiens,  ces  veterans,  6  deuil  ! 
Tremblaient,  hurlaient,  pleuraient,  couraient  ! — En  un  clin  d'oeil, 
Comme  s'envole  au  vent  une  paille  enflammee, 
S'evanouit  ce  bruit  qui  fut  la  grande  armee."  x 


1  Not  long  ago,  too,  we  found  in  La  Revue  Historique  the  following  ■ 
interesting  letter  written  by  the  historian  Sismondi  to  his  mother  with 
this  heading  : — 

On  lira  avec  emotion  le  recit  suivant  de  la  bataille  de 
Waterloo,  d'apres  les  premieres  nouvelles  arrivees  a 
Paris,  et  recueillies  par  l'auteur  de  l'  "  Histoire  des 
Francais  : " 

"23  fuin,  181 5,  vendredi  matin. 
"Je  n'ai    point   commence"  ma   lettre  au   commencement  de    la 
semaine,  bonne  mere  ;  je  fis  partir  celle  de  dimanche  avec  peu  d'esper- 
ance  qu'elle  put  faire  son  chemin.      Dans  les  quatre  jours  qui  suivi- 


SISMONDI  S    LETTER.  409 

It    was  very  unlikely   that    the  allies  who   refused   to 
negotiate  before   Waterloo  would   consent   to    negotiate 

rent,  la  communication  fut  interrompue  de  tous  les  cotes  ;  de  nouveaux 
desastres,  vine  catastrophe  qu'on  ne  pouvait  preVoir,  rouvriront  peut- 
6tre  aujourd'hui  la  communication.  L'armee,  sous  les  ordres  imme-- 
diats  de  l'Empereur,  avait  commence"  les  hostilite's  le  15,  et  remporte- 
un  avantage  brillant  a  Charleroi  le  16.  Avec  une  force  d'environ 
90,000  hommes,  elle  attaqua  pres  de  Fleurus  l'arme'e  combined  prus- 
sienne  et  anglaise  ;  apres  le  combat  le  plus  acharne*  et  a  la  fin  de  la 
journe'e  seulement,  elle  coupa  sa  ligne,  repoussa  les  Anglais  du  cote" 
de  Bruxelles  et  les  Prussiens  du  c6te"  de  Namur.  Napoleon  avec 
50,000  hommes,  se  chargea  de  la  poursuite  des  premiers,  le  marechal 
de  Grouchy  de  celle  des  seconds. 

"  La  journe'e  du  17,  qui  fut  extremement  pluvieuse,  fut  employee 
en  marches  et  petits  combats. 

"Le  18,  Napoleon  attaqua  Wellington  retranche'  dans  la  foret  de 
Soignies,  devant  Bruxelles.  Les  forces  anglaises  etaient  doubles  des 
siennes,  elles  avaient  encore  l'avantage  de  retranchements  pre'pare's 
longtemps  a  l'avance  et  d'une  formidable  artillerie. 

"  Ses  ge"ne"raux  jugerent  qu'il  y  avait  tres-peu  d'esperance  de  succes ; 
il  voulut  tenter  la  fortune. 

"  Sa  brave  Garde,  Polite  de  la  nation,  et  ce  que  la  France  posse"dait 
de  plus  glorieux,  le  seconda  avec  ce  courage  calme  et  in^branlable  que 
ces  vieux  soldats  portaient  empreint  sur  leur  front.  La  vieille  Garde 
e"tait  un  corps  de  7,000  hommes,  dont  plus  des  trois  quarts  avaient 
obtenu,  par  des  actions  e"clatantes,  la  decoration  de  la  Legion 
d'Honneur. 

"  Une  batterie  effroyable  qui  e"tait  masque"e  a  bientot  laboure"  leurs 
rangs.  Cette  vieille  Garde  n'existe  plus  ;  ils  ont  tous  pe"ri ;  lorsque, 
apres  le  combat  le  plus  acharne",  dans  lequel  plusieurs  des  positions 
anglaises  ont  e"te"  enleve"es  a  la  bai'onnette,  et  dans  lequel  Bonaparte 
cherchait  et  appelait.  a  mort  sans  pouvoir  la  trouver,  se  tenant  en 
•  dehors  et  en  avant  des  Carre's  qui  soutenaient  le  feu  le  plus  violent, 
une  terreur  panique,  un  faux  bruit,  peut-etre  une  trahison,  a  tout  a 
cdup  fait  lacher  la  pied  a  l'armee ;  mais  la  vieille  Garde,  ferme  a  son 
poste,  et  abandonn^e  seule  sur  le  champ  de  bataille,  a  repousse"  toutes 
les  instances  de  Wellington  ;  aucun  d'eux  n'a  voulu  se  rendre,  et  la 
mitraille  n'apportant  point  encore  assez  rapidement  la  mort,  le  petit 
nombre  de  braves  qui  restaient  sans  espeYance  se  sont  embrasse"s, 
puis  perce"s  de  leurs  bai'onnettes.  C'est  sur  leur  corps  qui  Louis 
XVIII.  veut  monter  pour  regner. 

"  Cependant  le  restant  de  l'arme'e,  ayant  rompu  ses  rangs,  n'a  plus 
pu  etre  reforme" ;  bient6t  ils  ont  jete"  leurs  armes  pour  fuir  et,  se  pre"- 


4IO     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

after  that  battle.     Nor  would  they,  as  the  following  letter 
shows. 

DECLARATION  TO  THE  FRENCH  PEOPLE. 

"  Frenchmen, — In  declaring  war  in  defence  of  the 
national  independence  I  reckoned  upon  the  united  efforts 
and  the  good  will  of  every  one,  and  upon  the  aid  of  all  the 
national  authorities  ;  I  had  reasons  to  hope  for  success, 
and  I  consequently  braved  all  the  declarations  of  the 
Powers  against  me. 

"  Circumstances  appear  to  be  changed. 

"  I  offer  myself  as  a  sacrifice  to  the  hatred  of  the 
enemies  of  France.  May  they  be  sincere  in  their  declara- 
tions, that  they  have  borne  enmity  to  my  person    alone. 

"  My  political  career  is  terminated,  and  I  proclaim  my 
son,  under  the  title  of  Napoleon  II.,  Emperor  of  the  French. 

"  The  present  ministers  will  form  a  provisional  Govern- 
ment. The  interest  which  I  bear  my  son  prompts  me  to 
invite  the  Chambers  to  organise  the  Regency  without 
delay. 

cipitant  dans  les  chemins  comme  un  troupeau  de  moutons,  entrainant 
avec  eux  et  devant  eux  ceux  meme  qui  dtaient  les  plus  de'termine's  a 
tenir,  ils  ont  6t6  poursuivis  pendant  vingt  lieues  par  la  cavalerie 
anglaise.  On  ignore  encore  le  nombre  des  morts  et  des  prisonniers, 
mais  il  doit  etre  immense,  et  surtout  la  terreur  dont  l'armee  fugitive  a 
frappe'  la  nation  ne  laisse  plus  de  ressources.  Pendant  le  meme 
temps  cependant,  le  mare'chal  Grouchy  avec  son  corps  d'armde  avait 
battu  les  Prussiens  et  occupy  Namur.  Mais  l'empereur  ne  le  savait 
pas  et  voyant  son  arme'e  dissipe'e,  toute  son  artillerie  perdue,  il  est 
revenu  a  Paris,  oil,  apres  trente-six  heures  malheureusement  perdues 
en  vaines  deliberations,  il  a  abdiqud  hier  l'empire  entre  les  mains  des 
deux  Chambres,  qui  ont  nomme'  une  commission  de  gouvernement 
provisoire  pour  negocier  avec  les  puissances  et  pourvoir  en  mSme 
temps  a  la  defense  nationale.  Le  choix  des  membres  de  ce  gouverne- 
ment provisoire  donne  l'esperance  qu'ils  ne  voudront  pas  soumettre  la 
nation  a  l'ignominie  du  roi  des  Strangers,  et  qu'ils  balanceront  plutot 
entre  Marie-Louise  et  le  due  d'Orleans  ;  mais  les  repre'sentants  sont 
tumultueux  et  faibles,  ils  inspirent  peu  de  confiance.  Cependant  le 
de'sastre  public,  renfermant  une  espe'rance  de  paix,  a  fait  remonter  les 
fpnds.d'une  maniere  extraordinaire." 


INCIDENT    IN    THE    CHAMBER    OF    PEERS.         411 

"  Let  all  of  you  unite  for  the  public  safety,  in  order  that 
France  may  remain  independent. 

"  Napoleon. 
"  Palace  of  the  Elysee,  22nd  June,  1815." 

The  above  declaration  was  forced  upon  the  Emperor  by 
his  relations  and  his  friends  when  they  perceived  that  all 
was  lost,  and  it  was  Lucien  who  wrote  it  at  the  dictation 
of  his  brother. 

Capefigue  has  given  an  interesting  account  of  an  in- 
cident which  occurred  while  the  proposition  contained  in 
the  above  declaration  was  being  discussed  in  the  Chamber 
of  Peers.  The  Imperialists  were  trying  to  make  out  that 
the  situation  was  by  no  means  so  desperate  as  had  been 
represented.     He  says  that  : — 

"  Marshal  Davoust  was  finishing  the  reading  of  a  report 
on  the  situation  of  the  army,  and  Carnot  was  commenting 
upon  it  with  his  usual  firmness,  when  the  sound  of  a  hollow 
voice  was  heard  :  it  was  that  of  Marshal  Ney  exclaiming, 
'  It  is  not  so  ;  it  is  false  ;  they  are  deceiving  you.'  After 
this  first  extraordinary  apostrophe  the  Marshal,  greatly 
excited,  rose,  and  these  were  the  strange  revelations  which 
he  made  to  the  peers  :  '  The  news  which  the  Minister  of 
the  Interior  has  just  read  to  you  is  false — false  in  every 
way  !  The  enemy  has  triumphed  everywhere  ;  I  witnessed 
the  disorder  since  I  commanded  under  the  eyes  of  the 
Emperor.  After  the  disastrous  results  of  the  16th  and  the 
1 8th  they  presume  to  tell  you  that  they  ended  by  beating 
the  enemy  on  the  18th,  and  that  we  have  still  60,000  men  on 
the  frontier.  It  is  false ;  and  it  will  be  as  much  as  Marshal 
Grouchy  can  do  to  rally  15,000  men,  and  we  have  been 
beaten  too  thoroughly  to  be  in  a  condition  to  resist  the 
enemy.  All  the  generals  who  are  here,  and  who  com- 
manded with  me,  can  attest  this.  .  .  .  What  the  Minister 
of  the  Interior  has  said  about  Marshal  Soult  is  false— quite 
false  ;  he  has  not  been  able  to  rally  a  single  man  of  the 
Guard.     This    is  our  real   position.      The   enemy  are  at 


412     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Nivelle  with  80,000  men.  When  they  tell  you  that  the 
Prussian  army  is  destroyed,  that  is  not  true.  The  greater 
portion  of  that  army  was  not  engaged.  In  six  or  seven 
days  the  enemy  will  perhaps  be  in  the  centre  of  the 
capital ;  there  is  nothing  to  do  but  to  treat  with  the 
enemy.' " 

And  Marshal  Ney,  by  way  of  attesting  his  sincerity, 
expressed  the  conviction  that  he  would  be  shot. 

On  the  25th  June  General  Bertrand,  Grand  Marshal  of 
the  Palace,  was  instructed  to  write  to  the  Imperial 
Librarian  Barbier  for  "  works  upon  America,"  a  report  on 
everything  published  on  the  subject  of  the  campaigns  of 
the  Emperor,  "and  in  addition,  several  works  on  the 
United  States."  The  library  was  to  be  consigned  to  an 
American  firm,  "  who  will  have  it  transported  to  America 
from  Havre." 

Having  thus  shown  that  it  was  his  intention  to  make  his 
escape  across  the  Atlantic,  Napoleon  penned  the  following 
farewell  address  to  the  army  : — 

TO   THE  ARMY. 

"  LA  Malmaison,  itfJi  June,  1815. 

"  SOLDIERS, — In  yielding  tp  the  necessity  which  obliges 
me  to  quit  the  brave  French  army,  I  carry  away  with  me 
the  happy  certainty  that  it  will  justify,  by  the  eminent 
services,  which  the  country  expects  from  it,  the  praises 
which  even  our  enemies  cannot  refuse. 

"  Soldiers,  although  absent,  I  shall  follow  your  footsteps. 
I  know  every  corps,  and  none  of  them  will  obtain  a  signal 
triumph  over  the  enemy  without  eliciting  my  admiration. 
You  and  I  have  both  been  calumniated.  Men  unworthy 
of  appreciating  your  labours  have  seen  in  the  marks  of 
attachment  which  you  have  given  me  a  zeal  of  which  1 
was  the  sole  object.  Let  your  future  successes  prove  that 
in  obeying  me  you  served  above  all  the  country,  and  that 
if  I  share  your  affection  I  owe  it  to  my  ardent  love  of 
France,  our  common  mother. 


LETTER   TO    THE    PROVISIONAL    GOVERNMENT.    413 

"  Soldiers,  a  few  gallant  efforts  and  the  coalition  will 
be  dissolved.  Napoleon  will  recognise  you  by  the  blows 
you  are  about  to  deal.  Save  the  honour  and  indepen- 
dence of  Frenchmen ;  be  to  the  end  the  same  as  I  have 
known  you  for  the  last  twenty  years,  and  you  will  be 
invincible.1 

"  Napoleon." 


On  the  27th  June,  however,  Napoleon,  thinking  that  he 
might  fall  upon  the  Prussians  and  destroy  them  before 
the  English  could  aid  them,  sent  the  following  letter 
(which  is  not  given  in  The  Correspondence)  by  General 
Becker  to  the  Provisional  Government : — "  In  abdicating 
power  I  did  not  renounce  the  most  noble  right  of  a 
citizen,  which  is  to  defend  my  country.  The  approach 
of  the  enemies  to  the  capital  leaves  no  doubt  with  regard 
to  their  intentions  and  their  bad  faith.  Under  these 
serious  circumstances  I  offer  my  services  as  a  general, 
still  looking  upon  myself  as  the  first  soldier  of  my 
country." 

Capefigue,  who  gives  this  letter  in  his  Cent  Jours  (vol.  ii. 
p.  290),  says  that  Fouche,  after  having  negligently  read  it, 
threw  it  on  the  floor,  exclaiming — "  This  man  is  then 
mad  !  He  wishes  to  compromise  everything.  Return  to 
the  Malmaison,  and  tell  him  that  he  must  leave  at  once ; 
that  I  can  be  answerable  for  nothing  that  may  happen." 
Blucher,  says  the  same  writer,  swore  that  he  would  hang 
him  at  the  head  of  his  columns;  and  his  War  Minister, 
Davoust,  said  to  M.  de  Flahaut — "Well!  let  him  go,  or 
I  will  seize  him  myself  by  the  collar." 

If  anything  could  excite  sympathy  for  the  great  soldier 
whose  career  was  now  closed  it  would  be  the  extraordi- 
nary baseness  with  which  he  was  deserted  in  his  hour  of 
misfortune.     Few  of  his  old  companions  in  arms  appeared 

1  The  Provisional  Government  would  not  allow  the  publication  of  this 
proclamation. 


414     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

to  realise  the  beauty  of  Shakespeare's  sublime  idea  that — 

"  He  that  can  endure 
To  follow  with  allegiance  a  fallen  lord, 
Does  conquer  him  that  did  his  master  conquer, 
And  earns  a  place  in  the  story." 

We  find  no  more  written  matter  until  the  following  : — 

To  the  PRINCE  REGENT  OF  ENGLAND. 

"  Isle  of  Aix,  14//&  July,  1815. 
"Royal  Highness, — Exposed  to  the  factions  which 
divide  my  country,  and  to  the  enmity  of  the  Powers  of 
Europe,  I  have  terminated  my  political  career,  and  I 
come,  like  Themistocles,  to  seat  myself  at  the  hearth  of 
the  British  people.  I  place  myself  beneath  the  protection 
of  their  laws,  which  protection  I  claim  from  your  Royal 
Highness  as  the  most  powerful,  the  most  constant,  and 
the  most  generous  of  my  enemies. 

"  Napoleon." 

No  notice  was  taken  of  this  undignified  appeal,  made 
when  escape  was  impossible. 

INSTRUCTIONS  TO  CAPTAINS   PHILIBERT,  commanding 
"La  Saa/e,"  and  POUCE,  commanding  the  " MtSduse." 

Very  Secret. 

"The  two  frigates  are  destined  to  take  him  who  was 
our  Emperor  to  the  United  States." 

Then  follow  very  ample  instructions  for  the  comfort 
and  safety  of  Napoleon,  who  was  to  be  treated  with  the 
greatest  honour.  If  the  frigates  were  attacked,  that  not 
bearing  Csesar  and  his  fortunes  was  to  sacrifice  itself  so 
as  to  allow  the  other  to  escape. 

On  the  8th  July,  the  same  day  that  Louis  XVIII. 
re-entered   Paris,  the  Emperor   embarked   on   board   the 


PROTESTATION.  415 

Saa/e,1  but  there  were  eleven  English  vessels  cruising  in 
sight  of  the  port,  and  after  waiting  for  three  days  he 
opened  communications  with  Captain  Maitland  of  the 
Bellerophon,  afterwards  pretending  that  good  faith  had 
not  been  kept  with  him.  Napoleon  for  a  moment  thought 
of  trying  his  chance  on  board  a  merchant  vessel,  but  the 
fear  of  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  Spaniards  or  the 
Portuguese  made  him  renounce  this  idea  ;  nor  did  he  care 
to  remain  any  longer  in  France.  The  correspondence 
which  ensued  between  the  English  naval  authorities  and 
Captain  Maitland  clearly  prove  that  the  only  promise 
made  to  Napoleon  before  he  stepped  on  board  the 
Bellerophon  was  to  take  him  to  England  and  to  treat 
him  with  humanity. 

PROTESTATION. 

"At  Sea,  on  board  the  'Bellerophon,' 
"  ^tk  August,  1815. 

"I  here  protest  solemnly  before  Heaven  and  before 
men  against  the  violation  of  my  most  sacred  rights,  in 
disposing  of  my  person  and  of  my  liberty  by  force.  I 
came  of  my  own  free  will  on  board  the  Bellerophon.  I  am 
not  a  prisoner  ;  I  am  the  guest  of  England.  I  came  here 
myself  at  the  instigation  of  the  captain,  who  said  that  he 
had  received  orders  from  his  Government  to  convey  me 
to  England  with  my  suite,  if  that  were  agreeable  to  me. 
I  presented  myself  in  good  faith,  in  order  to  place  myself 
under  the  protection  of  her  laws. 

"  As  soon  as  I  had  placed  foot  on  board  the  Bellerophon 
I  was  on  the  hearth  of  the  British  people.  If  the  Govern- 
ment, in  giving  directions  to  the  captain  of  the  Bellerophon 
to  receive  me  with  my  suite,  wished  merely  to  set  me  a 
trap,  an  ambush,  it  has  forfeited  its  honour  and  sullied  its 
flag.  Should  such  an  act  be  consummated  it  will  be  all 
in  vain  for  the  English  to  speak  in  future  of  their  honesty, 

1  Louis  XVIII.  returned  to  Paris  the  first  time  on  the  day  Napoleon 
embarked  for  Elba. 


41 6  THE    CORRESPONDENCE   OF   NAPOLEON. 

of  their  laws,  and  of  their  liberty.  British  good  faith 
will  be  compromised  by  the  hospitality  of  the 
Bellerophon. 

"  I  appeal  to  history.  It  will  say  that  an  enemy  who 
for  twenty  years  waged  war  against  the  English  people, 
came  of  his  own  accord,  in  his  misfortune,  to  seek  an 
asylum  under  their  laws  •  and  what  greater  proof  could  he 
give  of  his  esteem  and  his  confidence  ?  But  how  did 
England  reply  to  this  magnanimity  ?  She  feigned  to 
stretch  out  a  hospitable  hand  to  this  enemy,  and  when 
he  trusted  himself  to  her  good  faith  she  immolated 
him ! 

"  Napoleon."  * 

At  St.  Helena,  too,  Napoleon  wrote  a  series  of  Observa- 
tions on  the  campaign  of  1815.  There,  like  Philip's  god- 
like son,  he 

"  Fought  all  his  battles  o'er  again, 
And  thrice  he  routed  all  his  foes,  arid  thrice  he  slew  the  slain." 

He  was  very  severe  on  his  opponents  and  lavish  of 
praise  as  concerned  himself.  Thus  in  Observation  2  he 
says — "  The  art  with  which  the  movements  of  the  various 
army  corps  were  concealed  from  the  enemy  at  the  opening 
of  the  campaign  cannot  be  too  much  remarked.  Marshal 
Blucher  and  the  Duke  of  Wellington  were  surprised ; 
they  saw  nothing  and  knew  nothing  of  the  movements 
operated  close  to  the  outposts.  To  attack  the  enemy  the 
French  might  turn  their  right  or  their  left  or  pierce  their 

1  After  this  what  becomes  of  the  following  assertion  made  by  Lord 
Holland  in  his  Reminiscences  (p.  196)? — "The  headstrong  zeal  of 
Napoleon's  adherents  has  often  injured  his  cause  and  exposed  him  to 
the  accusation  of  perfidy,  which  he  sometimes,  but  rarely,  deserved. 
Some  of  them  most  injudiciously  as  well  as  falsely  accused  Captain 
Maitland  of  inveigling  the  Emperor  on  board,  and  of  equivocation  in 
interpreting  the  conditions  on  which  he  received  him.  To  neither  of 
these  most  unfounded  charges  was  Napoleon  himself  directly  or  in- 
directly a  party  ;  and  the  falsehood  contained  in  them  cannot  in  equity 
reflect  on  his  personal  or  political  character." 


napoleon's  observations.       417 

centre."  This  was  why  Wellington  would  not  concentrate 
until  he  could  make  out  where  the  blow  was  going  to  be 
struck.  To  continue — "The  Emperor  adopted  the  plan 
of  concealing  his  movements  behind  the  Sambre  and  of 
piercing  their  line  at  Charleroi,  the  point  of  their  junction, 
manoeuvring  with  rapidity  and  skill."  Not  rapidly  enough, 
however,  to  cut  off  Zeithen's  corps,  as  he  had  hoped  to  do, 
nor  that  of  the  Prince  of  Orange  at  Quatre  Bras.  The 
fact  is  that  Napoleon  had  hardly  entered  Charleroi  when 
he  ceased  the  pursuit  of  the  enemy,  much  to  the  astonish- 
ment of  his  troops,  and  allowed  them  time  to  barricade 
themselves.  In  the  Drame  de  Waterloo,  by  Pierrat,  we 
find — "  Having  given  his  columns  orders  to  stop  the  pur- 
suit of  the  Prussians,  and  while  the  cavalry  of  Grouchy  and 
of  the  Guard  defiled  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Sambre,  the 
Emperor  seated  himself  in  a  chair  in  the  entrance  of  a 
court-yard  in  the  upper  part  of  Charleroi,  where  the  roads 
to  Brussels  and  to  Namur  branch  off,  and  fell  sound  asleep, 
nor  could  the  vivats  of  the  soldiers  as  they  marched  past 
arouse  him  from  his  slumber."  At  3  P.M.  his  Majesty 
awoke,  but  more  time  was  lost,  because  instead  of  attack- 
ing the  enemy  with  his  Guard,  which  was  on  the  spot,  he 
insisted  upon  waiting  for  Vandamme  to  come  up.  As 
Damitz,  the  Prussian  historian,  says,  "  the  Prussians  took 
advantage  of  this  leisure."     Vide  also  Colonel  Baudus. 

In  Observation  3  we  find  it  mentioned  that — "  The 
French  army  did  not  arrive  in  front  of  Waterloo  until 
6p.M.  on  the  17th  ;  without  lamentable  hesitation  it  would 
have  arrived  there  at  3  P.M.  The  Emperor  appeared  much 
vexed,  and,  pointing  to  the  sun,  said—'  What  would  I  not 
give  to-day  for  the  power  of  Joshua  to  put  it  back  for  two 
hours ! ' " 

But  were  not  all  these  delays  due  to  Napoleon  himself 
and  did  he  not  again  delay  attacking  Wellington  the  next 
morning  ?  We  might  append  the  opinion  of  numerous 
and  competent  authorities  on  this  subject.  Let  the  three 
following  suffice  : — 

VOL.  III.  E  E 


418    THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

"  How  explain  the  eight  hours  lost  in  examining  the 
field  of  battle,  when  it  was  of  such  interest  to  pursue  the 
Prussians  ? " — JOMINI,  Correspondence  avec  Grouchy. 

"The  inaction  of  the  French  army  during  the  17th  and 
on  the  morning  of  the  18th  June  was  the  real  cause  of 
the  loss  of  the  battle  of  Waterloo." — General  Baron 
Delort,  Commentaires  sur  /'  Ouvrage  de  Damitz. 

"On  the  17th  we  should  have  moved  at  break  of  day, 
but  it  was  nearly  eleven  o'clock  when  the  Emperor 
marched,  and,  to  the  great  astonishment  of  his  officers 
he  broke  up  the  army  into  two  corps,  one  of  which  was  to 
follow  the  Prussians  and  the  other  to  attack  the  English- 
unfortunate  conception  which  was  the  cause  of  all  our 
disasters." — General  Lamarque,  Memoires. 

Vaulabelle  thinks  that  the  delay  of  the  17th  was  caused 
by  Napoleon's  uncertainty  as  to  the  direction  in  which  the 
Prussians  had  retreated. 

In  Observation  5  Napoleon  says  that  the  great  fault 
committed  by  Grouchy  on  the  18th  was  in  not  arriving  at 
Wavres  until  4  P.M.  instead  of  6  A.M.  "  Ordered  to  pur- 
sue Blucher,  Grouchy  lost  sight  of  him  for  twenty-four 
hours,  from  the  17th  at  4  P.M.  till  the  18th  at  4  p.m."  We 
have  seen  that  Grouchy  could  get  no  orders  until  after 
1  P.M.  on  the  17th,  and  that  then  he  was  sent  in  a  wrong 
direction,  when  the  enemy  had  fourteen  hours'  start  of 
him. 

The  following  written  instructions,  too,  must  be  taken 
into  account : — 

"  LlGNY,  17 th  June,  about  3  P.M. 

"  Marshal,  march  upon  Gembloux  with.  .  .  .  You  must 
send  out  reconnoitring  parties  in  the  direction  of  Namur 
and  Maestricht,  and  you  must  pursue  the  enemy.  ...  if 
the  enemy  have  evacuated  Namur.  .  .  . 

"  (Dictated  by  the  Emperor,  in  absence  of  the  Major- 

General.) 

"The  Grand-Marshal  Bertrand," 


WAVRES    AND    QUATRE    BRAS.  419 

In  Observation  6  the  Emperor  says  that  Blucher,  when 
he  heard  that  the  French  were  at  Charleroi,  should  have 
concentrated  not  at  Ligny  but  at  Wavres,  and  that  after 
losing  Ligny  he  should  have  retreated  either  on  Quatre 
Bras  or  on  Waterloo.  Blucher  might  have  attempted  this 
dangerous  operation  had  he  known  that  he  would  be 
granted  a  respite  of  fourteen  hours.  It  is  true  that  at  St. 
Helena,  according  to  Las  Cases,  Napoleon  declared  the 
march  of  Blucher  on  Wavres  to  have  been  "  one  of  those 
flashes  of  genius  which  display  a  great  general." 

In  Observation  7  Napoleon  says  that  Wellington  was 
surprised,  and  that  he  did  not  know  of  the  French  being 
at  Charleroi  until  11  p.m.  on  the  15th.  He  admits  that 
this  was  the  fault  of  the  Prince  of  Saxe- Weimar,  who 
ought  to  have  warned  the  Duke  at  6  P.M. 

It  was  at  about  five  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  of  the  15th 
that  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  while  at  dinner,  received 
information  of  the  advance  of  the  French  army  {Siborne, 
vol.  i.  p.  jf).  In  a  foot-note  the  author  says — "  I  had 
hoped  that  the  statements  so  erroneously  made  by  some 
writers,  imputing  to  the  Duke  that  he  was  taken  by  sur- 
prise, were  not  countenanced  at  the  present  day,  since  such 
statements,  when  submitted  to  an  impartial  military 
investigation,  must  be  found  totally  groundless.  .  .  ." 
Adding  that  some  writers  were  of  opinion  that  Blucher 
should  have  concentrated  at  Wavres,  and  Wellington  at 
Waterloo,  before  Napoleon  had  crossed  the  Sambre. 

The  Duke  of  Wellington  is  also  blamed  for  having  kept 
his  infantry,  cavalry  and  artillery  in  different  cantonments, 
and  for  thus  allowing  his  infantry  to  fight  at  Quatre  Bras 
without  cavalry  or  artillery.1  It  is  true  that  Picton's  men 
belonging  to  the  42nd  and  44th  Regiments  had  to  charge 
the  French  cavalry  at  the  bayonet,  as  the  5th  Regiment 
did  in  181 1  during  the  Peninsular  War  when  the  French 

1  This  was  partly  owing  to  the  fact  of  2,000  Belgian  cavalry  turning 
tail. 

E  E   2 


420  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

advanced  to  relieve  Ciudad  Rodrigo,  and  as  British  Infantry 
did  on  another  occasion.1 

The  Duke  of  Wellington  is  also  blamed  for  having 
fought  at  Waterloo ;  for,  according  to  Napoleon,  he  ought 
to  have  supposed  that  the  Prussians,  beaten  at  Ligny, 
having  lost  between  25,000  and  30,000  men  on  the  field 
of  battle,  having  20,000  men  dispersed,  and  being  pursued 
by  from  35,000  to  40,000  victorious  Frenchmen,  would  not 
be  able  to  render  him  any  assistance.  Now,  according  to 
the  Prussian  official  returns  Blucher  lost  only  11,706  men 
killed  or  wounded  at  Ligny.  Wellington  was  perfectly 
well  acquainted  with  the  true  state  of  affairs,  for  Gneisenau, 
who  "made  up  the  pills  administered  by  Blucher,"  as  the 
veteran  field-marshal  himself  expressed  it,  rode  over  to  see 
the  British  General  on  the  night  of  the  17th  to  arrange 
matters  with  him.  The  Duke  was  therefore  perfectly  well 
aware  that  he  would  receive  assistance  during  the  18th — 
assistance  which  he  no  doubt  required  as  he  could  count 
on  only  51,000  of  the  men  under  his  orders,  the  remainder 
being  raw  levies  or  disaffected.  But  from  unforeseen 
difficulties,  too,  Bulow's  corps  would  have  arrived  at 
Waterloo  three  hours  sooner  than  it  did. 

"If  Marshal  Blucher,"  adds  Napoleon,  "had  encamped 
before  Wavres  on  the  evening  of  the  17th  the 
Prussians  would  not  have  detached  any  troops  to  the 
assistance  of  the  English."  That  is,  Grouchy,  with  his 
30,000  men,  who  were  held  in  check  by  Thielman's 
corps,  would  have  given  Bluchers  90,000  men  full 
employment. 

1  Speaking  of  the  5th  Regiment,  Lord  Londonderry  says — "They 
marched  up  in  line,  firing  with  great  coolness,  and,  when  at  a  distance 
of  only  a  few  paces  from  their  adversaries,  brought  their  bayonets  to 
the  charge  and  rushed  forward.  This  I  think  is  the  first  instance  on 
record  of  a  charge  at  the  bayonet  being  made  upon  cavalry  by  infantry 
in  line.''  The  same  sort  of  thing  happened  at  Minden  in  1759,  when 
six  English  battalions,  mistaking  an  order  to  "  march  on  beat  of  drum," 
marched,  beating  their  drums,  against  10,000  French  horse,  and 
defeated  them. 


MONT.    ST. -JEAN.  42  I 

"  The  position  of  Mont  St.-Jean  was  badly  chosen.  The 
first  condition  of  a  field  of  battle  is  to  have  no  defiles  in 
its  rear.  ...  In  spite  of  the  diversion  of  Bulow  and  his 
30,000  Prussians,  the  English  army  would  have  twice 
retreated  on  the  18th  had  it  been  possible.  Thus,  by  a 
strange  coincidence,  the  bad  choice  of  a  field  of  battle, 
which  rendered  retreat  impossible,  was  the  cause  of 
success." 

It  was  certainly  not  a  greater  fault  on  the  part  of 
Wellington  to  have  fought  with  the  forest  of  Soignies  in  his 
rear,  than  for  Napoleon  to  have  fought  with  a  river  in 
his  rear  as.-at  Essling,  Wagram,  and  Leipsic,  and  again  at 
Waterloo.1 


1  Pierrat  says  that  Napoleon  at  Waterloo  "had  behind  him  at 
Genappe  only  one  outlet  by  a  narrow  passage  over  a  river  swollen  by 
rain,  and  across  which  he  had  thrown  no  bridge  to  serve  in  case  of 
defeat  :  he  took  into  no  account'the  nature  of  the  forest  of  Soignies 
and  the  large  outlets  which  ran  along  it,  which  ran  round  it,  and 
which  ran  through  it  in  the  direction  of  Brussels — issues  indicated  in 
the  map  possessed  by  Napoleon,  who  returned  to  his  head-quarters, 
taxing  the  English  general  with  incompetence  for  daring  to  fight  him 
single  handed,  and  this  with  a  large  forest  in  his  rear"  (p,  273). 

"  In  the  midst  of  the  extreme  confusion  into  which  the  army  was 
thrown,  all  the  fugitives  hurried  towards  Genappe,  which  in  a  moment 
was  encumbered.  The  Emperor  remained  there  for  some  minutes  in 
order  to  try  and  re-establish  a  little  order  ;  but  the  tumult,  increased 
by  the  obscurity  of  the  night,  rendered  all  these  attempts  useless.  Per- 
haps the  best  thing  to  do  was  to  offer  no  resistance  and  to  retreat  as 
quickly  as  possible.  All  the  corps,  all  the  branches  of  the  service, 
were  mixed  up  together  :  foot  soldiers,  cavalry,  artillery,  all  rushed 
along  crushing  each  other  mutually.  Several  waggons  and  caissons 
were  overturned  in  the  streets  and  on  the  bridge.  ...  It  was  there 
that  the  carriage  of  the  Emperor  was  captured.  .  .  .  The  Emperor 
did  not  hear  of  this  loss  [mentioned  in  the  bulletin  from  Laon]  until 
several  days  after  his  arrival  in  Paris." — General  Gourgaud, 
Campagne  de  181 5,  p.  127. 

General  Gneisenau,  in  his  report  of  the  18th  June,  says  : — "  It  was 
at  Genappe  that  the  carriage  of  Napoleon  was  captured  ;  he  had  just 
left  it  to  get  upon  horseback,  and  with  such  precipitation  that  he  forgot 
his  sword  and  his  hat.  .  .  ." 


42  2  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

In  Observation  9  we  "are  told  that  Wellington  should, 
instead  of  delivering  battle  at  Waterloo,  have  fallen  back 
through  the  forest  of  Soignies  in  the  direction  of  the  re- 
inforcements which  had  just  landed  at  Ostend  from 
America,  and  have  there  formed  his  junction  with  the 
Prussians,  Napoleon  would  never  have  ventured  through 
the  forest  to  attack  Blucher  and  Wellington  ;  he  would 
have  been  obliged  to  hasten  back  to  Paris  to  protect  it 
against  the  Russians  and  the  Austrians,  and  then  would 
have  been  the  time  for  the  English  and  Prussian  armies 
to  have  marched  on  the  capital. 

"The  English  general  did  not  know  how  to  make  use  of 
his  numerous  cavalry,"  says  Napoleon,  who  in  his  bulletin 
from  Laon  attributed  the  victory  of  the  English  to  the 
cavalry  of  Vivian  and  Vandeleur,  which  were  let  loose  on 
the  plain  when  all  the  French  cavalry  had  disappeared.1 

1  Many  authorities  might  be  quoted  in  reply  to  the  assertion  respect- 
ing the  handling  of  the  British  cavalry.  We  select  the  following  : — 
"  The  sun  had  set.  There  was  no  reason  to  despair  when  the  two 
brigades  of  the  enemy's  cavalry  which  had  not  been  engaged  pene- 
trated between  La  Haie  Sainte  and  the  corps  of  General  Reille.  They 
might  have  been  checked  by  the  eight  squares  of  the  Guard,  but  seeing 
the  immense  disorder  which  reigned  on  the  right,  they  turned  them. 
This  fresh  force  of  3,000  cavalry  hindered  all  rallying.  The  Emperor 
ordered  his  four  squadrons  de  service  to  charge  them.  These 
squadrons  were  too  few ;  it  would  have  required  a  whole  division  of 
the.cavalry  reserve  of  the  Guard,  but  unfortunatelythat  division  had  been 
engaged  on  the  plateau  without  the  orders  of  the  Emperor.  There 
remained  no  means  of  rallying  the  troops ;  the  four  squadrons  were 
overthrown,  the  confusion  only  augmented." — General  GOURGAUD, 
Campagne  de  181 5,  p.  104. 

"  The  repeated  charges  of  the  Old  Guard  failed  in  presence  of  the 
intrepidity  of  the  Scotch  regiments,  and  each  of  the  French  cavalry 
charges  was  repulsed  by  the  English  cavalry." — Prussian  Official 
Report.     By  order  of  Field  Marshal  Blucher.     General  Gneiseneau. 

"  In  the  first  period  of  the  battle  the  check  of  d'Erlon's  corps  was 
determined  by  that  arm  (cavalry)  and  cost  us  nearly  5,000  men.  In 
the  second  the  repeated  and  heroic  charges  of  the  squadrons  of 
Milhaud  and  Kellermann  and  of  the  Guard,  failed  not  only  on  account 
of  the  resistance  of  the  infantry,  but  also  owing  to  the  well-timed 


FLIGHT    OF    LOUIS    XVIII.  423 

Dwelling  upon  the  glorious  victory,  which  he  would 
have  gained  but  for  the  arrival  of  the  Prussians,  Napoleon 
concludes  thus : — 

"  Imagine  the  grimace  of  the  people  of  London  on 
learning  the  catastrophe  which  had  overtaken  its  army,  and 
that  the  purest  of  their  blood  had  been  poured  out  in 
support  of  the  cause  of  kings  against  that  of  the  people,  of 
privileges  against  equality,  of  oligarques  against  liberals, 
of  the  principles  of  the  holy  alliance  against  those  of  the 
sovereignty  of  the  people." 

Strange  language  in  the  mouth  of  a  despot  who  had 
made  so  many  kings,  oppressed  so  many  people,  and  who 
had  created  a  new  nobility ! 

Napoleon  also  dictated  the  following  account  of  his  last 
campaign  : — 

"  The  Emperor,  on  the  night  he  arrived  in  Paris,  ordered 
General  Excelmans  to  follow  the  military  household  of  the 
king,  to  take  it,  to  disperse  it,  or  to  drive  it  across  the 
frontier;  but  this  military  household  fell  to  pieces  of 
itself.  .  .  . 

"  Some  days  afterwards  Comte  Reille  marched  into 
Flanders  with  12,000  men  to  reinforce  Comte  d'Erlon, 
who  was  in  garrison  on  the  frontier.  The  Emperor  then 
deliberated  if,  with  35,000  or  36,000  men,  he  should  com- 
mence hostilities  on  the  1st  April  by  marching  on  Brussels, 
and  rallying  the  Belgian  army  to  his  standards.  The 
English  and  Prussian  armies  were  weak,  disseminated, 
without  orders,  without  chiefs,  and  without  plans ;  a 
number  of  officers  were  away  on  leave;  the  Duke  of 
Wellington  was  at  Vienna,  and  Marshal  Blucher  was  at 
Berlin.     The  French  army  might  have  been  at  Brussels  on 

and  skilful  employment  Wellington  made  of  his  cavalry.  Lastly,  in 
the  final  catastrophe,  this  same  cavalry  played  a  powerful  part,  espe- 
cially the  two  brigades,  2,500  strong,  held  in  reserve  until  then."— 
Charras,  vol.  ii.  p.  161. 


424     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

the  2nd  April.  But,  first,  hopes  of  peace  were  entertained; 
France  desired  it,  and  would  have  greatly  blamed  any 
premature  offensive  movement ;  second,  in  order  to  assemble 
from  35,000  to  36,000  men  it  would  have  been  necessary 
to  leave  twenty-three  strong  places,  from  Calais  to  Philippe- 
ville,  to  their  own  resources  ;  this  might  have  been  done 
had  public  feeling  been  as  good  as  in  Alsace,  the  Vosges, 
the  Ardennes,  or  the  Alps.  .  .  third,  the  Duke  of  Angou- 
leme  was  marching  on  Lyons,  the  Marseillais  on  Grenoble. 
The  first  news  of  the  re-opening  of  hostilities  would 
have  encouraged  the  discontented ;  it  was  essential 
above  all  to  drive  the  Bourbons  from  the  territory  of 
the  Empire. 

"  During  May,  when  France  was  pacified,  when  there 
remained  no  hope  of  preserving  peace  abroad,  and  when 
the  allied  armies  were  marching  on  France,  the  Emperor 
reflected  upon  the  plan  of  campaign  which  he  should 
adopt  ;    several  suggested  themselves  to  him. 

"The  first  was  to  remain  on  the  defensive,  allowing  the 
allies  to  take  upon  themselves  the  odium  of  an  aggression, 
to  get  in  among  our  strong  places,  to  penetrate  as  far  as 
Paris  and  Lyons,  and  there  to  begin  on  those  two  bases  a 
sharp  and  decisive  war.  This  plan  had  many  advantages : 
first,  the  allies,  not  being  able  to  take  the  field  before  the 
15th  July,  would  be  unable  to  reach  Paris  and  Lyons 
before  the  15th  August." 

Napoleon  set  down  the  strength  of  the  allied  armies  at 
600,000  men,  but,  having  to  mask  forty-two  strong  places, 
their  numbers  would  be  reduced  to  350,000  before  they 
reached  Paris.  With  240,000  regulars,  and  with  Paris 
fortified  and  guarded  by  116,000  National  Guards,  the 
Emperor  calculated  that  manoeuvring  between  the  Seine 
and  the  Marne,  under  the  protection  of  a  vast  entrenched 
camp,  he  would  be  able  to  conquer  400,000  men  of  the 
coalition.  Suchet,  too,  would  be  able  to  hold  Lyons  with 
60,000  regulars  and  25,000  National  Guards. 


RELATIVE  VALUE  OF  SOLDIERS.       425 

The  second  plan  was  to  attack  the  allies  before  they 
were  ready.     On  this  subject  the  Emperor  wrote : — 

"  1st.  If  the  Anglo-Dutch  and  Saxo-Prussian  armies 
were  beaten,  Belgium  would  rise,  and  her  troops  would 
recruit  the  French  army  ;  2nd,  the  defeat  of  the  English 
army  would  cause  the  fall  of  the  British  Cabinet,  which 
would  be  replaced  by  the  friends  of  peace,  liberty,  and  the 
independence  of  nations  ; 1  this  circumstance  alone  would 
terminate  the  war." 

But  the  question  was  whether  125,000  Frenchmen  could 
beat  241,000  allies?  Napoleon  said  that  the  strength  of 
the  two  armies  was  not  represented  by  the  above  figures, 
because  if  an  Englishman  and  a  Frenchman  were  of  equal 
value,  a  Frenchman  was  worth  two  Dutchmen,  two  Prus- 
sians, or  two  men  of  the  Confederation.  Then  the  allies 
were  commanded  by  different  generals,  and  had  different 
interests.  According  to  the  Emperor  the  insurrection  in 
La  Vendee,  which  weakened  his  army  of  Flanders  by 
20,000  men,  obliged  him  to  adopt  a  third  plan,  and  to 
attack  the  English  and  Prussian  armies,  after  separating 
them  on  the  15th  June. 

On  the  subject  of  this  third  plan  the  most  celebrated 
and  impartial  of  military  critics  has  said — ■ 

"  In  order  to  appreciate  the  merit  of  Napoleon's  plan 
it  must  be  remembered  that  he  was  opposed,  not  to  one 
army  under  one  chief,  but  to  two  armies  independent  of 
each  other,  having  two  bases  of  operations  in  entirely 
different  directions  ;  that  of  the  English  being  Ostend  or 
Antwerp,  and  that  of  the  Prussians  Cologne."  (Jomini, 
Campaign  of  1813,  p.    146.) 

We  shall  dwell  no  more  upon  what  Napoleon  wrote  at 
St.  Helena  in  order  to  throw  dust  in  the  eyes  of  posterity.2 

1  All  that  England  was  fighting  for. 

2  Vide  the  Memorial  of  St.  Helena,  by  Las  Cases,  and  the  equally 
inspired  writings  of  Generals  Gourgaud,  Montholon,  Bertrand,  and 
O'Meara. 


426  THE    CORRESPONDENCE    OF    NAPOLEON. 

Lord  Holland  mentions  that  one  day  "  Le  Mercier  read 
Napoleon  a  play  on  the  subject  of  Peter  the  Cruel.  At 
the  moment  of  his  fall  that  discomfited  tyrant  was  made 
to  say,  '  De  tout  mon  vaste  empire,  il  me  reste  un  rocher! 
Napoleon  observed  :  '  It  will  never  do.  You  mean  to 
rouse  us  to  indignation,  and  you  put  into  his  mouth  a 
pathetic  remark  on  the  contrast  between  his  former  eleva- 
tion and  present  ruin,  that  cannot  fail  to  excite  the 
compassion  of  every  well-regulated   mind.' " 

And  many  years  after,  indulging  in  this  excellent  bit 
of  criticism,  he  himself,  in  a  similar  position  and  under 
similar  circumstances,  excited  almost  universal  compas- 
sion, and  the  big  wars  which  he  had  waged  made 
ambition  virtue. 

Little  was  heard  of  Napoleon  in  his  captivity  with 
the  exception  of  his  constant  squabbles  with  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe.  In  1821  he  died,  but  before  dying  he  made  a 
holograph  will  at  Longwood,  dated  2 1st  April,  1821,  in 
which  he  said  : — 

"  I  die  in  the  Roman  Apostolical  religion,  in  the  bosom 
of  which  I  was  born  more  than  fifty  years  ago. 

"  I  desire  that  my  ashes  may  repose  on  the  banks  of  the 
Seine,  in  the  midst  of  the  French  people  I  loved  so  well. 

"  I  have  always  had  reason  to  be  pleased  with  my 
dearest  wife,  Marie  Louise.  I  preserve  the  most  tender 
affection  for  her  to  the  last  moment.  I  implore  her  to 
watch  over  my  son  in  order  to  preserve  him  from  the 
snares  which  may  environ  his  infancy. 

"  I  recommend  my  son  never  to  forget  that  he  was  born 
a  French  prince,  and  never  to  allow  himself  to  become  an 
instrument  in  the  hands  of  the  triumvirs  who  oppress  the 
nations  of  Europe  ;  he  must  never  fight  against  France,  or 
do  her  any  harm.  He  should  adopt  my  motto,  Everything 
for  the  French  people  ! l 

1  While  at  Vienna  the  Emperor's  son,  then  Duke  of  Reichstadt, 
took  Marmont  (called  a  traitor  in  his  father's  will)  as  his  military  in- 
structor.   "The  Duke,"  says  the  Marshal  in  his  Memoirs,  "spoke 


NAPOLEONS    WILL.  427 

"  I  die  prematurely,  assassinated  by  the  English  oligarchy 
and  its  hired  assassin.  The  English  nation  will  not  be  slow 
in  avenging  me. 

"  The  unfortunate  result  of  the  two  invasions  of  France, 
when  she  had  still  so  many  resources  left,  is  to  be  attributed 
to  the  treason  of  Marmont,  Augereau,  Talleyrand,  and 
Lafayette. 

"  I  forgive  them,  and  may  French  posterity  also  pardon 
them. 

"I  thank  my  good  and  most  excellent  mother,  the 
cardinal  (Fesch),  my  brothers  Joseph,  Lucien,  Jerome,  also 
my  sisters  Pauline  (Borghese),  Caroline  (Murat),  Julie 
(Joseph's  wife),  Catherine  (Jerome's  wife),  and  Hortense 
and  Eugene  for  the  interest  they  continue  to  feel  for  me. 
I  pardon  Louis  for  the  libel  he  published  in  1820:  it  is 
full  of  false  assertions  and  falsified  documents."  {Documents 
Historiques  sur  la  Hollande.)  1  , 

Napoleon  went  on  to  justify  the  execution  of  the  Due 
d'Enghien,  forgetting  that  he  had  often  denied  that  he  had 


with  great  ardour  and  passion  of  his  desire  to  fight.  '  France  and 
■  Austria,'  he  said,  'might  one  day  be  allies,  and  .fight  side  by  side. 
It  was  not  against  France  that  he  could  fight,  for  his  father  had  for- 
bidden that ;  it  would  also  be  contrary  to  his  feelings  and  to  good 
policy.  .  .  .'  At  other  times,  reflecting  in  despair,  that  war  could  take 
place  only  between  France  and  the  other  powers,  he  would  make  such 
..remarks  as  these — 'But  would  not  glory,  acquired  even  at  their 
-expense/  raise  me  in  the  eyes  of  the  French ;  and  if  I  were  called 
upon  one  day  to  govern  them,  would  I  not  be  all  the  more  worthy  to 
do  so  if  I  had  proved  my  capacity  by  my  actions  ? '  However,  he 
always  returned  to  the  idea  that  French  blood  should  be  sacred  to  him, 
and  that  he  ought  to  obey  the  strict  injunctions  of  his  father." 

1  Apropos  to  this  incident,  Lucien  Bonaparte  says  in  his  Memoirs  : 
— "Publicly  accused  and  even  insulted  by  the  Emperor,  Louis  thought 
right  to  justify  his  conduct  in  a  work  which  greatly  offended  Napoleon, 
although  he  said  nothing,  and  probably  because  he  said  nothing,  but 
the  truth.  .  .  .  '  I  pardon  my  brother  Louis  the  libel  he  wrote  against 
me' — according  to  me  really  meant — 'I  do  not  pardon  my  brother, 
and  I  invite  all  my  friends  to  share  my  resentment.'  " 


428     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

ordered   that   execution.      Then    came   various   bequests, 
such  as — 

"  The  antique  cameo,  which  Pius  VI.  gave  me  at 
Tolentino,  to  Lady  Holland. 

"  To  Marchand,  my  first  valet-de-chambre,  15,000/.  The 
services  he  has  rendered  me  are  those  of  a  friend ;  it  is  my 
wish  that  he  should  marry  the  widow,  the  sister,  or  the 
daughter  of  an  officer  of  my  Old  Guard. 

"  To  Comte  Lavalette,  4,000/.* 

"To  Larry,  surgeon-in-chief,  4,000/.  He  is  the  most 
virtuous  man  I  have  known." 

The  same  sum  was  bequeathed  to  several  old  comrades 
like  Cambronne.to  the  children  of  the  brave  Labedoyere,&c. 
In  all,  the  bequests  in  money  were  to  amount  to  240,000/. 

The  will  sets  forth  that  the  private  property  of  the 
Emperor,  derived  from  savings  from  the  civil  list  for 
twelve  years,  amounted  to  over  8,000,000/.  The  smallest 
objects — nearly  all  of  which  were  to  go  to  his  son — were 
duly  mentioned,  such  as  two  flannel  waistcoats,  six  pairs  of 
gaiters,  six  shirts,  two  pillow-cases,  one  pair  of  braces,  four 
pairs  of  drawers,  one  pair  of  slippers,  "  my  night  tables 
which  I  used  in-  France,  and  my  silver-gilt  bidet,"  and  so 
on.  Marchand  was  to  preserve  his  hair,  and  to  have 
a  bracelet  and  a  little  gold  clasp  made  of  it  for  Marie 
Louise,  who  was  also  to  have  his  lace,  &c.  Special 
provision  was  to  be  made  for  the  soldiers  wounded  at 
Waterloo,  and  a  pension  was  given  to  sub-officer  Can- 
tillon,  "tried  on  the  charge  of  having  endeavoured  to 
assassinate  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  of  which  he  was 
pronounced  innocent.  Cantillon  had  as  much  right  to 
assassinate  that  oligarchist  as  the  latter  had  to  send  me 
to  perish  upon  the  rock  of  St.  Helena."     The  Duke  of 

1  Fleury  de  Chaboulon  tells  us  that  Lavalette  said  to  Napoleon  as 
Phocion  said  to  Antipater,  "  I  cannot  be  your  friend  and  your 
flatterer;"  that  he  remained  the  Emperor's  friend,  and  that  his 
advice  was  often  followed. 


CHATEAUBRIAND  S    ELEGY.  429 

Wellington  was  also  accused  of  having  violated  the  capitu- 
lation of  Paris,  of  being  responsible  for  the  blood  of  Ney 
and  Labedoyere,  and  of  the  pillage  of  the  museums ! 

The  museums  had  to  give  up  the  treasures,  of  which  other 
countries  had  been  plundered,  to  their  rightful  owners.  If 
the  robber  had  to  render  the  prey  we  believe  that  nothing 
had  to  be  restored  to  England,  and  therefore  the  conduct 
of  the  Duke  of  Wellington  in  this  matter  was  disinterested. 
As  for  Cantillon — :who  could  not  have  been  innocent,  for 
in  that  case  he  would  not  have  received  a  bequest — his 
pension  was  duly  paid  until,  under  the  Second  Empire,  the 
matter  was  brought  before  the  House  of  Commons.  Upon 
this  the  French  Government  paid  off  Cantillon,  and  washed 
its  hands  of  him.  The  legacy  contrasted  strangely  with 
the  conduct  of  Louis  XVIII. ,  who,  receiving  a  number  of 
English  officers  after  Waterloo,  could  not  congratulate 
them  on  their  victory,  but  said  that  he  might  thank  them 
for  their  humanity  afterwards. 

In  the  Longwood  will  Louis  was  merely  pardoned,  and 
yet  the  purple  was  destined  to  descend  to  his  third  son— 
the  younger  brother  of  that  "  little  Napoleon,"  whose 
name  appears  several  times  in  The  Correspondence  previous 
to  1806. 

Shortly  after  writing  his  will  Napoleon  expired,  and  it 
was  in  this  poetical,  if  overstrained,  language  that  Chateau- 
briand noticed  an  event  which  created  a  deep  impression 
on  the  whole  civilized  world : — 

"The  solitude  of  Napoleon  in  his  exile  and  his  tomb 
has  thrown  another  kind  of  spell  over  a  brilliant  memory. 
Alexander  did  not  die  in  sight  of  Greece  ;  he  disappeared 
amid  the  pomp  of  distant  Babylon.  Bonaparte  did  not 
close  his  eyes  in  the  presence  of  France ;  he  passed  away 
in  the  gorgeous  horizon  of  the  torrid  zone.  The  man  who 
exhibited  such  powerful  reality  vanished  like  a  dream  :  his 
life,  which  belonged  to  history,  co-operated  in  the  poetry  of 
his  death.     He  now  sleeps  for  ever,  like  a  hermit  or  a 


430     THE  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  NAPOLEON. 

pariah,  beneath  a  willow,  in  a  narrow  valley,  surrounded 
by  steep  rocks,  at  the  extremity  of  a  lonely  path.  The 
depth  of  the  silence  which  weighs  upon  him  can  be 
compared  only  to  the  vastness  of  that  tumult  which  once 
surrounded  him.  Nations  are  absent ;  their  throngs  have 
retired.  The  bird  of  the  tropics,  harnessed  to  the  car  of 
the  sun,  as  Buffon  magnificently  expresses  it,  speeding  his 
flight  downwards  from  the  planet  of  light,  rests  alone,  for 
a  moment,  over  ashes  the  weight  of  which  shook  the 
equilibrium  of  the  world. 

"  Bonaparte  crossed  the  ocean  to  repair  to  his  final 
place  of  exile,  regardless  of  the  beautiful  sky  which 
delighted  Columbus,  Vasco  da  Gama,  and  Camoens. 
Stretched  upon  the  ship's  stern  he  did  not  perceive  that 
unknown  constellations  glittered  over  his  head.  His  pow- 
erful glance  for  the  first  time  encountered  their  rays. 
What  to  him  were  stars  which  he  had  never  seen  from 
his  bivouacs  and  which  had  never  shone  over  his  empire  ? 
And  yet  each  one  of  them  fulfilled  its  destiny;  one  half 
of  the  firmament  shed  its  light  over  his  cradle,  and  the 
other  half  illuminated  his  tomb." 

We  have  now  come  to  the  conclusion  of  our  work, 
having  selected  for  translation  out  of.  the  mass  of  cor- 
respondence left  behind  by  Napoleon  those  letters  which 
appear  of  interest  to-day  as  throwing  some  light  on  his 
character  or  on  the  events  of  his  epoch.  After  the  death 
of  Napoleon  Talleyrand  said  of  him  : — 

"  It  is  incalculable  what  he  produced  ;  more  than  any 
other  man,  yes,  more  than  any  other  four  men,  I  ever 
knew.  His  genius  was  inconceivable.  Nothing  could 
equal  his  energy,  his  imagination,  his  talent,  his  capacity 
for  work,  and  his  facility  for  producing.  He  had  also 
sagacity.  He  was  not  so  remarkable  as  regards  judgment, 
but  when  he  would  give  himself  time  he  knew  how  to 
profit  from  the  judgment  of  others." 


NAPOLEON  S    WORK.  43  I 

The  published  correspondence  of  Napoleon,  talcen  alone, 
testifies  to  the  magnitude  of  the  work  accomplished  by  the 
extraordinary  man  who  for  twenty  years  filled  the  world 
with  the  noise  of  his  exploits.  The  first  letter  printed  in 
The  Correspondence,  addressed  by  Buonaparte,  Commandant 
of  Artillery  in  the  Army  of  the  South,  to  the  Committee 
of  Public  Safety,  is  dated  4th  Brumaire,  year  II.,  or  25th 
October,  1793,  and  the  last  letter  is  that  which  was  written 
on  board  the  Bellerophon,  on  the  4th  August,  181 5.  And 
between  October,  1793,  and  August,  181 5,  Napoleon  found 
time,  in  spite  of  his  incessant  campaigning,  his  daily  re- 
ceptions, his  verbal  instructions,  his  study  of  arduous 
questions,  &c,  to  write  or  dictate  even  more  than  the 
22,066  letters,  despatches,  orders  of  the  day,  &c.  &c,  con- 
tained in  The  Correspondence,  which  forms  no  less  than 
twenty-eight  volumes  in  octavo  of  closely  printed  matter. 


INDEX 


VOL.    III. 


!■•    V 


INDEX. 


Abercromby,  Sir  Ralph,  his  mc- 
cess  in  Holland,  i.  241  ;  at  Alexan- 
dria, i.  214 ;  in  Egypt,  i.  265  ; 
Napoleon  on,  i.  265 

Abrial,  citizen,  minister  of  justice, 
Napoleon's  letters  to,  i.  368,  399 

Aboukir,  battle  of,  i.  242,  259,  334 

Academy,  French,  dissolution  of,  i. 
316,  317  n 

Aix,  Josephine  at,  i.  206  ;  Napoleon  at, 
i.  269 

Aix  la  Chapelle,  Napoleon  at,  ii.  91,  92 

Ajaccio,  disturbance  in,  i.  20,  25,  26 

Albuera,  battle  of,  iii.  105 

Aldini,  Count,  ii.  480 

Alessandria,  cathedral  of,  destroyed, 
i.  406 

Alexandria,  Napoleon's  orders  from, 
i.  259,  262,  263  ;  capture  of,  i.  214 ; 
English  blockade,  i.  343  ;  occupy,  ii.  6 

Algiers,  Dey  of,  Napoleon's  letters  to, 
i.  398,  399  ;  threatened  by  Napoleon, 

i-  397 
Algesiras,  battle  of,  i.  340 
Alison's    History   of  Europe,    on   the 

retreat  from  Moscow,  iii.  182 
Allocution  to  the  old  guard,  1814,  iii. 

344 
Almeida,  fall  of,  iii.  101,  105 
Alquier,  M.,  Napoleon's  instructions  to, 

at  Rome,  ii.  363 
Alvinzi,    General,    at    Pavia,    i.    118; 

attacks  the  French,  i.   129  ;  defeated 

at  Rivoli,  i.  130 
Amed   Pasha,  Napoleon's  letter  to,  1. 

235 
Amiens,  treaty  of,  i.  366,  380,  382,  385, 
388 ;  proclaimed  in  London,  1.  382  ; 


rapture   of,    ii.   1,   2,   6 ;    causes   of 
rupture  of,  ii.  12,  13  ;  Napoleon  at, 
ii.  19 
Ancona  occupied  by  the  French,  i.  37S  ; 

ii.  201  ;  Napoleon  at,  i.  137 
Andreossi,  M.  de,  ambassador  in  Ion- 
don,  i.  383  ;  ambassador  in  Austria, 
ii.  300 
Annual  Register,  quotations  from,   on 
treaty   of   Amiens,   i.   366 ;    on  the 
arrest  of  English  in  France,  ii.  2 ;  on 
English  naval  victory,  1804,  ii.  101 ; 
Lord   Lake's  march  against   Daolat 
Rao,  ii.  130;  on  Captain  Wright,  ii. 
163  ;  on   the  conscription,  1807,   ii. 
300 
Anspach,    Napoleon  violates  the   neu- 
trality of,  ii.  no,  154,  161 
Aosta,  Duke  of,  accused  of  aiding  the 

English,  i.  353  n 
Aranjuez,  revolution  at,  ii.  354 
Archives,  foreign,  sent  to  Paris,  iii.  55 
Areola,  battle  of,  i.  119 
Arrighi,    General,    Due     de    Padone, 

Napoleon's  letter  to,  iii.  276 
Arrighi,   Canon,   pastoral  by,  greeting 

Napoleon  at  Elba,  iii.  349,  350  n 
Aspern,  battle  of,  ii.  429,  454,  455 
Asturias,  Ferdinand,  Prince  of,  Napo- 
leon's letters  to,  ii.    380,   393 :  con- 
spires   with    Napoleon    against    his 
father  the  King  of  Spain,  ii.  350 — 
353 ;    his    projected   marriage   with 
Napoleon's  niece,  ii.  352,  353,  369 ; 
Napoleon's  perfidy  to,  ii.  375,   381, 
385  ;  Napoleon's  orders  for  his  arrest, 
ii.  382  ;  receives  freedom  on  conclud- 
ing a  treaty  with  Napoleon,  iii.  288  ; 
his   letters   to    Napoleon,    iii.   287  ; 
after  battle  of  Tudela,  ii.  421  n 
F    F    2 


!36 


INDEX. 


Aubry,  General,  iii.  384 

Auerstadt,  battle  of,  ii.  198 

Augereau,  Marshal,  Napoleon's  letters 
to,  i.  103;  ii.  37,  153;  iii.  32I; 
JNapoleons  instructions  to,  ii.  205; 
coup  d'etathy,  i.  125,  172  ;  at  Eylauj 
ii.  298  ;  his  inactivity  when  in  com- 
mand of  the  army  of  Lyons,  iii.  321, 
325.  33°;  placed  under  General 
Moreau's  orders,  iii.  321  ;  deserts 
Napoleon,  iii.  361 

Aulic  Council,  i.  129,  130,  195,  308. 

Anne,  M.,  Napoleon's  letter  to,  iii. 
35°   . 

Austerlitz,  battle  of,  ii.  109,  170,  181 — 
183,  185  ;  provision  made  for  rela- 
tions of  those  who  fell  at,  ii.  186 

Austria,  Emperor  of,  Napoleon's  letters 
to,  i.  -279 ;  ii.  95,  103,  169,  190,  464, 
475  ;  "i-  2°>  29,  31,  51,  53,  64,  93, 
155,  169,  172,  196,  216,  235,  241, 
245,  246,  255,  322—324,  369;  his 
letter  to  Princess  Augusta,  Eugene's 
wife,  iii.  318;  his  family  recognised 
as  imperial  hereditary,  ii.  91,  95 ; 
Napoleon's  mistaken  estimate  of  his 
popularity,  ii.  169M 

Austria,  Archduke  Charles  of,  Napo- 
leon's letters  to,  i.  146;  iii.  31;  de- 
feated at  Tagliamento,  i.  143 ;  un- 
successful against  Napoleon,  i.  145, 
169;  defeats  Jourdan,  i.  241  ;  to  his 
troops  after  Austerlitz,  ii.  184 ;  his 
want  of  vigour  in  1 809,  ii.  429,  430 

Austria,   Archduke  Maximilian  of,  ii. 

451 
Austria,  troops  defeated  by  Napoleon, 
1796,  i.  69,  91,  125  ;  receives  Venice, 
&c,  i.  126;  Napoleon  enters  terri- 
tory of,  i.  144  ;  wars  with  Erance, 
i.  277,  285,  311;  in  1805,  ii.  109, 
149,  151;  in  1809,  ii.  447,  452, 
454,  469 ;  in  1813,  iii.  256,  261  ; 
manifesto  on  the  war  in  1805,  ii. 
152;  invades  Bavaria,  ii.  152;  en- 
deavours to  mediate  in  1807,  ii.  287  ; 
position  of,  in  1813,  iii.  201,  204 ; 
proposes  a  congress  at  Prague,  iii. 
238 ;  j>ins  the  allies  in,  1813,  iii.  256, 
261 ;  proposed  matrimonial  alliance 
with  Spain,  iii.  68 ;  objections  to  the 
marriage  of  the  Arch-Duchess  Marie 
Louise  with  Napoleon,  iii.  4  ;  incon- 
sistency of,  iii.  8  ;  misery  of  the 
Austrian  army  in  1805,  ii.  161 ; 
Napoleon's  address  to  the  Austrian 
generals  after  the  capitulation  of  Ulm, 
ii.  159 


Autun,  Napoleon  at,  i.  4  ;  Talleyrand, 

Bishop  of;  see  Talleyrand 
Avignon,  attack  on,  i.  30 
d'Azara,   M.,  Spanish  minister,  i.  95; 

Napoleon's  violent  message  to,  i.  374 
Avesnes,  Napoleon  at,  iii.  385,  386  n 

B. 

Badajoz,  treaty  of,  i.  334,  357,  358, 
373  ;  invested  by  the  English,  iii. 
153 

Baden,  Princess  Stephanie,  Napoleon's 
letter  to,  ii.  244 ;  Napoleon's  com- 
plaint of,  iii.  119,  120 

Bale,  treaty  of,  i.  299  ;  ii.  18 

Barbe  Marbois,  M.,  minister  of  the 
treasury,  Napoleon's  letters  to,  i. 
390;  ii.  133,  206,  212  ;  disgrace  of,  ii. 
190 

Barbier,  M.,  librarian  to  the  Emperor, 
Napoleon's  letters  to,  ii.  400,  452  ; 
iii.  81,  150,  167 

Bard,  taken  by  Napoleon,  i.  305 

Bar-sur-Aube,  battle  of,  iii.  291,  331, 

333 
Barras,    citizen    director,    assists    Na- 
poleon, i.   57,  63  ;  fears  Napoleon's 
popularity,  while  complimenting  him, 

i-  195 
Barrere,  citizen,  in  Napoleon's  service, 

ii.  92 
Baste,   Admiral,    ordered   to   Swedish 

Pomerania,  iii.  221 
Bass  no,  battle  of,  i.  108 
Bastia  bombarded  by  Nelson,  i.  42 
Batavia,  republic  of,  Napoleon's  per- 
fidious treatment  of  the,  i.  367 ;  it 
receives  a  new  constitution,  i.  377  ; 
establishes  his  authority  in  the,  i.  384 
Baudus,  Colonel,  quotations  from  his- . 

toryby,  iii.  334  «,  398  n,  $9gn 
Bautzen,  battle  of,  iii.  202,  246 
Bavaria,  king  of,  Napoleon's  letters  to, 
ii.  154,  217  ;  iii.  228  ;  endeavours  to 
persuade   Prince   Eugene    to  desert 
Napoleon,  iii.  283 
Bavaria,  Princess  Augusta  of,  Napo- 
leon's letters  to,  ii.  210,  .252 ;  her 
marriage  to  Eugene  de  Beauharnais, 
ii.    192,    193 ;    her   indignation    at 
Napoleon's  orders   that   she  should 
go  to  Paris,  1814,  iii.  319  ;  letter  from 
the  Emperor  of  Austria  to,  iii.  318 
Baylen,  capitulation  of,  ii.  357,  405 
Bayonne,  Napoleon  at,  ii.  354,  380 
Beauchamp,  citizen,  sent  to  Constanti- 
nople, i.  237 


INDEX. 


437 


Beaufrauchet,  Madame,  pension  for,  i. 

Beauharnais,  Alexander  de,  marriage 
of,  i.  4  ;  death  of,  i.  169 

Beauharnais,  M.  de,  ambassador  in 
Spain,  ii.  351,  352 

Beauharnais,  Eugene  de,  Viceroy  of 
Italy,  Napoleon's  letters  and  notes 
to,  i.  205  ;  ii.  134,  136,  138,  152,  193, 
204,  206,  209,  226,  228,  231,  242, 
25°.  3°4.  305,  3!2,  325>  326,  33s, 
343,  367»  368.  371,  373,  394,  400, 
409,  425,  435,  443,  450,  481  ;  iii. 
64,  66,  81,  124,  156,  194,  214,  215, 
220,  221 — 223,  227—229,  231,  232, 
258,  261,  282,  283,  285,  299,  316; 
his  first  appointment,  i.  169  ;  made 
Viceroy  of  Italy,  ii.  121,  134;  his 
marriage,  ii.  192,  193  ;  birth  of  his 
daughter  Josephine,  ii.  304 ;  ap- 
pointed to  command  of  the  Grand 
army,  iii.  214 ;  evacuates  Berlin,  iii. 
227  ;  urged  by  his  father-in-law  to 
desert  Napoleon,  iii.  283  ;  corre- 
spondence with  Josephine  about 
his  fidelity  to  Napoleon,  'iii.  308, 
3°9 

Beaulieu,  General,  defeated  by  the 
French,  i.  69,  77,  81  ;  in  Venice,  i. 

93.  94 
Beausset,  M.  de,  iii.  354,  355 
Belfort  in  1 813  and  1870,  iii.  295 
Bellerophon,   Napoleon  on   board  the, 

iii.  416 
Belliard,  General,  severely  criticised  by 
Napoleon,     i.     266 ;     distinguished 
afterwards,  i.  267 ;  in  Spain,  ii.  435, 
436  ;  Napoleon  refuses  to  accept  his 
resignation,   iii.    107 ;    saved   Napo- 
leon's life,   iii.    107  n 
Beneventum,    seized   by   Napoleon,   i. 
37°.    395  >   given  to  Talleyrand,   ii. 
235.  237 
Bensingen,  General,   at  Eylau,  ii.  294, 

3'4>  3'6 

Beresina,  passage  of,  iii.  186,  187 

Bergamo,  occupation  of,  i.  126 

Bergen,  battle  of,  i.  242 

Berlin,  Napoleon  enters,  ii.  267 ;  the 
decree  of,  ii.  198,  272  ;  evacuated  by 
the  French,  iii.  227  ;  the  Russians 
enter,  iii.  227 

Bernier,  Abbe  de,  i.  285,  291,  394 ;  ii. 

17 
Bernadotte,  General,  Napoleo"n's  letters 
to,   i.    159;    ii.    314,   326,  446;  iii. 
99  ;  Napoleon's  orders  to  the  divi- 
sion under,  i.  15 1,  152;  his  marriage, 


i.  52;    Napoleon's  praise  of,  i.  177, 
appointed     French     ambassador     at 

-  Vienna,  i  206  ;  a  staunch  Repbuli- 
can,  i.  271  ;  minister  of  war,  i.  319 ; 
offered  post  of  captain-geenral  of 
Guadaloupe,  i.  383,  384 ;  captures 
Munich,  ii.  156;  receives  Porto 
Corvo,  ii.  235  ;  Napoleon  complain1! 
of  him,  ii.  474  ;  elected  Prince  Royal 
of  Sweden,  iii.  10,  59 

Berthier,   Alexander,   Prince    of  Neu- 
chatel,  Napoleon's  letters  and  notes 
to,  i.   121,   127,  158,   166,    169,  19? 
201,     210,     219,      230,     233,    234, 
236,  243,   253,   299,   313,   348,  352 
372,    390;   ii.    9,    34,    39,   56,    58 
66,  96,  137,  200,  209,  214,  223,  225 
227,  249,    253,   254,   256,   283,  288 
333>  348.  352,  447  ;  "'•  40,  41.  60. 
°3.  68,  75,  83,   102,   104,   107,  119, 
130,  139,   140,   147,   152—155,  157 
159,  162,   163,   165,  180 — 182,    184. 
186,  192,  197, 200,  208,  210,  236,  266. 
270,  271,  273,  299—301,  311,  341 
343,  344  ;  letters  from  Joseph  Buona- 
parte to,  iii.  103,  104,  334  ;  appointed 
chief  of   the  staff   in    Italy,   i.   67  ; 
enters  Rome,   i.   197  ;   his    letter  to 
Napoleon,  i.    199  ;  ordered  to  Alex- 
andria, i.  243  ;  his  love  for  Madame 
Visconti,  i.  244  ;  ii.   223  ;  his  mar- 
riage, iii.  224  ;  sent  to  Spain,  i.  320  ; 
directed  to  form  light  companies,  ii. 
43  ;  his  career,  ii.  223,  224  ;  his  note 
to  Joseph,    ii.  299 ;  Prince  of  Neu- 
chatel,  ii.  332  ;  sent  as  extraordinary 
ambassador   to    arrange  Napoleon's 
marriage  with  Marie- Louise,  iii.  22 ; 
his    reception    by   the    Emperor    of 
Austria,  iii.  30,  31  «  ;  signs  letter  to 
General  Kutusoff,  iii.  179 

Berthier,  Cesar,  embezzlements  by,  ii. 
245  ;  in  the  Ionian  Islands,  ii.  289 

Berthollet,  M.,  ii.  368 

Bertrand,  General,  Napoleon's  letters 
to,  iii.  272,  351,  353—355  ;  sent  to 
Prussia,  ii.  292 ; .  his  account  of 
Eylau,  ii.  298 ;  on  the  Danube,  ii. 
459  ;  grand  marshal  at  Elba,  iii.  350 

—353.  36S  . 

Berri,  Due  de,  marriage  of,  ii.  328 
Bessieres,  Marshal,   Napoleon's  letters 

to,  ii.  374,  382  ;  iii.  122  ;  his  success 

in  Spain,  ii.   401 ;  death  of,  iii.  239, 

240 
Beurnonville,  Marquis  de,   Napoleon's 

instructions  to,   ii.   21,   42  ;   famous 

bulletin  by  the,  ii.  38 


438 


INDEX. 


Bignon,  Baron,  to  organise  secret  police, 

l8n,  iii.  131 
Bigot,  Comte,  minister  of  public  wor- 

ship,   Napoleon's   letters  to,  iii.   12, 
J4>  74.  83,  90,   106,   125,   152,  215, 

231.    257  ;    see   Minister    of    Public 

Worship,  letters  to 
Billington,  Madame  ;  .r^  Grassini,  i.  313 
Bishops,   Napoleon's   circulars   to  the, 

"•  3H;    "■•    I74i    his  questions  to 

them,  iii.  13;  their  replies,  iii.    14; 

requires   the    Pope   to    confirm    his 

nomination  of  French,  i.  389,  393, 

400 
Blucher,  Marshal,  in   France,  iii.  291, 

301,  3H-  327,  332,  338;  his  ill-health, 

iii.  340  ;  his  vigilance,  1815,  iii.  385?*, 

at  Waterloo,  iii.  405,  423  n 
Bologna,  Napoleon  at,  i.  97,  98,  134 
Bolton,  Lord,  on  the  peace  of  Amiens, 

i-383 
Bonnechose,   M.,   quotation   from;   see 

Protestant 
Borghese,  Prince,  Napoleon's  letters  to, 

ii.   475;  iii.  81,   158;  his  letter  to 

Napoleon,  iii.  14 n 
Borghese.    Princess;    see    Buonaparte, 

Pauline 
Borodino,  battle  at,  iii.  172,  173 
Boulogne,     Napoleon   at,    ii.    36 — 38, 

139 — 147 ;     disaster     to     Boulogne 

flotilla,  iii.  1 22  n 
Bourgogna,  Baron  Paul  de,  account  of 

Napoleon's    journey  to    Paris,  after 

leaving  the  army  on  its  retreat  from 

Moscow,  iii.  192 n — 194» 
Bourrienne,  M. ,  iii.  121 
Brescia,  Napoleon  at,  I,  89,  90,  104 
Breslau,  capitulation  of,  ii.  284 
Bressieux,   Madame,  Napoleon's  letter 

to,  ii.  89 
Brienne,    Napoleon    enters,    i.    2,    4 ; 

masters  at,   i.   5  ;  Napoleon's  letters 

from,  i.  5 — 7>  9  >  comrades  at,  i.  6  ; 

examinations  at,  i.  6 ;  Joseph  enters, 

i-  9 

Brienne,  battle  of,  iii.  301,  303 

Brueys,  Vice-Admiral,  Napoleon's  let- 
ter to,  i.  205 

Bruix,  Admiral,  Napoleon's  letters  to, 
'•  355  >  ''•  43  >  blockaded  by  the 
English  in  Brest,  i.  294  ;  instructed 
to  capture  English  peasants  and 
fishermen,  ii.  32 

Brune,  General,  Napoleon's  letters  to, 
i.  206,  289,  293, 321, 328  ;  iii.  68  ;  sent 
to  La  Vendee,  i.  289;  in  Tuscany, 
i.  326,  327 ;  Napoleon's  instructions 


to,  i.  326,  404 ;    appointed  to  com- 
inand  of  the  Italian  army,  i.321  ;  hi< 
death,  iii.  374  n 
Bruno,  General,  captured,  iii.  273 
"  Buffons    Italiens  "     to     perform    in 

France,  i.  371 
Bulletins  to  the  army,  issued  by  Na- 
p>leon  after  Marengo,  i.  309,  311, 
312,  314;  in  1805,  ii.  155-157, 
159— 161,  166,  168,  169,  182,  185, 
186,  192  ;  in  1806,  ii.  199,  259,  261, 
—265,  267,  271,  272,  275 ;  in 
1807,  ii.  284,  285,  287,  291,  293, 
32472;  in  1809,  ii.  449—451,  454, 
456,  459.  460  ;  in  1812,  iii.  160,  189, 
190  ;  in  1813,  iii.  246,  278,  279 
Buonaparte,    M.    de,     archdeacon    of 

Ajaccio,  Napoleon's  letter  to,  i.  13 
Buonaparte,  Charles,  marriage  of,  i.  3  ; 
Napoleon's  letters  to,  i.  5,  9  ;  sub- 
stitutes Napoleon  for  Joseph  at 
Brienne,  i.  4 ;  appointed  one  of 
committee  to  govern  Corsica,  i.  4  ; 
goes  to  France,  i.  4 ;  death  of,  i.  12  ; 
Napoleon's  letter  on,  i.  13  ;  brilliant 
destinies  of  his  family,  i.  30 
Buonaparte,  Charlotte,  Lucien's  daugh- 
ter, ii.  348,  349,  354 
Buonaparte,  Eliza,  Grand  Duchess  of 
Tuscany,  Napoleon's  letters  to,  ii. 
127,  143,  219,  232,  446;  iii.  287; 
leaves  school  of  St.  Louis,  i.  28  ; 
Grand  Duchess  of  Tuscany,  ii.  127, 
177;  enriched  at  the  expense  of  the 
Queen  of  Etruria,  ii.  228  ;  flatters 
Napole  >n,  ii.  343 
Buonaparte,  Jerome,  King  of  West- 
phalia, Napoleon's  letters  to,  ii.  347, 

358,  362,  396,  403.  4",  44°.  457; 
111.  12,  81,  127,  143,  156,  230; 
his  return  to  Europe,  ii.  125,  126, 
130  ;  joins  the  army,  ii.  309  ;  his 
first  marriage  with  Miss  Patterson, 
ii.  3,  76,  83,  129,  131,  201 11;  His 
marriage  with  the  Princess  of  Wir- 
temberg,  ii.  193,  255,  256,  327,  328  ; 
his  dissatisfaction  with  Napoleon,  iii. 
231  ;  his  wife  returns  to  Paris,  iii. 
233  ;  Napoleon's  advice  to  him  on  a 
constitution,  ii.  346  ;  his  account  of 
Waterloo,  iii.  400,  401 
Buonaparte,  Joseph,  King  of  Spain, 
Napoleon's  notes  and  letters  to,  i. 
27,  45,   46—52,   58,    186,  207,  209, 

215.  304.  35°.  36o,  383;  "•  '52. 
164,  165,  181,  188,  192,  193,  203, 
205,  215,  219—221  «,  227,  234,  235  ; 
241,  242,  244,  247,  251,  252,  251— 


INDEX. 


439 


256,  265,  288,  290,  298,  306,  309, 

348,  372,  373,  380,  382,  392,  397, 
401—404,  407,  412,  416,  418,  433— 
436,  438,  444;  iii.  14,  295,  302,  304 
—306,   308,    310— 315,    319,    320, 

325—327,  33°.  333.  335— 34°.  386, 
389,  401  ;  his  letters  to  Napoleon, 
ii.  402,  443,  470,  471  ;  iii.  333  n ;  his 
letters  to  Berthier,  iii.  103,  104 ;  his 
letter  to  General  Clarke,  iii.  257  ; 
Napoleon's  letter  on  his  profession, 
i.  7  ;  enters  Brienne,  i.  9  ;  made  war 
comissary,  i.  31  ;  settles  in  Genoa, 
i.  46 ;  his  marriage,  i.  52 ;  French 
minister  in  Rome,  i.  193  ;  his  indig- 
nation at  the  rupture  of  the  treaty  of 
Amiens,  ii.  13,  73  ;  Napoleon's  letter 
on  murder  of  the  Due  d'Enghien,  ii. 
49  ;  made  colonel,  ii.  71 ;  receives 
false  commissions,  ii.  72,  73 ;  pro- 
claimed KiDg  of  Italy,  ii.  11 1  ;  King 
of  Naples,  ii.  198,  207,  225  ;  declines 
throne  of  Italy,  ii.  200,  207  ;  pro- 
jected marriage  of  his  infant  daughter, 
ii.  193  ;  in  Naples,  ii.  219 ;  made 
King  of  Spain,  ii.  354,  387 ;  his 
distress  at  Napoleon's  conduct  in 
Spain,  ii.  419  n ;  his  troubles  in 
Spain,  iii.  103,  107  ;  forced  to  leave 
Madrid,  ii.  404;  leaves  Spain,  takes 
refuge  in  France,  iii.  103,  204 ;  is 
badly  treated  on  his  return  from 
Spain,  iii.  295 ;  takes  Marie-Louise 
to  Tours,  iii.  343  n ;  letter  from 
Baron  Fain  to,  iii.  388 

Buonaparte,  Laetilia,  Madame  Mere, 
Napoleon's  letters  to,  i.  12,  18  ;  ii. 
365,  366  ;  iii.  25,  51 ;  settles  at 
Marseilles,  i.  31  ;  in  Paris,  ii.  366  ; 
joins  Napoleon  at  Elba,  iii.  353 

Buonaparte,  Louis,  King  of  Holland, 
Napoleon's  letters  to,  ii.  242,  243, 
245,  247,  251,  254,  277,  282,   295, 

305,  376,  378,  385,  4i6,  443,  445, 
462,  481  ;  leaves  Ajaccio  with  Na- 
poleon, i.  21 ;  at  Chalons,  i.  48 ; 
made  King  of  Holland,  "  ii.  199, 
222,  236  ;  in  command  of  an  army 
corps,  ii.  222 ;  Napoleon's  advice 
on  his  government,  ii.  277  ;  finances 
of  his  kingdom,  1806,  ii.  243  ;  throne 
of  Spain  offered  to,  and  declined,  ii. 
354,  376,  383  ;  bis  quarrels  with  his 
wife,  ii.  306 ;  birth  of  his  sons,  ii.  103, 
383 ;  death  and  burial  of  his  eldestson, 
ii.  311,  312,  316;  asks  for  a  divorce, 
id.  33 ;  quarrels  with  Napoleon,  iii. 
36 —  38,  40  ;  abdicates,  i.  22  ;  i'i.  46 


Buonaparte,  Lucien,  Napoleon's  letters 
to  i.  290,  293,  297,  315,  316,  323, 
326;  store-keeper  at  St.  Maximin, 
i.  31;  aids  Napoleon  at  a  critical 
time,  i.  272,  274  ;  ii.  75  ;  minuter  of 
the  interior,  i.  290 ;  death  of  his  first 
wife,  i.  303  ;  ambassador  at  Madrid, 
i.  338  ;  asks  for  Napoleon's  portrait 
for  Prince  of  the  Peace,  i.  349  ;  re- 
called from  Spain,  i.  358 ;  his 
marriage,  ii.  76,  349  ;  exiled,  ii.  67  ; 
leaves  Rome,  iii.  46 ;  quotations 
from  his  Memoirs,  i.  54  ;  iii.  427 

Buonaparte,  Pauline,  Napoleon's  letters 
to,  ii.  70 ;  iii.  280 ;  Napoleon's 
criticism  of,  ii.  71  ;  in  St.  Domingo, 
i.  407  ;  marries  Prince  Borghese,  i. 
407  ;  expected  at  Elba,  iii.  354 

Buttafuoco,  M.  de,  Napoleon's  letter 
to,  i.  19 

Burgos,  sack  of,  ii.  418,  419 

Busaco,  battle  of,  iii.  61 

Byng,  Admiral,  at  Etaples,  1708,  ii. 
28 

Buonaparte,  Napoleon,  birth  of,  un- 
certain identity,  i.  3,  4 ;  reasons  for 
suppressing  early  correspondence,  i. 
2  ;  at  Autun,  i.  4  ;  at  Brienne,  i.  4 ; 
his  prospects  at  father's  death,  i.  14  ; 
literary  efforts,  i.  10,  16,  23,  31,  53  ; 
at  Douai,  i.  14 ;  in  Corsica,  i.  24,  25, 
28,  30 ;  at  Auxonne,  i.  16,  22 ;  at 
Marseilles,  i.  36 ;  at  Nice,  i.  37,  39, 
64;  in  Italy,  i.  37,  67—143,  158— 
193,  305—315;  «■  126—136;  in 
Malta,  i.  210 ;  in  Egypt,  i.  212 — 
247,  258 — 264  ;  in  Syria,  i.  248 — 
257  ;  in  Switzerland,  i.  300,  305  ;  in 
Austria,  i.  144—155,  194;  ii.  154— 
170,  179 — 204,  448 — 479  ;  in  Ger- 
many, ii.  91  ;  in  Prussia,  ii.  256 — 
272,  314 — 325  ;  in  Poland,  ii.  273 — 
314;  iii.  160,  193;  in  Russia,  iii, 
165 — 192  ;  in  Elba,  iii.  350—361  ; 
obtains  command  of  artillery  at 
Toulon,  i.  31 ;  military  reports  by, 
i.  32,  38,  105,  152 ;  becomes  in- 
timate with  Barras,  Freron,  Salicetti, 
i.  32  ;  attached  to  topographical  de- 
partment, i.  50,  54 ;  in  difficulties 
with  Republican  government,  i.  39, 
57  ;  appointed  to  the  army  of  the 
interior,  i.  57 ;  arrested,  i.  6,  40 ; 
rapid  promotions,  i.  59  ;  first  com- 
mission of,  i.  2  ;  made  first  lieuten- 
ant, i.  24;  lieut. -colonel  Corsican 
volunteers,  i.  25  ;  captain  of  artil- 
lery, i.  28  ;  brigadier-general,  i.  36  ; 


4"4o 


INDEX. 


general  of  division,   i.  58 ;   defeats 
General  O'Hara,  i.  35  ;  his  de,ire  to 
goto  India,  i.  54,  55,  58  ;  summary  of 
his  success  in  1796,  i.  60;  descends 
Alps  at  Montenotte,  i.  62  ;  marriage 
with    Josephine,     i.     63 ;    ii.     231  ; 
iii-  S — 7;     with    the    Arch-Duchess 
Marie- Louise,   iii.    I,   4,   9,    25 — 28, 
31  ;     takes    command   of    army    in 
Italy,  i.  64  ;  defeats  the  Austrians  at 
Montenotte  and  Mellesimo,  i.  69,  70  ; 
Mondovi,    i.    72 ;    his   discipline    in 
the  army,  i.  72,  73  ;  signs  armistice 
with  Sardinia,  i.  74 ;  fines  Genoa,  i. 
75  ;    crosses   the   Po,    i.    77  ;   gains 
battle   of   Lodi,  i.    81  ;   his   success 
alarms  the  Directory,  i.  83  ;  treasure 
levied  in  the  wars,  1796 — 97,  i.   87, 
88,  97,  99,  163,  182  ;  enters  Venetian 
territory,  i.  91  ;  concludes  armistice 
with  Naples,  i.  95  ;  enters  the  Tyrol, 
i.   96 ;  concludes  armistice  with  the 
Pope,  i.  99  ;  siege  of  Mantua,  i.  102 ; 
attacks    Tuscany,    i.     109 ;     defeats 
Wurmser,    i.    106,    108 ;    negotiates 
for  peace  with  Germany,  i.  112;  de- 
poses Duke  of  Modena,  i.  1 13  ;  com- 
plains of  army  contractors,  i.    113, 
133  ;  orders  the  occupation  of  Elba, 
i.  117  ;  wins  battle  of  Areola,  i.  119, 
120  ;  his  critical  position  at  close  of 
1796,  i.   123  ;  sends  General  Clarke 
to     offer    conditions     of    peace    to 
Austria,  i.    123,    124 ;  wins  battle  of 
Rivoli,  i.  125,  130 ;  concludes  treaties 
of  Tolentino  and  Campo  Formio,  i. 
125,  .141,    142,    163,   190;    destroys 
Venetian  Republic,  i.  126  ;  threatens 
Papal  territory,  i.  1 34  ;  defeats  army, 
i.  136  ;  resumes  hostilities  with  Aus- 
tria, i.  143;  crosses  Isonzo,  i.  144;  his 
criticism  of  the  Archduke  Charles,  i. 
145  ;  concludes  treaty  with  Sardinia, 
i.    147  ;     consents   to  armistice  with 
Austria,  i.    147 ;    sends    instructions 
to  General  Kilmaine  in  Italy,  i.  148  ; 
his    perfidy   to    Lombardy,    i.    149  ; 
complains  of  Moreau,    i.    145,    150, 
15S  ;  at  Leoben,  i.    150;  signs  pre- 
liminaries of  peace,   i.    152 ;  his  re- 
marks    on    the    negotiations     with 
Austria,   i.   152 — 154  ;  raises  money 
in  Goritz  and  Trieste,  i.  154  ;  renews 
ho  ;tilities  with  Venice   and    Italian 
cities,  i.  156  ;  complains  of  embezzle- 
ment in  Corsica,  i.   157;  concludes 
treaty    with   Venice,    i.     126,    158; 
establishes  himself  at  Montebello,  i. 


159  ;  despatches  General  Gentili  to 
the  Ionian  Isles,  i.  162  ;  authorises 
sales  of  Abbeys,  i.  i6r,  166;  Dumo- 
lard  brings  motion  against,  i.  167  ; 
tenders  resignation,  i.  168,  184; 
sends  Lavallette  to  Paris  to  arrange 
with  Barras,  i.  172  ;  sends  Augereau 
to  Paris,  i.  172,  173;  urges  the  dis- 
solution of  the  Royalist  clubs,  i.  173  ; 
corresponds  with  Greece,  i.  1 75 ; 
sends  friendly  overtures  to  Tuscany, 
i.  176;  his  designs  upon  Egypt,  i. 
178,  181  ;  his  contempt  for  Austrian 
negotiators,  i.  179;  his  negotiations 
with  Naples,  i.  180 ;  proposes 
seizure  of  Malta,  i.  181  ;  requires  re- 
inforcements, i.  183,  185  ;  conscrip- 
tions levied  by,  ii.  425,  434,  437  ; 
omplains  of  bad  health,  i.  187  ;  his 
requirements  for  invading  England, 
i.  191,  200;  goes  toRastadt,  i.  193; 
received  and  eulogised  by  the  direc 
tors  in  Paris,  i.  194,  195  ;  elected 
member  of  the  institute,  i.  195,  207  ; 
coalition  of  powers  against  him,  i. 
196  ;  threatens  Naples,  i.  198 ;  sends 
Berthier  to  Rome,  i.  198  ;  prepares 
to  invade  Egypt,  i.  201 — 203  ;  pub- 
lishes decrees  against  the  English  in 
the  East,  i.  203  ;  appeals  to  Austrians 
to  maintain,  treaty  of  Campo  Formio, 
i.  206  ;  sails  for  Malta,  i.  208  ;  takes 
Malta,  i.  209  ;  his  organisation  of 
Malta,  i.  210,  211  ;  reaches  Alex- 
andria, i.  212;  his  success  in  Egypt, 
i.  215  ;  levies  money  in  Alexandria, 
i.  216  ;  his  cruelty  in  Egypt,  i.  217, 

218,  227,  233,  237  ;  creates  insti- 
tute at  Cairo,  i.  220  ;  his  conversa- 
tion in  the  Grand  Pyramid,  i.  221 — 
225  ;  his  idea  of  becoming  a  Mussul- 
man, i.  225  n  ;  is  unpopular  in  Egypt, 
i.  231  ;  wins  battle  of  Sediman,  i. 
232  ;  anxious  f or  European  news,  i. 

219,  235  ;  his  invasion  of  Syrin, 
i.  235,  240,  242,  248  ;  re- 
assures the  Sultan  respecting 
Egypt,  i.  237 ;  wins  battle  of  Aboukir, 
i.  242,  259 ;  dissatisfaction  of  his 
army  in  Etrypt,  i.  237,  327;  his  dis- 
cipline in  Egypt,  i.  243,  248,  249 ; 
his  alliance  with  Tippoo  Sahib,  i. 
244  ;  appeals  to  authorities  in  Syria, 
i.  249  ;  wins  battle  of  Gaza,  i.  250  J 
takes  Jaffa,  i.  250  ;  lays  siege  to  St. 
Jean  d'Acre,  i.  251,  255  ;  his  re- 
turn to  Egypt,  i.  254 ;  celebrates 
fete  of  the  Prophet,  i.  260,;  tries  to 


INDEX. 


441 


close  the  war  iu  Egypt,  i.  261  ; 
leaves  Egypt,  i.  263 ;  nominates 
General  Kleber  to  command  of  army 
in  the  East,  i.  264,  274 ;  orders  him 
10  hold  Egypt,  i.  313  ;  learns  French 
reverses  in  Esiypt,  i.  360;  restores 
Ejiypt  to  the  Porte,  i.  360 ;  sends  an 
agent  to  Egypt,  iii.  67  ;  his  return  to 
France,  i.  263,  264,  270,  271  ;  makes 
terms  with  bieyes,  i.  270;  disperses 
the  chambers,  i.  271 ;  Lucien's  as- 
sistance to,  i.  27r,  272;  elected  con- 
sul, i.  272  ;  his  attention  to  details,  i. 
274.  377  ;  «-  137  ;  abolishes  the  law 
of  hostages,  i.  277 ;  the  British  Go- 
vernment refuse  to  treat  with,  i.  279  ; 
his  government  of  France  in  1800,  i. 
284,  285  ;  requires  money  from  the 
Dutch,  i.  288,  289  ;  his  measures  for 
suppressing  the  insurrection  in  La 
Vendee,  i.  285,  287,  289  ;  his  du- 
plicity towards  the  Count  de  Frotte, 
i.  292  ;  resides  in  the  Tuileries,  i. 
291  ;  takes  command  of  the  Army  of 
Reserve,  i.  285  ;  crosses  the  Alps, 
i.  286,  303,  304  ;  his  success  in  Italy, 
i.  286,  306  ;  wins  battle  of  Marengo, 
i.  286,  310;  signs  preliminaries  of 
peace, i.  286,  315;  leaves  Italy,  i.  314; 
offers  a  pension  to  Louis  XVIII.,  i. 
323  ;  renews  hostilities  with  Austria, 
i.  324  ;  offers  maritime  truce  to  Eng- 
land, i.  324,  325  ;  attempts  made  to 
assassinate  him,  i.  325,  326,  331, 
332 ;  his  accusations  against  Eng- 
land, i.  295,  311,  312,  314,  337, 
351  ;  ii.  59,  78>  79  \  his  projected 
expeditions  again-t  England,  ii.  I, 
32—34,  39,  69,  81,  83,  85,  96,  106, 
145,  148  ;  exchanges  prisoners  with 
England,  i.  295,  296  ;  his  attempts 
to  hinder  English  and  colonial  com- 
merce, ii.  272,  335  ;  iii.  57,  64 — 66, 
68,  69,  72,  113,  114  ;  offers  terms  to 
England,  i.  361,  362 ;  ii.  15,  197,  l9%  ', 
friendly  overtures  to  Grand  Duke  of 
Tu-cany,  i.  176;  orders  General 
Brune  to  disarm  Tuscany,  i.  326; 
gives  Tuscany  to  kingdom  of  Etruria, 
i.  356  ;  requires  funds  from  Tuscany, 
i.  348  ;  quarters  troops  in  Tuscany, 
i.  368 ;  offended  by  Queen  of  Por- 
tugal, i.  226,  227  ;  exacts  money  from 
Portugal,  i.  288,  289,  342,  343  ; 
suggests  seizure  of  Portugal  by  Spain, 
i.  328  ;  orders  Junot  to  march  upon 
Portugal,  ii.  336,  338;  establishes 
his  authority  in  the  Batavian,  Helve- 


tian, and  Cisalpine  Republics,  and 
becomes  President  of  the  latter,  i. 
384;  his  overtures  to  Spain,  i.  299, 
320,  328,  342  ;  his  arrogance  to  the 
King  and  Queen  of  Spain,  i.  378 — 
381  ;  ii.  7  ;  threatens  war  with  Spain, 
ii.  26 — 29 ;  endeavours  to  marry 
his  niece  to  the  Prince  of  Asturias, 
"•  349)  353  ;  his  intrigue  with  the 
Prince  of  Asturias,  ii.  336,  352,  353, 
375 ;  sends  troops  into  Spain,  ii. 
354 ;  his  instructions  to  Soult  in 
Naples,  i.  348  ;  his  complaints  of  the 
Queen  of  Naples,  ii.  198,  199,  209  ; 
French  troops  overrun  Naples,  ii. 
199,  215  ;  his  schemes  for  the  dis- 
posal of  Naples,  ii.  205,  207  ;  makes 
Joseph  King  of  Naples,  ii.  206,  207  ; 
refuses  to  ratify  the  treaty  of  Badajoz, 
i-  357.  358  ;  arranges  the  Concordat, 
i.  360;  imposes  it  upon  France,  i. 
393>  394  >  his  intentions,  had  the 
Moscow  expedition  been  victorious, 
i.  395  ;  seizes  Beneventum  and  Ponte 
Corvo,  i.  395 ;  demands  an  equal 
number  of  cardinals  for  France  as 
Austria  possessed,  i.  396 ;  his  views 
on  the  political  situation  of  France 
in  1802,  i.  397  ;  his  message  to 
Algiers,  i.  397 — 399  ;  refuses  Vestris 
permission  to  leave  France,  i.  401 ; 
his  protection  to  Christians  in  the 
Eavt,  i.  401 ;  gives  two  ships  to  the 
Pope,  i.  401,  402  ;  obtains  possession 
of  Elba,  i.  348,  403  ;  threatens  Hel- 
vetian Republic,  i.  403 ;  at  Rouen,  i. 
404  ;  orders  demolition  of  cathedral 
at  Ales'andria,  i.  406  ;  his  satisfac- 
tion with  Paulette,  i.  407 ;  appeals 
for  Pope's  help  in  temporal  designs, 
i.  408 ;  despatches  an  expedition  to 
St.  Domingo,  i.  372,  374,  377  ;  de- 
spatches an  expedition  to  the  Cape  01 
Good  Hope,  i.  337 ;  makes  peace 
with  America,  i.  286 ;  considers 
treaty  of  Amiens,  i.  366,  373  ;  his 
interference  with  the  theatres,  i.  297  ; 
iii.  23,  27  ;  establishes  horse-racing 
in  France,  ii.  147  ;  proposes  annual 
exhibition  of  inventions  and  manu- 
factures, i.  345  ;  his  encouragement 
of  art  in  France,  i.  323  ;  ii.  139, 
140 ;  his  views  on  Trinidad,  i.  378, 
391  ;  his  ecclesiastical  nominations,  i. 
289,  293,  400  ;  his  projected  invasion 
of  India,  i.  334,  362  ;  ii.  3,  1 15  ;  his 
charities  and  pensions,  i.  318 ;  ii. 
4;   iii.    58,    59,    132;  his   scurrilous 


442 


INDEX. 


articles  against  George  III.-,  ii.  14  ; 
he  rules  the  press,  ii.  17,  44,  45,  59, 
134,  204,  374,  386,  437;  iii.  76, 
178;  invades  Hanover,  ii.  18,  19; 
objects  to  ministers  chosen  by  foreign 
states,  ii.  22,  25,  78  ;  conspires  with 
United  Irishmen,  ii.  25  ;  his  designs 
upon  Ireland,  ii.  25,  26;  iii.  Ill; 
orders  erection  of  statue  to  Charle- 
magne, ii.  10,  11,  31  ;  his  arbitrary 
conduct  towards  individuals,  ii.  41, 
51,56,  197;  to  women,  ii.  32,63, 
74,  86  ;  his  treatment  of  the  clergy, 
ii.  77  ;  iii.  34—36,  9°>  9* «.  i°6, 
107  ;  causes  murder  of  the  Due 
d'Enghien,  ii.  47 — 51,  66,  68 — 70; 
causes  Moreau's  banishment,  ii.  51 — 
53  ;  is  suspected  of  causing  Piche- 
gru's  death,  ii.  53 — 55  ;  his  corona- 
tion by  the  Pope,  ii.  55,  84,  93  ;  ex- 
asperates the  foreign  states,  ii.  55  ; 
his  attention  to  the  internal  welfare 
of  France,  ii.  59,  60  ;  his  duplicity, 
ii.  6l,  63,  64,  112,  120  ;  aspires  to 
the  purple,  ii.  71  »,  72  ;  makes  Joseph 
a  colonel,  ii.  Jl — 73  ;  his  ingratitude, 
ii.  75  ;  becomes  Emperor,  ii.  75,  77  ; 
issues  titles  to  form  a  court,  ii.  77  ; 
complains  of  Russia,  ii.  84,  87  ;  de- 
lays passport  to  Russian  ambassador, 
ii.  128  ;  crowned  King  of  Italy,  ii. 
105,  109,  132 ;  proclaims  Joseph 
King  of  Italy,  ii.  ill  ;  appoints 
Eugene  de  Beauharnais  Viceroy  of 
Italy,  ii.  121,  134 ;  his  schemes, 
Sept.  1804,  ii.  97  ;  commences  hos- 
tilities against  Austria,  ii.  109,  141, 
146  ;  orders  his  generals  to  join  their 
corps,  ii.  116  :  his  movements  in 
spring  of  1805,  ii.  125,  127  ;  unites 
Genoa  to  France,  ii.  133,  136;  mis- 
takes Nelson's  movements,  ii.  136  ; 
his  note  on  the  naval  action  between 
Villeneuve  and  Sir  R.  Calder,  ii.  140 
— 142  ;  his  frontiers  in  1805,  ii.  144  ; 
joins  army  in  Austria,  ii.  149  ;  his 
successful  operations,  ii.  151,  155 — 
161,  166,  181,  185  ;  at  Palace  of 
Shoenbrunn,  ii.  168  ;  wins  battle  of 
Austerlitz,  ii.  109,  181,  183,  185, 
186 ;  refuses  to  make  peace  with 
Austria,  ii.  184 ;  his  overtures  to 
Prussia,  ii.  187,  188  ;  re-establishes 
peace,  ii.  190 — 192  ;  his  matrimonial 
arrangements  for  his  family,  ii.  193  ; 
hears  of  Trafalgar,  ii.  170;  suspected 
of  causing  Villeneuve's  death,  ii.  178, 
179  ;  his  position  during  1806,  ii.  194 


— 200  ;  his  position  with  Prussia,  ii. 
194 — 197,  208  ;  at  Munich,  ii.  200— 
204 ;  his  treatment  of  Ouvrard,  ii. 
212 — 214  ;  orders  rejoicings  to  cele- 
brate return  of  the  army  to  Paris,  ii. 
218  ;  his  territorial  arrangements  in 
Europe,  ii.  221,  222,  255  ;  makes  Louis 
King  of  Holland,  ii.  222,  236,  237  ; 
makes  Berthier  Prince  of  Neuch&tel, 
ii.  223  ;  orders  erection  of  the  Arc  de 
Triomphe,  ii.  229  ;  urges  Joseph  to 
capture  Sicily,  ii.  232 ;  concludes 
Concordat  with  the  Jews,  ii.  233,  234  ; 
organises  seminaries  and  introduces 
catechism  into  France,  ii.  246,  247  ; 
his  knowledge  of  his  generals'  capa- 
city, ii.  237,  238  ;  his  alliance  with 
Turkey,  ii.  239,  274,  282,  289  ;  iii. 
50  ;  prepares  for  war  with  Prussia,  ii. 
253  ;  duplicity  towards  the  King  of 
Prussia,  ii.  255  ;  joins  the  army  at 
Mayence,  ii.  256  ;  his  overtures  to 
Austria,  ii.  257,  275,  300  ;  his  com- 
plaints against  Prussia,  ii.  259  ;  com- 
mences war,  ii.  258  ;  his  forces  on 
the  field,  ii.  260  ;  wins  battle  of  Jena, 
ii.  261  ;  refuses  armistice  to  Prussia, 
ii.  263  :  takes  possession  of  Hesse- 
Cassel,  ii.  264  ;  at  Potsdam,  ii.  265  ; 
enters  Berlin,  ii.  267 ;  signs  de- 
cree of  Berlin,  ii.  272 ;  his  troops- 
enter  Warsaw,  ii.  273  ;  at  Warsaw, 
ii.  277  ;  orders  construction  of  the 
Madeleine,  ii.  275  ;  summary  of  his 
wars  during  1807,  ii.  279  ;  his  cam- 
paign in  Poland,  ii.  279 ;  makes 
Jerome  King  of  Westphalia,  ii.  279  ; 
his  activity,  ii.  281,  295,  352;  hisim 
morality,  i.  238 ;  ii.  283,  306,  339  ; 
winsbattleofEylau,  ii.2go(.«KEy]au) ; 
his  instructions  to  Bertrand  in  Prussia, 
ii.  292,  293  ;  levies  fresh  conscriptions 
in  France,  ii.  295,  300 ;  offers  peace 
to  Prussia  and  Russia,  ii.  296, 
308  ;  his  employment  of  foreign 
soldiers  and  prisoners,  ii.  302  ;  wins 
battle  of  Friedland,  ii.  315;  signs 
armistice  with  Russia,  ii.  316;  his 
alliance  at  Tilsit  with  the  Czar, 
318,  319,  347  ;  his  fears  of  poison, 
ii.  320  ;  meets  the  Queen  of  Prussia, 
ii.  321  :  commences  Peninsular  War, 
«•  336,  343.  344.  354  ;  sends  troops 
to  Fampeluna  and  Madrid,  ii. 
369 — 371  ;  issues  two  decrees  of 
Milan,  ii.  347—  349  ;  prepares  for 
his  divorce  from  Josephine,  ii.  340, 
341  ;    his  matrimonial   proposals  re- 


INDEX. 


443 


fused  by  Russia,  ii.  342  ;iii.  1,3,4,  I34J 
goes  to  Bayonne,  ii,  354 ;  his  conver- 
sation with  Escoiquiz,  ii.  354 — 356  ; 
gives  throne  of  Spain  to  Joseph,  ii. 
354..  387,  391,  392,  397  ;  offers  it  to 
Louis,  ii.  376  ;  his  desire  for  peace, 
"■  357  >  his  instructions  respecting 
the  invasion  of  the  Papal  States,  ii. 
359.  367.  371.  373;  his  naval  re- 
sources, ii.  377,  378 ;  concludes 
treaty  of  Erfurth,  ii.  413,  415  ; 
threatens  Lisbon,  ii  417  ;  enters  Bur- 
gos, ii.  418  ;  orders  erection  of  temple 
of  Janus,  ii.  420  ;  enters  Madrid,  ii. 
431 ;  attempts  to  create  discord  be- 
tween England  and  Spain,  ii.  422— 
424  ;  orders  fountain  of  the  Bastille, 
ii.  425  ;  his  movements  in  1809,  ii.  428 
— 431  ;  his  reverses  in  1809,  ii.  432  ; 
leaves  Spain,  ii.  434  ;  quarrels  with 
Talleyrand,  ii.  434  ;  advises  Joseph  to 
use  harshness  in  Spain,  ii.  435 — 437  ; 
requires  German  assistance  against 
Austria,  ii.  439;  joins  army  in  Austria, 
ii.  447  ;  strength  of  his  army,  ii. 
448  ;  his  success  in  Austria,  ii.  449 ; 
at  Vienna,  ii.  451  ;  his  battle.s  at 
Essling  and  Aspern,  ii.  4J4,  455  ;  his 
victories  at  Enzersdorf  and  Wagram, 
ii.  459,  460 ;  complains  of  Joseph's 
inactivity,  ii.  456  ;  agrees  to  suspen- 
sion of  arms,  ii.  460  ;  is  excommuni- 
cated, ii.  461  ;  makes  peace  with 
Austria,  ii.  464,  479 ;  his  anxiety 
about  Spain,  ii.  467 — 469  ;  foments 
an  insurrection  in  Galicia,  ii.  471; 
institutes  a  new  order,  Three  Golden 
Fleeces,  ii.  476  n ;  his  note  on  title  of 
Augustus,  ii.  477,  478  ;  annexes 
Papal  States,  ii.  430,  431  ;  iii.  24, 
25,  83 ;  his  peaceful  assurances  to 
the  Czar,  ii.  482,  483  :  his  questions 
to  the  bishops,  iii.  13;  his  policy  in 
Sweden,  iii.  10,  11,  86,87;  cedes 
Hanover  to  Jerome,  iii.  12;  disputes 
with  Russia  about  Poland,  iii.  16, 
17 ;  his  treaty  with  Tlolland,  iii.  27  ; 
threatens  Heligoland,1  iii.  32  ;  goes  to 
Antwerp,  iii.  34;  quarrels  with  King 
of  Holland,  iii.  36 — 38,  40,  46  ;  orders 
Oudinot  to  march  upon  Amsterdam, 
iii.  45,  46  ;  annexes  Holland,  iii.  9, 
47,  48  ;  deprives  Fouche  of  his  port- 
folio, iii.  42,  43,  47  ;  endeavours  to 
cultivate  cotton  in  Rome,  iii.  51,  52  ; 
orders  foreign  archives  to  be  sent  to 
Paris,  iii.  55  ;  he  occupies  himself 
with  the  affairs  of  the  Church,  iii.  78 


— 82  ;  his  suspicions  of  Russia,  iii. 
73  ;  annexes  the  Valais,  iii.  72,  74  ; 
prepares  for  war  with  Russia,  iii. 
78,  85,  88,  101  ;  appropriates  Old- 
enburg, iii.  85 ;  his  overtures  to 
Austria,  ii.  87,  88 ;  his  son's  birth, 
iii.  93,  94 ;  threatens  Mecklenburg 
and  Prussia,  iii.  95;  objects  to  Rus- 
sian establishment  in  Servia,  iii.  95, 
96,  98 ;  reinforces  his  army  from 
foreign  states,  iii.  97  ;  his  excuses  f  jr 
war  with  Russia,  iii.  99  ;  his  over- 
tures to  the  Pope,  iii.  ioi  ;  his  mes- 
sage to  General  Belliard,  iii.  107  ; 
complaints  of  smuggling  in  Germany, 
iii.  101  ;  his  speech  at  the  opening  of 
Parliament,  iii.  108,  109  ;  complains 
of  Murat,  iii.  m  ;  his  reply  to  a 
deputation  of  merchants,  iii.  113, 
-  114;  his  sale  of  licences  for  trade, 
iii.  112,  113;  receives  a  deputation 
from  the  Ionian  Isles,  iii.  117;  list  of 
his  clothes,  iii.  117,  118;  threatens 
war  with  Prussia,  iii.  122,  127  ;  visits 
Holland,  iii.  123,  124  ;  sets  a  spy  on 
the  Pope,  iii.  125  ;  threatens  war 
with  Sweden,  iii.  126 ;  rewards 
English  prisoners,  iii.  128  ;  his  dis- 
satisfaction with  the  generals  in  Spain, 
iii.  131  ;  organises  secret  police  in 
case  of  war,  iii.  131  ;  his  bickerings 
with  Russia,  iii.  134,  135  ;  his  re- 
proaches to  Prince  Kourakine,  iii. 
13S  ;  Russia,  Sweden,  and  Turkey 
unite  against  him,  iii.  136  ;  goes 
to  Dresden,  meets  German  princes, 
iii.  136,  158  ;  strength  of  his  army, 
iii.  136,  137;  his  disasters  in  Russia, 
iii.  138  ;  reverses  of  his  army  in 
Spain,  iii.  139  ;  his  note  upon  the 
continental  blockage  and  sugar  manu- 
facture, iii.  141,  142 ;  explains  the 
situation  to  Jerome,  iii.  143 — 145  ; 
complains  of  Colonel  Czernitchef, 
iii.  151  ;  sends  instructions  to 
Marmont  in  Spain,  iii.  147 — 149, 
152;  his  note  on  commerce  in  Cor- 
sica, iii.  156  ;  dictates  letter  to  Lord 
Castlereagh,  iii.  156,  157;  transfers 
the  Pope  to  Fontainebleau,  iii.  158  ; 
declares  war  against  Russia,  iii.  160, 
161  ;  his  speech  to  the  Polish  depu- 
ties, iii.  164 ;  forbids  the  exporta- 
tion of  corn  from  France,  iii.  165  ; 
endeavours  to  induce  Turkey  to  join 
him,  iii.  165,  166 ;  takes  Smolen- 
sko,  iii.  168  ;  sufferings  of  his  troops 
in  Russia,  iii.  170,  174  ;  his  views  on 


444 


INDEX. 


Salamanca,  iii.  171;  defeats  the 
Russians  at  Borodino,  iii.  172  ;  in 
Moscow,  iii.  174,  211;  enormous 
losses  amongst  his  troops,  iii.  176  ; 
raises  new  conscriptions  in  France 
and  Italy,  iii.  176  ;  becomes  aware  of 
his  dangerous  position,  iii.  177,  178  ; 
attempts  to  negotiate  with  Russia, 
iii.  179,  195  ;  leaves  Moscow,  iii. 
181  ;  orders  Marshal  Mortier  to  burn 
public  buildings  in  Moscow,  iii.  181  ; 
obliged  to  change  line  of  retreat,  iii. 
181  ;  resolves  to  take  up  a  position 
half-way  between  St.  Petersburg  and 
Wilna,  iii.  183  ;  his  reference  to  the 
damage  done  to  Moscow,  iii.  183, 
184 ;  sufferings  and  losses  of  the 
army  during  the  retreat  from  Moscow, 
iii.  184,  185,  189,  190 — 192  ;  crosses 
the  Beresina,  iii.  186,  187,  190 ; 
anxious  for  news  from  Paris,  iii.  188  ; 
leaves  the  army,  iii.  189  n,  192; 
reaches  Paris,  iii.  197  ;  receives 
news  from  Spain,  iii.  191  ;  his  army 
destroyed  by  the  Russians,  iii.  197  ; 
prepares  to  continue  the  war,  iii.  198  ; 
his  reply  to  the  Senate  on  the  war, 
iii.  198,  199  ;  his  anxiety  to  make 
peace  with  the  Pope,  iii.  199  ;  his 
losses  in  the  army  during  the  Russian 
campaign,  iii.  200  ;  in  1813  coalition 
formed  against  him,  iii.  201  ;  new 
plan  of  campaign  against  him,  iii. 
202,  203 ;  list  of  the  defeats  of 
his  lieutenants,  iii.  203 ;  his  in- 
structions to  Joseph  in  Spain,  iii. 
205,  221,  222 ;  examines  a  new 
musket,  iii.  206 ;  orders  Dantzic 
to  be  armed  and  provisioned,  iii. 
207  ;  his  description  of  the  Rus- 
sian campaign  to  the  King  of  Den- 
mark, iii.  207 ;  guarantees  Norway 
to  Denmark,  iii.  208  ;  breaks  up 
camp  of  Boulogne,  iii.  208  ;  his  pre- 
parations for  war,  iii.  209  ;  relates 
his  Russian  campaign  to  Jerome,  iii. 
210 — 212  ;  complains  of  General 
York,  iii.  209,  213 ;  his  glowing 
account  of  the  state  of  affairs,  iii. 
212;  appoints  Prince  Eugene  to  the 
command  of  the  Grand  Army,  iii. 
274,  215  ;  makes  an  arrangement  with 
the  Pope,  iii.  215,  216 — 219  ;  changes 
his  ambassador  at  Vienna,  iii.  216; 
hopes  of  an  alliance  with  Austria,  iii. 
217  ;  his  speech  at  the  opening  of 
the  legislative  body,  iii.  223 — 226  ; 
reduces  his  equipment  for  the  cam- 


paign, iii.  226  ;  forces  the  King  01 
Holland  and  the  Czar  to  seize  Ameri- 
can ships,  iii.  225  n ;  instructs  Prince 
Eugene  to  hold  Berlin,  iii.  227 ; 
offers  a  home  to  the  King  of  Saxony, 
iii.  227  ;  orders  General  Clarke  to 
watch  the  defences  of  the  coast, 
iii.  228  ;  his  instructions  to  Prince 
Eugene,  iii.  228,  229  ;  intends  to 
mislead  the  enemy  and  to  march  on 
Dantzic,  iii.  229  ;  complains  of 
Jerome,  iii.  230;  Russia  and  Prusia 
unite  against  him,  iii.  232 ;  orders 
money  to  be  sent  to  Spain,  iii.  233  ; 
dismisses  the  repre-entatives  of  Prus- 
sia in  France,  iii.  233  ;  his  refusal  to 
grant  Prussia  any  pecuniary  relief 
causes  the  war,  iii.  234  ;  his  faith  in 
Austria,  iii.  234,  237  ;  at  Mayenne, 
iii.  235  ;  orders  the  formation  of  an 
army  of  Italy,  iii.  237  ;  doubts  Murat's 
fidelity,  iii.  238 ;  becomes  suspicious  of 
Austria,  iii.  238  ;  dissatisfied  with  the 
minister  of  foreign  affairs,  iii.  239 ; 
wins  battle  of  Lutzen,  iii.  240;  at 
Dresden,  iii.  242  ;  threatens  the 
King  of  Saxony,  iii.  242 ;  the1  Czar 
refuses  to  treat  secretly  with  him, 
iii.  202,  246 ;  fights  battle  of  Bautzen, 
iii.  246  ;  at  death  of  Duroc,  iii.  246, 
247 ;  grants  an  armistice,  iii.  202, 
24,  249  ;  complains  of  Austria,  iii. 
248,  249 ;  writes  for  comedians  to  be 
sent  to  Dresden,  iii.  25 1  ;  dissatisfied 
with  the  minister  of  police,  who 
wishes  for  peace,  iii.  251  ;  hears  of 
Murat's  intrigues,  iii.  252  ;  his  inter- 
view with  Metternich,  iii.  253 — 255  ; 
sends  Soult  back  to  Spain,  iii.  256  ; 
battle  of  Vittoria  induces  him  to 
Austrian  proposals,  iii.  256  ;  praises 
the  Bishop  of  Nantes,  iii.  257 ; 
makes  Fouche  governor  of  Illyria, 
iii.  258  ;  concludes  a  treaty  with  Den- 
mark, iii.  258  ;  orders  his  troops  to 
march  towards  Berlin,  iii.  259  ;  Aus- 
tria declares  war  against  him,  iii.  202, 
260  ;  his  views  on  the  Congress  of 
Prague,  iii.  262  ;  his  note  on  the 
fete  of  the  Empress,  iii.  264;  his 
instructions  to  Vandamme,  iii.  265  ; 
"wins  battle  of  Dresden,  iii.  202, 
266  ;  his  views  on  the  situation  of 
affairs,  iii.  267  ;  forces  opposed  to 
him,  iii.  267,  268;  tries  to  escape 
the  responsibility  of  Vandamme's 
defeat,  iii.  270;  reverses  of  his 
generals,  iii.  203,  271,  272;  dictates 


INDEX. 


445 


the  report  to  be.  published  on  the 
war,  iii.  273  ;  prepares  for  a  battle, 
iii.  274 ;  crosses  Blucher  and  Ber- 
nadotte,  iii.  275  ;  nearly  cuts  off 
Sacken's  corps,  iii.  276  ;  uncertain 
as  to  his  movements,  iii.  276  ;  forced 
back  upon  Leipsic,  iii.  277  ;  anxious 
to  carry  the  war  into  Prussian  terri- 
tory, iii.  277  ;  issues  orders  to  bis 
generals  to  assemble  at  Leipsic,  iii. 

277  ;  the  Bavarian  troops  desert  him, 
iii.  278  ;  his  precarious  position,  iii. 

278  ;  captures  General  Meerfelt,  iii. 
278  ;  endeavours  to  make  terms  with 
the  Emperor  of  Austria,  iii.  279  ; 
his  description  of  Leipsic,  iii.  279  ; 
retreats  to  Erfurth,  iii.  279 ;  falls 
back  to  Gotha,  iii.  280  ;  takes 
1.200,000/.  from  his  private  funds 
for  the  public  service,  iii.  280 ;  is 
bent  on  raising  a  new  conscription, 
iii.  280  ;  orders  the  reconstruction  of 
the  fortifications  of  Geneva,  iii.  282  ; 
returns  to  St.  Cloud,  iii.  282  ;  orders 
the  Swiss  frontier  to  be  armed, 
iii.  282 ;  sends  Fouche  to  Naples, 
iii.  283  ;  doubts  Murat's  fidelity,  iii. 
283  ;  the  King  of  Bavaria  endeavours 
to  induce  Prince  Eugene  to  desert 
Napoleon,  iii.  283 ;  conditions  of 
peace  offered  by  the  allies  to  him, 
iii.  284  ;  temporises  in  order  to  gain 
time,  iii.  285  ;  orders  all  the  troops 
of  the  Confederation  to  be  disarmed, 
iii.  285  ;  sends  Admiral  Allemand 
to  Flushing,  iii.  285  ;  orders  employ- 
ment to  be  found  for  workpeople  in 
Paris,  iii.  286 ;  his  speech  at  the 
opening  of  Parliament,  iii.  286  ; 
commands  Eliza  to  refuse  arms  to 
the  Neapolitans,  iii.  287  ;  enters 
into  negotiations  with  the  Prince  of  - 
Asturias,  iii.  287  ;  concludes  a  treaty 
with  the  Prince,  iii.  288  ;  assures  the 
Senate  of  his  efforts  to  secure  peace, 
and  his  disinterested  love  for  France, 
iii.  288  ;  his  losses  in  the  campaign, 
iii.  289  ;  takes  the  field  against  the 
allies  in  France,  iii.  291  ;  his  brilliant 
genius  displayed,  iii.  291  ;  deserted 
by  Marmont,  iii.  291  ;  orders  a  levle 
en  masse  in  the  departments,  iii.  293  ; 
doubts  the  good  faith  of  the  allies, 
iii.  293 ;  is  willing  to  accept  the 
terms  offered  at  Frankfort,  but  not 
the  later  ideas  of  the  allies,  iii.  293, 
294 ;  his  instructions  to  Caulain- 
court,    iii.    294;    his    treatment    of 


Joseph  on  his  return  from  Spain,  iii. 

295  ;  orders  to  his  generals,  iii.  295, 

296  ;  his  estimate  of  the  forces  op- 
posed to  him,  iii.  296 ;  the  real 
relative  strength  of  the  opposing 
forces,  iii.  297 ;  makes  overtures  to 
Austria,  iii.  297 — 299  ;  complains  of 
his  generals,  iii.  299  ;  Murat  deserts 
him,  iii;  291,  299 ;  appoints  Marie- 
Louise  regent  and  Joseph  his  lieut- 
general,  iii.  300;  defeats  Blncher  at 
Brienne,  iii.  292,  301 ;  disapproves 
Barras's  return  to  France,  iii.  302  ; 
realises  the  horrors  of  war,  iii.  302  ; 
his  -account  of  the  battle  of  La 
Rothiere,  iii.  303 ;  sends  orders  to 
Jo-eph  to  have  all  valuable  furniture, 
&c,  removed  to  Fontainebleau,  iii. 
305  ;  charges  Joseph  with  the  safety 
of  his  wife  and  child,  iii.  306 — 308, 
339  ;  his  doubts  of  Eugene's  fidelity, 
iii.  308  ;  wins  battle  of  Champaubert, 
iii.  291,  310 ;  wins  battle  of  Mont- 
mirail,  iii.  291,  311,  312;  his  fears 
for  Fontainebleau,  iii.  313  ;  his  indig- 
nation against  Murat  and  his  wife, 
iii.  313;  wins  battle  of  Vauchamps, 
iii.  314;  the  allies,  to  gain  time,  offer 
to  agree  to  terms  of  peace,  iii.  315, 
316  ;  his  reasons  for  being  willing  to 
treat  before  Champaubert,  iii.  316 ; 
his  indignation  at  the  terms  offered, 
iii.  317  ;  orders  the  vicereine  of 
Italy  to  go  to  Paris  iii.  318;  his 
indignation  at  the  excesses  committed 
by  the  troops,  iii.  320,  32 1 ;  com- 
plains to  Augereau  of  delay  in  taking 
the  field,  iii.  321  ;  his  letter  to  the 
Emperor  of  Austria  on  the  political 
situation,  and  on  the  terms  of  peace 
offered,  iii.  322 — 324 ;  is  aware  of  the 
state  of  public  opinion  in  France, 
iii.  325  ;  accepts  an  armistice  from 
Austria,  iii.  325  ;  negotiations  opened 
at  Lusigny,  his  instructions  to  Gen- 
eral Flabault,  iii.  326 ;  at  Troves, 
iii.  326  ;  his  anxiety  for  Soult  to  take 
the  offensive,  iii.  327,  329;  his  satis- 
faction with  the  navy,  iii.  329  ;  com- 
plains of  the  inactivity  of  his  generals, 
iii.  330  ;  evacuation  of  Bar-sur-Aube, 
iii.  331  ;  wins  the  battle  of  Craonne, 
"i-  333— 335;  allows  the  Pope  to 
return  to  Italy,  iii.  334;  Joseph 
intreats  him  to  make  peace,  iii. 
333  «>  334 » ;  reconnoitres  the 
enemy's  position  at  Laon,  iii.  335  ■ 
returns  to  Soissons,  iii.  335  ;  depre- 


446 


INDEX. 


cates  Joseph's  idea  that  he  will 
derive  personal  benefit  from  his  alli- 
ance with  an  Austrian  princess,  iii. 
336 ;  the  desperate  position  of  the 
French,  iii.  337  ;  orders  the  fortifica- 
tion of  Paris,  iii.  337 ;  retakes 
Rheims  from  the  Russians,  iii.  337, 
338 ;  sends  Joseph  instructions  for 
Soult  and  Suchet,  iii.  339 ;  takes 
Mery,  iii.  340 ;  sends  note  to  the 
Moniteur,  iii.  341  ;  finds  himself 
confronted  by  the  grand  army  of  the 
allies,  iii.  341  ;  marches  on  St. 
Dizier,  iii.  342  ;  returns  to  Fontaine- 
bleau,  finds  that  Paris  has  capitulated, 
iii.  343  ;  tries  to  reopen  negotiations, 
iii.  343  ;his  speech  to  the  Old  Guard, 
iii.  344 ;  assembles  his  generals,  iii. 
344 ;  abdicates,  iii.  344,  347 ;  his 
proclamation  to  the  army,  iii.  345  ; 
complains  of  the  Senate,  iii.  346  ; 
endeavoured  to  poison  himself,  iii. 
348,  350  n  ;  his  farewell  to  the 
Guard,  iii.  348,  349;  goes  to  Elba, 
iii.  347,  349  ;  arranges  the  household 
at  Elba,  iii.  350,  351;  his  arrange- 
ments for  some  balls,  iii.  352,  360; 
expects  the  empress,  iii.  352  ;  joined 
by  his  mother,  iii.  353  ;  his  leiters  to 
the  empress,  iii.  354,  355  ;  complains 
of  Pauline,  iii.  355  ;  his  anxiety  for 
news  of  his  wife  and  child,  iii.  355  ; 
carries  on  negotiations  for  returning 
to  France,  iii.  356  ;  his  economies  at 
Elba,  iii.  360  ;  leaves  Elba,  iii.  357, 
361  ;  his  welcome  in  France,  iii. 
358,  364  ;  his  appeals  to  the  people 
and  army,  iii.  361,  362;  chooses  his 
ministers,  iii.  365  ;  the  European 
powers  unite  against  him,  iii.  357, 
361 ;  organises  his  army,  iii.  358, 
366,  375  ;  writes  to  his  old  generals, 
iii.  366  ;  orders  a  list  of  the  treaties 
concluded  during  his  reign,  iii. 
367 ;  orders  articles  for  the  Moni- 
teur, iii.  367  ;  finds  the  finances  of 
the  country  in  good  condition,  iii. 
369  ;  his  efforts  to  regain  the  society 
cf  his  wife  and  child,  iii.  359,  369, 
377;  378  j  orders  General  Caulain- 
c  mrt  to  assure  the  foreign  powers  of 
his  good  intentions  towards  them, 
iii.  370;  his  circular  to  the  sove- 
reigns, iii.  370 ;  is  accepted  by  the 
provinces,  iii.  372 ;  orders  the  pay- 
ment of  pensions  to  his  family  and 
others,  iii.  372  ;  maks  inquiries  re 
specting  King   of  Naples,   iii.   373  ; 


finds  employment  for  naval  officers 
ashore,  iii.  375  ;  re-elected  by  the 
people,  iii.  378  ;  his  speech  to  the 
electors,  iii.  378  ;  takes  the  oath  to 
the  people,  iii.  380 ;  his  relations 
return  to  Paris,  iii.  380 ;  his  speech 
to  parliament,  iii.  382,  383  ;  goes  to 
I.aon,  iii.  384 ;  Ney  rejoins  him,  iii. 
384 ;  orders  Polish  infantry  to  be 
sent  to  him,  iii.  384 ;  position  of 
his  army  on  the  14th  June,  iii. 
385  ;  writes  a  series  of  instructions 
for  his  war  minister,  iii.  386 ;  ad- 
dresses his  soldiers,  iii.  387  ;  forces 
the  passage  of  the  Sambre,  iii.  388 ; 
sends  arrangements  for  the  campaign 
to  Marshal  Ney,  iii.  389  ;  the  battle  of 
Ligny,  iii.  390  ;  orders  Grouchy  to 
march  upon  Sombreffe,  iii.  391  ; 
his  miscalculations,  iii.  391  ;  order 
of  the  day  for  the  18th  June,  iii.  391  ; 
his  account  of  Ligny  and  Waterloo, 
iii.  392 — 400  ;  passes  the  Sambre 
at  Charleroi,  iii.  400 ;  his  error  re- 
specting the  movements  of  the  Prus- 
sian army,  iii.  403 ;  at  Laon,  iii. 
406  ;  returns  to  Paris,  iii.  406,  407  ; 
his  message  to  the  Chamber  of  Re- 
presentatives, iii.  407  ;  forms  com- 
mittee to  treat  with  the  allies  of 
Waterloo,  iii.  407 ;  his  declaration 
to  the  French  people,  iii.  41 I  ;  pro- 
poses to  abdicate  and  proclaims  his 
son  Napoleon  II.,  iii.  411  ;  asks  for 
works  on  America,  iii.  412  ;  his  fare- 
well address  to  the  army,  iii.  413  ; 
deserted  by  his  old  companions,  iii. 
414  ;  places  himself  under  English 
protection,  iii.  414 ;  instructions  to 
the  captains  of  the  two  frigates  pro- 
vided for  his  safety,  iii.  415 ;  on 
'  board  the  Bellerophon,  iii.  415  ;  his 
protestation  against  England,  iii. 
416  ;  his  observations  on  the  cam- 
paign of  1815,  published  at  St. 
Helena,  iii.  417 — 419,  425  ;  his  will, 
iii.  426—429 ;  his  death,  iii.  429, 
430  ;  Talleyrand's  opinion  of  him, 
iii.  430  ;  his  immense  correspondence, 
iii.  431 


Cacault,  citizen,  Napoleon's  letters  to, 

i.  116,  117,  133 
Cadiz  blockaded  by  Saumarez,  i.  340 
Cairo,     Napoleon     at,    i.     216—246 ; 


INDEX. 


447 


quells  revolt  at,  i.  233  ;  orders  of 
the  day  dated  at,  i.  217,  221,  230, 
237.  239 

Cairo,  divan  of,  Napoleon's  letter  to, 
i.  258 

Calais,  Napoleon  at,  ii.  19 
•Calendar,  Republican,  ceases,  ii.  192 

Calder,  Sir  Robert,  naval  conflict  with 
Villeneuve,  ii.  107,  108. 

Cambaceres,  Prince,  Napoleon's  letters 
and  notes  to,  i.  404  ;  ii.  19,  24,  36, 
37,  89, 98, 129, 132, 133, 165, 167,  200, 
2°5.  273,  285,  290,  291,  302,  307, 
3<39»  315.  316,  413.  420.  45i.  464. 
465,  467  ;«i-  115.  Iz3.  I26>  I32,  192, 
235.  239,  243,  247,  250,  251,  260, 
261,  263,  275,  280,  -281,  305; 
elected  consul,  i.  272 ;  arch-chan- 
cellor, iii.  263 

Campo  Formio,  treaty  of,  i.  125,  191, 
194.  197 

Canope,  battle  of,  i.  354,  391 

Canova,  Napoleon's  letter  to,  i.  176 

Cantillon,  sub-officer,  receives  a  legacy 
from  Napoleon,  iii.  428,  429 

Cape  of  Good  Hope,  Napoleon's  pro- 
jected expeditions  to,  i.  337  ;  re- 
stored by  the  English  "to  the  Dutch, 
i.  182,  332  ;  in  English  possession, 
i.  203,  204 

Capeflgue,  historian,  quotations  from, 
iii.  401,  406,  411,  412,  414 

Caprara,  Cardinal,  Napoleon's  allocu- 
tion to,  i.  389 

Caraman,  Captain,  Napoleon's  in- 
structions to,  iii.  272 

Carnot,  Director,  Napoleon's  letters  to, 
i.  70,  77,  82,  107,  116,  133,  145, 
313.  319.  324;  "•  375;  in  difficul- 
ties, ii.  458  ;  made  war  minister,  i. 
287  ;  made  one  of  committee  to  treat 
with  allies  after  Waterloo,  iii.  407 

Castiglione,  Napoleon's  success  at,  i. 
105 

Castlereagh,  Lord,  letter  dictated  by 
Napoleon  to,  iii.  156 

Catechism  introduced  into  France  by 
Napoleon,  ii.  246 

Caulaincourt,  General,  Napoleon's 
letters  and  notes  to,  ii.  398  ;  iii.  235, 
242,  249,  282,  293,  302,  317,  328, 
339,  343.  365.  367;  in  Russia,  ii. 
367,  368 ;  recalled  from  Russia, 
iii.  85,  98  ;  his  conduct  in  Spain, 
ii.  402 ;  sent  back  to  Russia,  iii. 
202  ;  his  titles,  iii.  343  ;  wishes  to 
refuse  the  Foreign  Office,  iii.  365  ; 
his  anger  at  the  murder  of  the  Due 


d'Enghein,  ii.  50  ;  Napoleon's  speech 

to,  afier  Waterloo,  iii.  406 
Celerier,  M.,  ii.  242 
Ceracchi-Arena  conspiracy,  i.  325,  326, 

331.  332 

Chaboulon,  M.  Fleury  de,  quotations 
from  Memoirs  of,  iii.  390,  406 

Champagny,  M.  de,  Due  de  Cadouc, 
foreign  minis:  er,  Napoleon's  letters 
and  notes  to,  ii.  120,  229,  284,  320, 

332,  335.  36o,  366—368,  394,  398, 
407.  433.  444,  451,  453,  464,  468, 
469,  471,  475  5  "i-  12,  15,  16,  20, 
21,  23,  27,  29,  30,  33,  35,  38, 
39,  44,  45,  5°,  52,  57.  62,  66,  67, 
69,  72,  74,  85,  86,  92,  95,  96,  98, 
132 

Chamberlain,  Grand,  Napoleon's  note 
to,  iii.  86 ;  ordered  to  give  a  present 
to  the  Pope's  servants,  iii.  215 

Champcentz,  Madame,  ordered  to  leave 
France,  i.  386 

Champaubert,  battle  of,  iii.  291,  310 

Champ  de  Mai,  iii.  378 

Chappe,  citizen,  inventor  of  telegraphy, 
death  of,  i.  325 

Chaptal,  citizen,  Napoleon's  letters  and 
notes  to,  i.  330,  355,  363,  369 

Charlemagne,  Napoleon  orders  a  statue 
to  be  erected  of,  ii.  10,  11,  31 

Charras,  M.,  quotations  from,  iii.  423  n 

Charucca,  Spanish  admiral;  see  Trafalgar 

Chateaubriand,  M.  de,  on  Napoleon's 
death,  iii.  429 

Chatillon,  congress  of,  iii.  292,  328 

Chaumon,  treaty  of,  iii.  328,  357 

Chayle,  Rear-Admiral  du,  calumniated 
by  Napoleon,  i.  227 ;  his  real  cour- 
age, i.  228 

Christophe  ;  see  Toussaint  Louverture 

Cintra,  Convention  of,  ii.  414,  415,  417, 
422 

Circular  to  the  sovereigns"  by  Napoleon 
on  his  return  from  Elba,  iii.  370 

Cisalpine  Republic,  Napoleon's  con- 
duct towards,  i.  384  ;  Napoleon  be- 
comes president  of,  i.  384 

Clarke,  General,  war  minister,  Napo- 
leon's notes  and  letters  to,  i.  63,  129, 
174,  175  ;  ii.  15,  263,  313,  336,  406, 
409,  414,  445,  454,  456,  458,  460, 
466-469,  471,  472,  477,  479,  480  ; 
iii.  11,  23,  28,  32,  41,  44,  49,  53,  55, 
56,  62,  63,  68,  84,  92,  in,  118,  121, 
126,  12.8,  143,  171,  205,  208,  221, 
222,  231,  237,  248,  260,  282,  285, 
301,  304,  309,  324,  327,  329,  332, 
333,    34°,    342 ;   letter  from  Joseph 


448 


INDEX. 


Buonaparte  to,  iii.  257 ;  commissioned 
to  conclude  peace  with  Austria,  i. 
123  ;  recalled,  i.  185  ;  praised  by 
Napoleon,  i.  185,  193  ;  enters  French 
Embassy  in  London,  i.  193 ;  be- 
comes Due  de  Feltre,  i.  193  ;  French 
ambassador  in  Florence,  ii.  15  ;  war 
minister  at  Berlin,  ii.  298 ;  leaves 
Paris  with  the  Bourbons,  iii.  365 

Clary,  Desiree,  Crown  Princess  of 
Sweden,  Princess  of  Ponte  Corvo,  i. 
46,  52,  59  ;  her  marriage  with  Berna- 
dotte,  i.  52  ;  ordered  to  leave  Paris, 
iii.  126 

Clermont,  Bishop  of,  threatened  by 
Napoleon,  i.  403 

Coalitions  formed  against  Napoleon,  i. 
197  ;  ii.  105,  199  ;  iii.  201 

Colbert,  Brigadier,  Napoleon's  letter  to, 
ii.  6  ;  his  mission  to  Russia,  ii.  6 

Colli,  General  ;  see  Hermann 

Cologne,  Napoleon  at,  ii.  93 

Commercial  chambers  createdin  France, 

i-383 

Committee  for  publishing  correspond- 
ence, i.  I  ;  letter  of,  to  Napoleon,  iii. 
1  ;  incorrect  assertion  of,  i.  2 

Committee  of  Arts,  Napoleon's  letter 
to,  i.  161 

Concordat,  i.  360,  364,  393,  394  ;  ii.  4, 
57,  75  ;  with  the  Jews,  ii.  233,  234 

Confederation  of  the  Rhine  arranged, 
ii.  no;  armies  required  from  the 
sovereigns  forming  the,  iii.   97 

Confederation  of  the  Rhine,  Prince 
Primate  of,  Napoleon's  letter  to,  ii. 
256,  257 

Consalvi,  Cardinal,  quotations  from  Me- 
moirs of,  i.  394  ;  opposes  Napoleon's 
second  marriage,  iii.  6,  9 

Conservatory,  inspectors  of  the,  Napo- 

.  leon's  letter  to,  i.  171 

Consuls  of  the  Republic,  Napoleon's 
letters  and  notes  to,  i.  301,  303,  304, 
309,  385  ;  decrees  by,  i.  276,  282  ; 
Napoleon  elected  First  Consul,  i.  272 

Constitution  of  the  Republican  Year 
III.  destroyed,  i.  271 

Contat,  Mademoiselle,  ii.  229 

Contributions  levied  in  Holland  and 
Germany,  ii.   221 

Copenhagen,  bombardment  of,  ii.  330 

Corbineau,  General,  Napoleon's  letter 
to,  iii.  347 

Corfu,  General  Gentili  sent  to,  i.  162, 
164  ;  occupation  of,  i.  176 ;  value 
Napoleon  placed  upon,  i.  178 ; 
taken  by  Russians  and  Turks,  i.  242; 


Napoleon's   change    of    opinion   re- 
specting its  value,  ii.   84 
Cornwallis,    Lord,    in    France,  i.  372, 

386 
Coronation   of   Napoleon   as    King  of 

Italy,  ii.  105,  109,  133  ;  as  Emperor 

of  France,  ii.  132 
Correspondence  of  Napoleon,  immense, 

iii.  431 
Corsica,  notice  of,  i.  2,  3  ;  Napoleon's 

history  of,  i.  10  ;  disturbances  in,   i. 

19,   24;    in    English   hands,   i.   42; 

generals  sent    to   expel  the  English, 

i.  142  ;  public  works  in,  iii.  339 
Corvisart,  Baron,  Napoleon's  letter  to, 

iii-  35° 
Council  of  State,   Napoleon's  address 

in,  i.   390  ;    proposes   to  invest  hitn 

with  the  purple,  ii.  7 1  n 
Coucy,  M.  de,  ex-Bishop  of  Rochelle, 

arrested,  ii.  42 
Craonne,  battle  of,  iii.  333 — 335.  337 
Cretet,   M.,    minister   of  the   interior, 

Napoleon's   letter  to,  ii.  348,   425 ; 

in  Corsica,  ii.  339 
Cuidad  Rodrigo  taken  by  Massena,  iii. 

53 ;  by  Wellington,  iii.  139,  147 


D. 

Dalberg,  arch-chancellor,  ii.  230  it 

Dalesme,  M.,  commandant  of  Elba, 
Napoleon's  letter  to,  iii.   349 

Damas,  Madame  de,  ordered  to  leave 
France,  i.   386 

Dantzic,  capitulation  of,  ii.  313  ;  de- 
clared a  free  town,  ii.  318  ;  claimed 
by  Napoleon,  iii.  70 ;  invested  by  the 
Russians,  iii.  222 

Daru,  Count,  Napoleon's  letters  to,  ii. 
139;  iii.  150,  151  ;  Napoleon's  in- 
structions to,  iii.  274 

Daure,  Commissionaire,  Napoleon's 
letters  to,  iii.   309,  310 

Davoust,  General,  Napoleon's  letters  to, 
ii.  30,  187,  336,  377,  465  ;  iii.  58, 
62,  81,  94,  100,  116,  121,  128,  129, 
146,  163,  258,  259,  262,  366,  374— 
377>  381  ;  against  the  Prussians,  ii. 
262  ;  pillage  by  his  men,  iii.  163  ; 
at  Dresden,  iii.  234  ;  war  minister, 
iii.  365  ;  his  desertion  of  Napoleon, 
iii.  414 

Decree  by  Napoleon  to  the  soldiers, 
1815,  iii.  366 

Decree  of  Milan,  ii.  347 — 349 

Decres,    Admiral,    Napoleon's    letters 


INDEX. 


449 


and  notes  to,  i.   392,  395  :  ii.  3,  24, 

25>  34.  9'.  94.  143.  146.  170,  225, 
300,  329,  348,  363,  377,  378,  392, 
397,  398,  439  ;  ill-  49.  84,  91,  108, 
116,  117,  119,  129,  146,  159,  215, 
221,  255,  259,  329,  372  ;  Villeneuve's 
letter  to,  ii.  171  ;  minister  of  marine 
places  two  frigates  at  Napoleon's  dis- 
posal after  Waterloo,  iii.  359 

Dejean,  General,  Napoleon's  letters  to, 
ii.  301,  302,  418 

Delmas,  General,  Napoleon's  letter  to, 
i.  154  ;  exiled,  i.  394 

Demerara  ;   see  Tobago 

Denmark,  King  of,  Napoleon's  letters 
to,  ii.  462  ;  iii.  207,  252  ;  Napoleon's 
policy  towards,  ii.  326  ;  declares  war 
against  England,  ii.  330 

Dennewitz,  battle  of,  iii.  203,  271 

Deputations  to  Napoleon  from  Finis- 
terre,  his  answer  to,  iii.  91  ;  from  the 
Ionian  Islands,  iii.  1 1 7  ;  from  the  Jews, 
ii.  233  ;  from  the  merchants,  iii.  113 

Desaix,  General,  Napoleon's  letters  to, 
i.  248,  259,  300 ;  at  Marengo,  i.  310, 
311  ;  signs  treaty  of  El  Arish,  i.  337  ; 
death  of,  i.  310  ;  Napoleon's  disposal 
of  his  body,  ii  312  ;  Napoleon  orders 
a  monument  to  his  memory,  i.  322  ; 
Napoleon  pensions  his  mother,  i.  318 

Despinoy,  General,  Napoleon's  letter 
to,  i.  89 

Dessolles,  General,  in  Hanover,  ii.  65, 
66  n 

Director  of  Customs,  Napoleon's  letter 
to,  iii.  54 

Directory,  Napoleon's  letters  to,  i.  65, 
67,  69,  72—74.  76,  81,  88,  91,  97, 
no — 116,  119,  122,   128,  130,  132, 

135— 141.  147.  149—152,  154.  158, 
160,  162,  163,  165,  167—169,  171 — 
177,  181,  183,  185,  191- 193,  210, 
215,  219,  226,  231,  233,  236,  246, 
250,  253,  255,  257,  269  ;  letter  from 
— to  Napoleon,  i.  184  ;  refuses  to 
ratify  the  treaty  with  Sardinia,  i. 
147  ;  wishes  to  recommence  war  with 
Austria,  i.  184 ;  decree  by,  relative  to 
the  invasion  of  Egypt,  i.  203,  204 ; 
power  passes  from,  to  three  Consuls, 
i.  272  ;  overthrown,  i.  284  ;  President 
of,  Napoleon's  letter  to,  i.  204 

Dissertation  sur  VAutorite  royale,  by 
Napoleon,  i.  17 

Dolgorouki,  Prince,  Napoleon's  inter- 
view with,  ii.  183,  184 

Don,  General,  exchange  of,  for  Napper 
Tandy,  i.  295 
VOL.    III. 


Drake,  Captain,  British  charge  d'affaires, 
ii.  35  ;  Napoleon's  designs  against,  ii. 
36 ;  intercepted  correspondence  of, 
ii.  60,  61 

Dresden,  battle  of,  iii.  266,  268  ;  bridge 
of,  blown  up  by  Davoust,  iii.  234 

Droust,  Comte,  Napoleon's  notes  to, 
iii.  260,  351  ;  sent  to  Elba,  iii.  349 

Dugommier,  General,  Napoleon's  kindly 
remembrance  of,  i.  325 

Duguesclin,-  pension  given  to  descend- 
ants of,  ii.  226,  227 

Dumanoir,   Admiral,    at   Trafalgar,   ii. 

175.474 

Dumas,  General,  ii.  203,  212 

Dumberion,  Genera],  successfully  com- 
mands army  of  Italy,  i.  37 

Dumesnil,  M.,  commandant  at  Vin- 
cennes,  iii.  83,  84 

Dumolard,  citizen,  brings  motion  before 
Assembly  against  Napoleon,  i.  167 

Dundas,  M.,  MS.  quotation  from  speech 
by,  i.  297 

Duncan,  Admiral,  defeats  the  Dutch, 
i.  195 

Dupin,  M.,  minister,  Napoleon's  letters 
to,  i.  33.  35 

Duphot,  General,  killed  in  Rome,  i. 
197,  198  j  marriage  arranged,  i.  199 

Dupont,  General,  defeated  in  Spain,  ii. 
404  ;  defence  of,  ii.  404 — 406  ;  capit- 
ulation of,  iii.  108 

Duroc,  General,  Due  de  Frioul,  Napo- 
leon's letters  and  notes  to,  i.  353 ;  ii. 
146—148,  161,  298,  333;  iii.  117, 
228  ;  sent  to  Russia,  i.  367  ;  death  of, 
iii.  246,  247,  250 

Duruy,  M.,  historian,  note  by,  ii.  36  n  ; 
quotation  from,  on  decree  of  Berlin, 
ii.  272 

Djezzar,  nominated  Pasha  of  Acre,  i. 
231  ;  Napoleon's  letter  to,  i.  249 


E. 


Egypt,  Napoleon  in,  i.  212 — 247,  258 — 
264;  reaches,  i.  212  ;  his  success  in, 
i.  215  ;  money  levied  in,  i.  217  ;  his 
cruelty  in,  217,  218;  operations  in,  i. 
247 ;  Napoleon  leaves  for  Syria,  i. 
242  ;  returns  to,  i.  242,  257 ;  General 
Kleber  instructed  to  hold,  i.  313 ; 
evacuation  of,  by  the  French,  i.  262, 
334.  372  ;  restored  to  the  Porte,  i.  360 

Egypt,  Pasha  of,  Napoleon's  letters  to 
the,  i.  213,  214 

G   G 


45° 


INDEX. 


El  Arish,  treaty  of,  i.  337  ;  Napoleon's 
note  on,  i.  298  ;  British  Government 
refuse  to  ratify,  i.  301 

Elba,  occupied  by  the  French,  i.  117, 
355  ;  ceded  by  Naples,  i.  180  ;  Napo- 
leon endeavours  to  obtain  possession 
of,i.  348  ;  Napoleon's  treatment  of,  in 
1802,  i.  397  ;  government  organised 
by  Napoleon,  i.  403 ;  requisitions 
from,  ii.  133;  Napoleon's  life  at,  iii. 
349,  35° — 356  ;  his  escape  from,  iii. 
357,  361 

Empire,  French,  founded,  ii.  75 — 78 

d'Enghien,  Due,  arrest  and  assassina- 
tion of,  ii.  47 — 50,  66,  68,  70 

England,  JCing  of,  Napolejn's  letters 
to,  i.  278,  378  ;  ii.  357 

England,  Prince  Regent  of,  Napoleon's 
letter  to,  iii.  414 

England,  unsucces-ful  negotiations  of, 
i.  182;  without  allie-,  i.  182;  coali- 
tion formed  by,  i.  197 ;  concludes 
peace  with  Russia  and  France,  i. 
333  ;  strong  feeling  against  in  France, 
ii.  12  ;  blockades  the  mouths  of  the 
Elbe  and  We^er,  ii.  21,  23  ;  Napo- 
leon prepares  to  invade,  ii.  32,  33, 
148  ;  Napoleon's  suspicions  of  Eng- 
lish arrested  in  France,  ii.  16;  ill- 
treatment  of  English  vessels,  ii.  14 ; 
navy  in  1808,  ii.  364;  ministers  in 
1806,  ii.  211  ;  in  Spain,  ii.  426, 
427 ;  Napoleon's  note  for  English 
ambassador,  ii.  1 1 

Enzersdorf,  battle  of,  ii.  459,  460 

Erfurth,  treaty  of,  ii.  413,  415  ;  iii. 
134;  Napoleon  retreats  to,  iii. 
279 

d' Erlon,  Comte,  iii.  390,  392,  396 

Escoiquiz,  Juan,  ii.  351,  352;  his  con- 
versation with  Napoleon,  ii.  354 — 
356 

Essling,  battle  of,  ii.  429,  454,  455 

Atats  des  services  furnished  by  Napoleon, 

i.  35.  36 

Etruria,  Count  of  Leghorn,  becomes 
King  of,  i.  356  ;  received  in  Paris, 
i.  356 ;  Napoleon  commands  the 
Pope  to  recognise  the,  i.  358  ;  Napo- 
leon's note  to,  on  the  evacuation  of 
Tuscany,  i.  371  ;  died,  ii.  2 

Etruria,  Queen  of,  forced  into  war  with 
England,  ii.  81  ;  robbed  for  Eliza 
Buonaparte,  ii.  228  ;  Napoleon's  in- 
terference with  Etruria,  ii.  333,  334  ; 
ill-treated  by  Napoleon,  iii.  120 

Eylau,  battle  of,  ii.  279,  290,  291,  293, 
'294.  295.  297,  298 


F. 

Faenza,  town  of,  taken  by  the  French, 

i.  136 
Fain,   Baron,  quotation  from,  iii.  303, 

304 

Farewell,  Napoleon  s,  to  the  guard  be- 
fore Elba,  iii.  348,  349 

Faypoult,  citizen,  Napoleon's  letters  to, 
i.  65,  76 

Ferrara,  Napoleon  at,  i.  115 

Fersen,  Baron  de,  Swedish  ambassa- 
dor, i.  194 

Fesch,  Cardinal,  Napoleon's  letters  to, 
i.  7,  16,  21,  24  ;  ii.  58,  70,  71,  94, 
138,  202,  208,  214,  217,  230;  store- 
keeper to  the  army  of  the  Alps,  i. 
31 ;  nominated  to  the  embassy  at 
Kome,  ii.  10  ;  promoted  to  be  co- 
adjutor of  the  elector  arch-chancellor, 
ii.  236 ;  his  position  with  regard  to 
Napoleon's  marriage,  iii.  7,  8 

Flahault,  General,  represents  France  at 
Lusigny,  iii.  326 

Flanders,  Napoleon  enters,  iii.  359 

Finance  minister,  Napoleon's  letters  to, 
i.  87,  178 

Finkenstein,   Napoleon's   letters  from, 

ii-  304—313 
Fontainehleau,  treaty  of,  with  Spain,  ii. 

338  ;  the  Pope  at,  iii.  158  ;  Napoleon 

abdicates  at,  iii.  344,  347 
Foreign  affairs,  minister  of,  Napoleon's 

letters  to,  i.  178,    180,    194;  ii.  40, 

210,  448,451  ;  Hi.  12,   21,  45,    131, 

165,    174,     186,    377 ;    installed    at 

Wilna,  iii.  165 
Forfait,   M.,  Napoleon's  letters   to,    i. 

347.  359 

Forli,  Napoleon  at,  i.  136 

Fort  Carre,  Napoleon  committed  to, 
i.  40 

Fouche,  M.,  Due  d'Otrante,  minister 
of  police,  Napoleon's  letters  and 
notes  to,  i.  306,  356,  374,  385,  386  ; 
ii.  92,  96 — 100,  127,  129,  131,  133, 
134,  162,  189,  204,  211,  243,  266, 
286,  295,  296,  299,  301,  303,  307, 
309,  312,   313,    315,   320,   322,  340, 

367,  374,  386,  437,  44°,  456>  459, 
462,  463,  465,  472,  474;  iii.  n, 
34,  42,  44,  243,  283,  313,  364  ;  ap- 
pointed Governor  of  Rome,  iii.  43, 
47  ;  deprived  of  his  portfolio,  iii.  42, 
43  ;  in  disgrace,  iii.  11,  243  ;  ordered 
to  Dresden,  iii.  243  ;  appointed 
governor  of  the  Illyrian  provinces, 
iii.    258  ;  sent  to   Naples,  iii.    283 ; 


INDEX. 


451 


narrow  escape  of,  iii.  364  re,  365  re  ; 
appointed  one  of  committee  to  treat 
with  allies  after  Waterloo,  iii.  407  ; 
his  desertion  of  Napoleon,  iii.  414 

Foure,  citizen,  i.  238 

Fox,  Mr.,  on  peace  of  Amiens,  i.  383  ; 
procures  the  release  of  his  country- 
men in  France,  ii.  241  ;  refu;es  to 
agree  to  Napoleon's  plans,  1806,  ii. 
198  ;  death  of,  ii.  198,  256 

Foy,  Marshal,  in  Spain,  iii.  257 

France,  position  of,  in  1 800,  i.  284  ; 
invaded  by  the  allies,  1813,  iii.  290 

Frankfort  occupied  by  the  French,  ii. 
205,  206  ;  treaty  of  peace  offered  to 
Napoleon  by  the  allies,  iii.  293,  294 

Friedland,  battle  of,  ii.  279,  315 ; 
Napoleon's  plans  after,  ii.  281 

Frotte,  Count  Louis,  pursued  by 
General  Brune,  i.  292  ;  assassinated, 
i.  292  ;  Napoleon's  duplicity  towards 
him,  i.  292,  294 

Fulton,  steamship  inventor,  i.  329,  347  ; 
ii.  38 

Functionaries,  public,  Napoleon's  letter 
to  the,  i.  324 


G. 


Gabrielli,  Cardinal,  ii.  400,  401 

Gallo,  Marquis  de,  meets  Napoleon  at 
Leoben,  i.  151  ;  visits  Napoleon  at 
Montebello,  i.  159 ;  ambassador  in 
Paris,  ii.  68,  69 

Gardane,  General,  his  mission  to  Persia, 
ii.  310,  311 

Gaudin,  M.,  minister  of  finance,  Napo- 
leon's letters  and  notes  to,  ii.  274, 
328,  369  ;  iii.  47,  121 

Ganteaume,  Admiral,  Napoleon's  letters 
to,  i.  218,  329,  346;  ii.  39,  91  ; 
Napoleon's  instructions  to,  i.  344  ; 
sails   from  Brest  for  Egypt,    i.   329, 

339>  34° 

Gaza,  Napoleon's  letter  from,  i.  248  ; 
battle  of,  i.  250 
\  Genoa  offends  France,  i.  39  ;  heavily 
fined,  i.  65,  75  ;  capitulates  to  Aus- 
tria, i.  308,  309  ;  annexed  by  France, 
ii.  105,  109,  no;  Napoleon's  letter 
to  Archbishop  of,  i.  180 

Gentili,  General,  sent  to  Corfu,  i.  162 ; 
at  Corfu,  i.  164 

Georges,  Cadoudal,  in  La  Vendee,  1. 
v     290,  292 — 294  ;  his  arrest  ordered,  i. 


306,  351 ;  sends  emissaries  to  France, 

i.  352  ;  his  relations  arrested,  ii.  17  ; 

arrest,  death  of,  ii.  51,  55,  62 — 64,  66 
Germain,  Count,  Napoleon's  letter  to, 

iii.  236 
Germany,     Emperor     of,     Napoleon's 

letters  to,  i.  112,  311  ;  Napoleon  in, 

1805,  ii.  151 — 205 
Gilot,  Napoleon's  orders  respecting,  i. 

335 
Gneisenau,  General,  on  battle  of  Ligny, 
iii.  394  re  ;  report  on  Waterloo,   iii. 
422  re,  423  re 
Gobain,  Grenadier,  Napoleon's  note  on 

suicide  of,  i.  392 
Godoi,  Manuel,   Prince   of  the  Peace, 
i.   372  ;    Napoleon  refuses   his   por- 
trait   to,    i.    349  ;     pretensions    of, 
i.  359  ;    Napoleon  threatens,   ii.   28, 
29 ;    Napoleon's    note   to,    ii.    209  ; 
concludes  treaty  of  Bale,  ii.  299,  350  ; 
unpopular  in  Spain,  ii.  350,  351,  375  ; 
imprisoned,  ii.  376,  384 
Gori'z,  Napoleon  at,  i.  144,  145 
Gorodina,  Napoleon  at,  iii.  190  re 
Gourdand,    General,    quotation    from, 

iii.  423  re,  424  n 
Grassini,  Mademoiselle,  ordered  to  sing 
before  Napoleon,   i.    313;  promoted 
by  him,  i.  313  ;   ii.  339 
Gravina,    Admiral,    ordered    to    assist 
Admiral  Brieux,  i.  294,  393  ;  at  Tra- 
falgar, 176,  178 
Grenier  d'Abondance,  iii.  165  re 
Grey,  Lord,  on  Napoleon,  i.  279 
Gross-Beeren,  battle  of,  iii.  203,  271 
Grouchy,   General,   i.   295,  296  ;  made 
chief   of  the  staff  at  Waterloo,    iii. 
398,   402 — 405  ;    Soult  to  Grouchy, 
iii.  404 
Grouchy,  Marquis  de,  defence  of  Mar- 
shal Grouchy,  iii.  402 
Guibert,  citizen,   Napoleon's  letter  to, 
i.  234 


H. 


Haller,  citizen,   Napoleon's  letters  to, 

i.  161,  166,  188 
Hamburg,  Napoleon's  letter  to  Senate 

of,  i.  282 
Hamuda  Pasha,    Bey  of  Tunis,  Napo- 

poleon's    letters    to,    i.    379,    380; 

Nelson's  letter  to,  i.  380 

G    G     2 


452 


INDEX. 


Hanau,  battle  of,  iii.  281 

Hanover  invaded  by  Napoleon,  ii.  18  ; 
offered  to  Prussia,  ii.  144, 195  ;  offered 
to  England  at  the  same  time,  ii.  197  ; 
ceded  to  England,  ii.  249 

Hardenberg  signs  treaty  of  Kalisch, 
iii.  232 

Hatzfeld,  Prince  of,  Napoleon's  clemency 
to,  ii.  269,  270  ;  iii.  35 

Haugwitz,  M.  de,  ii.  180,  182,  187,  195 

Hauterive,  citizen,  Napoleon's  letters 
to,  i.  380  ;  ii.  480 

Hawkesbury,  Lord,  his  defence  of 
British  actions,  1 803,  ii.  36  ;  his  views 
in  1804,  ii.  79;  note  to,  i.  361  ; 
Napoleon  refutes  his  insinuations,  i. 
356 

Hedouville,  General,  Napoleon's  letters 
to,  i.  287 ;  commander-in-chief  of 
the  army  of  England,  i.  287 ;  super- 
seded in  La  Vendee,  i.  289 

Heliopolis,  battle  of,  i.  286 

Helvetian  Republic  threatened  by 
Napoleon,  i.  384,  403 

Hermann,  General,  exchanged  for  Gene- 
Colli,  i.  295,  296 

Hesse  Cassel  taken  possession  of  by 
Napoleon,  ii.  264 

Hill,  Lord,  iii.  140 

d'Hilliers,  General  Baraguey,  takes 
possession  of  Venice,  i.  160 

Hoche,  General,  acquiring  fame,  i.  30  ; 
sent  to  La  Vendee,  i.  51  ;  imprisoned, 
i.  64 ;  applied  to  by  the  Republican 
Government  to  prevent  a  Bourbon 
restoration,  i.  172,  173  ;  death  of, 
i.  190 

Hohenlinden,  battle  of,  i.  287,  336 

Hohenzollern,  Prince,  intercepted  letter 
from,  i.  306 

Holland,  Lord,  Reminiscences  by,  quo- 
tations from,  ii.  42 1  n  ;  iii.  328,  329  n, 
426 

Holland  forced  into  war,  ii.  245,  246  ; 
annexed  by  France,  iii.  47,  48  ;  king 
of;  see  Buonaparte,  Louis 

Hompesch,  General,  Napoleon's  in- 
terest in,  i.  369 

Hood,  Admiral,  capitulation  with,  i. 
101 

Hortense,  Queen  of  Holland,  Napo- 
leon's letters  to,  iii.  15,  33,  48,  166  ; 
her  reluctance  to  go  to  Holland,  ii. 
237  ;  loses  her  son,  ii.  261,  311  ;  her 
delight  at  leaving  Holland,  iii.  49 

Hullin,  General,  ii.  50 

Hulote,  General,  report  on  the  passage 
of  the  Sambre,  iii.  388  n 


I 


India,  Napoleon's  desire  to  go  to,  i. 

54,  58  ;  Napoleon's  designs  upon,  i. 

362;  ii.  68,  115,  394,  395 
Imola,   General  Victor  marches  on,  i. 

135  ,       , 

Interior,   minister  of  the,   Napoleon  s 

letters  to,  i.   165,  201,   326  ;  ii.  218, 

419  ;  iii.  17 
Ireland,   Napoleon's  designs   upon,   ii. 

25,  26  ;  orders  an  expedition  to,  ii. 

96 
Isabey,  artist,  iii.  378 
Italian   Republic  placed  under  French 

protection,  i.  396 
Italy,    Napoleon    in,    i.    37,    67 — 143, 

158—193,   306—3l5  !  "•   126—136  ; 

closed  for  English  commerce,  ii.  218  ; 

contributions  levied  in,  ii.  218 
Ivree  taken  by  Napoleon,  i.  304 


J- 


Jacobins  punished  for   Ceracchi-Arena 

conspiracy,  i.  332 
Jaffa,   Napoleon's  orders  from,  i.  248  ; 

proclamation  from,  i.   249  ;  siege  of, 

i.  250 
James,   historian,   quotations  from,  iii. 

146,  147,  159,  330 
Jantzon,  Francois,  notice  of,  i.  149 
Jarvis,  battle  of,  i.  144 
Java  becomes  a  French  colony,  iii.  59 
Jena,  battle  of,  ii.  198,  261,  262 
Jervis,    Admiral     Sir    John,    Nelson's 

letter  to,  i.  90,  117  n 
Jesuits,  Napoleon's  grudge  against  the, 

ii.  116 
Jews,  convocation  of  the,  in  France,  ii. 

233.  234 

Jomini,  military  historian,  ii.  337  ;  note 
by,  on  Marengo,  i.  311  ;  joins  the 
allies,  iii.  263  ;  on  Blucher's  vigilance, 
iii.  385  n ;  Grouchy  at  Waterloo, 
iii.  405 

Josephine,  Empress,  marriage  to  Beau- 
harnais,  i.  4 ;  marriage  to  Napoleon,  i. 
63,  ii.  231 ;  iii.  5, 6 ;  joins  him  in  Italy, 
i.  79 ;  Napoleon's  letters  and  notes  to, 
i.  79,  80  ;  ii.  82,  88,  98,  154,  160,  261, 
269,  271,  272,  276—278,  283—287, 
291—293,  297,   303,  304,   308,   310, 

3",  315. 317. 321. 323.  383.  4>5.  426, 
427,  450,  455,  459,  476,  479,  480 ; 
I11-  15.  33.  42,  5°.  59.  94 ;  at  Milan, 
i.   79  ;   narrowly  escapes   capture  in 


INDEX. 


453 


Italy,  i.  107  ;  accompanies  Napoleon 
to  Toulon,  goes  to  Aix,  i.  206 ;  im- 
morality, i.  238  ;  intercession  for  Due 
d'Enghien,  ii.  50,  51  ;  in  Strasburg, 
ii.  153;  her  jealousy,  ii.  278,283; 
accompanies  Napoleon  to  Austria, 
}]•  447  >  is  divorced  from  Napoleon, 
ii.  340 — 342  ;  uses  her  influence  for 
the  Austrian  marriage,  iii.  5  ;  her 
pension,  iii.  342 

Josephine,  manuscript  of,  sent  to  Paris, 
i.  165,  166 

Joubert,  General,  Napoleon's  letters 
to,  i.  165,  175 

Jouberthon,  Madame,  ii.  348,  349 

Jourdan,  Marshal,  Napoleon's  letters 
to,  i.  275,  307  ;  ii.  401,  468  ;  de- 
feated by  the  Archduke  Charles  at 
Feldkirch,  i.  241,  259  ;  praised  by 
Napoleon,  ii.  234  ;  proposed  title  for, 

»•  399 

Junot,  Marshal,  Due  d'Abrantes,  ii.  414  ; 
Napoleon's  notes  and  letters  to,  i.  40  ; 
ii.  229,  337, 343,  344,  370, 391  ;  life  in 
1795>  i-  48  ;  takes  Italian  trophies  to 
Paris,  i.  73  ;  conveys  Napoleon's  letter 
to  Venice,  i.  148  ;  defeated  atVimeiro, 
357  ;  his  rapacity  in  Portugal,  ii.  415  ; 
Napoleon's  instructions  to  him  in 
Madrid,  ii.  118,  119;  concludes  con- 
vention of  Cintra,  ii.  414,  415,  417 

Jung,  Colonel,  quotation  from  his  his- 
tory, ii.  54 

Justice,  minister  of,  Napoleon's  note  to, 
ii.  41 

K. 

Kalisch,  treaty  of,  iii.  232,  234 

Kalitcheff,  M.  de,  Russian  ambassador 
in  France,  i.  340 

Keith,  Lord,  at  Genoa,  i.  309 ;  his 
treatment  of  Massena,  i.  312 

Kellerman,  General,  Napoleon's  letters 
to,  i.  133 ;  iii.  55,  266  ;  sent  to 
Italy,  i.  51  ;  at  Marengo,  i.  311 

Kilmaine,  General,  receives  command 
of  Lombardy,  i.  127;  receives  Na- 
poleon's instruction?,  i.  148 

Kleber,  General,  Napoleon's  letters  to, 
i.  216,  220,  227,  262,  263  ;  his  divi- 
sion mutinies  in  the  desert,  i.  248  ; 
appointed  chief  of  the  Army  in  the 
East,  i.  263,  264,  274,  277  ;  authorised 
to  make  terms  with  Turkey,  i.  262  ; 
receives  orders  from  Napoleon  to 
hold  Egypt,  i.  3I3>  3l6  :  wins  battIe 
of  Heliopolis,  i.   286 ;  his  death,   i. 


286  ;  Napoleon  orders  a  monument 
to  be  erected  to  his  memory,  i.  322 

Kcenigsberg,  Napoleon  at,  ii.  322 

Kolli,  M.,  iii.  84,  85 

Kourakine,  Prince,  Russian  ambassador 
in  France,  iii.  151 

Kray,  General,  driven  back  upon  Ulm, 
i.  316 

Krasnoi,  fighting  at,  iii.  185 

Kremlin,  the,  occupied  by  the  French, 
iii.  176,  180 

Krusemark,  M.  de,  Prussian  ambas- 
sador, iii.  233 

Kutusoff,  General,  Napoleon's  letter  to, 
iii.  179  ;  appointed  to  command  the 
Russian  army,  iii.  172  ;  signs  treaty 
of  Kalisch,  iii.  232 


Lacepede,  General,  Napoleon's  letters 
to,  ii.  211,  228,  313,  314,  339,  475, 
476 

Lacrosse  driven   from   Guadaloupe,    i. 

383 
Lacue'e,     General,    Napoleon's   letters 
to,    i.    326 ;   ii.    87,   417  ;   iii.    143, 

153 

Lady  of  Loretti,  Our,  i.  140,  395 
Laforest,  M.,  Napoleon's  letters  to,  iii. 

70,  71 
Laharpe,    M.,  ordered  to  leave  Paris, 

i- 385 

Laine,  report  by,  on  the  wars  of  Napo- 
leon, iii.  289 

Lake,  Lord,  ii.  129,  130 

Lamiston,  Count,  ambassador  in  Rus- 
sia, iii.  98,  99 

Lance,  Chevalier  de,  Napoleon's  letter 
to,  i.  19,  20 

Lanfrey,  quotations  from  Memoirs  by, 
i.  251  n  ;  ii.  20,  45,  52,  55,  61,  158  ; 
on  Captain  Wright's  murder,  ii.  164  ; 
on  Villeneuve's  death,  ii.  172;  246, 

294>  4°5.  429>  434. 455.  47° » }}ii-  '35 
Lannes,   General,  at  Vienna,  ii.  451  ; 

deaih  of,  455 
Laou   in   the  hands  of  the  allies,   iii. 

335.    336  ;    Napoleon  at,    iii.    359, 

384 
Lapi,    General,    Napoleon's   letter   to, 

iii.  361 
Laplace,  citizen,  Napoleon's  letters  to, 

i.  272,  407;  iii.  167 
Lardner,  historian,  quotation  from,  iii. 

137 

La  Rochefoucauld,  M.,  11.  25 


454 


INDEX. 


La  Rochefoucauld,  Madame,  Napoleon's 

letters  to,  li.    410 
La  Rothiere,  battle  of,  iii.  291,  303 
Latour,  Foissac,  disgraced  for  surrender- 
ing Mantua,  i.  319,  320 
Lau^ier,   Captain,    gives  Napoleon  an 

excuse   for   fresh    hostilities    against 

Venice,  i.  155 
Lauriston,   Comte,  Napoleon's  instruc- 
tions to,  iii.  no  ;  note  to,  iii.  226 
Lavalette  and  Napoleon,  iii.  428 
Lebrun,   General,  ii.   205  ;  Napoleon's 

letters  to,  ii.  206,  289  ;  iii.  47,  59,  63  ; 

elected    consul  i.  272  ;    Governor  of 

Antwerp,  iii.  285 
Leclerc,    General,    Napoleon's    letters 

and  note  to,   i.   387,  397,  398,  407  ; 

at  St.  Domingo,   i.   375,  376  ;  death 

of,  i.  407 
Lefebvre,-  Marshal,  Duke  of  Dantsic, 

Napoleon's  letters  to,  ii.  300,   463  ; 

appointed    to     command     the     Old 

Guard,  iii.    156 
Le  Gallois,  Abbe,  iii.  106,  107 
Leghorn  held  by  the    French,   i.    377  ; 

in  a  state  of  siege,  ii.  63 
Leichenstein,  Prince,  ii.  479 
Leipsic,  battle  of,  iii.  278,  279 
Lemarois,  General,  ii.  231 
Leoben,  Napoleon  at,  i.  149,  150 
Le  >n,  private  soldier,  Napoleon's  letter 

to,  i.  289,  290 
Lesegno,  Napoleon  at,  i.  71 
Letort,    General,     death    of,    iii.    388, 

389 
Le  Tourneur,  citizen,  Napoleon's  letter 

to,  i.  63 
Licences  for  trade,  Napoleon's  sale  of, 

iii.  112,  113 
Ligny,   battle  of,   iii.   359,  390,  392 — 

394 

Lille,  negotiations  of,  broken  off,  i.  182 

Linois,  Admiral,  defeated  by  the  Eng- 
lish, ii.  94 

List  of  masters  at  Brienne,  i.  5  ;  com- 
rades at  Brienne,  i.  6  ;  officers  in  the 
army  of  Italy,  i.  67  ;  Napoleon's 
generals  in  Italy,  i.  69 ;  treasures 
seized  in  Italy,  i.  163  ;  successes  in 
I797i  i.  T95  >  armies  in  1799,  i. 
242 ;  statues  for  the  Tuileries,  i. 
290;  Napoleon's  clothes,  1811,  iii. 
117,  118 

Locker,  William,  Nelson's  letter  to, 
i.  102 

Lodi,  battle  of,  i.  81 ;  Napoleon's  letters 
from,  i.  82 

Louis  XVI.,  flight  of,  i.  23 


Louis     XVIII.   returns    to    Paris,    iii. 

Lombardy,  Napoleons  proclamation  to 
the  people  of,   i.   85,  88;    contribu-- 
tions   levied  in,    i.  85  ;    general  ad- 
ministration of,  Napoleon's  letter  to, 
i.  149 
Lonato,  Napolem  at,  i.  104 — 106 
Londonderry,     Lord,    quotations   from 
Memoirs  of,   on  Peninsular  War,  ii. 
344,  405  n,  406  n  t  iii.  140,  203,  204, 
257  ;  on  Waterloo,  iii.  420  n 
Louisiana  ceded  to  the  United  States, 

ii.  10,  60  n 
Lucchesini,  M.  de,  ii.  250 
Luneville,  treaty  of,  i.  333,  341 
Lutzen,  battle  of,  iii.  239—242 
Luxembourg,   Due  de,   standards  cap- 
tured by,  ii.  187 
Lyndoch,  Lord,  Duke  of  Wellington's 

letter  to,  iii.  385  « 
Lyons,  Napoleon  at,  i.  315 
Lyons,     Archbishop     of,     Napoleon's 
letter  to,  i.   404 


M. 

Macaulay  on  Frederic  the  Great,  iii. 
290,  291 

Macdonald,  Mar.-hal,  Napoleon's  letters 
to,  iii.  295  ;  Napoleon  sends  in- 
structions to,  iii.  163 

Mack,  General,  captured,  ii.  157  ; 
trial  of,  ii.  157,  158  ;  exchanged,  i. 
295,  296 

Madeleine,  construction  of  the,  ii.  275, 
276,  420 

Madrid,  the  French  in,  ii.  369 — 373  ; 
Napoleon  enters,  ii.  421  ;  capitula- 
tion of,  ii.  422 

Maida,  battle  of,  ii.  245 

Maillard,  Colonel,  report  on  Napoleon, 
i.  26 

Maitland,  captain  of  the  Bellerophon, 
Napoleon  surrenders  to,  iii.  415, 
416 

Malmesbury,  Lord,  unsuccessful  nego- 
tiations, i.  120,  182 

Malta,  Emperor  of  Russia  negotiates 
for  purchase  of,  i.  138,  192  ;  knights 
of,  expelled,  i.  210,  213  ;  French 
take  possession  of,  i.  209  ;  despatches 
for  administration  of  the  island, 
i.  210;  sacrifices  of  the  garrison,  i. 
317,  318  ;  nomination  of  Grand 
Master,     i.     261,    369,     400,     4C8  ; 


INDEX. 


455 


Napoleon's  note  on,  i.  388  ;  evacua- 
tion of,  by  England  refused,  ii.  13  ; 
proposed  exchange  of  Malta  for  Ire- 
land, ii.  25,  26 ;  Malta  an  excuse 
for  war  with  England,  1804,  ii.  59 

Malta,  Bishop  of,  Napoleon's  letter  to, 
i.  209 

Manheim  becomes  French,  i.  194. 

Mansourah,   Napoleon's  letter  from,  i. 

243 
Mantua  besieged  by  Napoleon,  i.  102  ; 

taken,  i.   125,  142  ;    surrendered  by 

the  French,  i.  319 
Mamelukes,  destruction  of  the,  i.  214 
Marbeuf,  Comte  de,  friend  of  Charles 

Buonaparte,  i.  3  ;  Napoleon's  letter 

to,  i.  6  ;  governor  of  Corsica,  i.  3  ; 

gives  Napoleon  admission  to  Brienne, 

i-  4 

Marengo,  battle  of,  i.  2S6,  309,  310 

Maret,  General,  Napoleon's  letters  and 
notes  to,  iii.  101,  102,  no,  112,  120, 
127,  131,  147,  15 1,  154,  166 — 
168,  170,  173,  176,  177,  180,  184, 
186,  187,  188,  191,  194,  222,  223, 
233.  239,  248,  263,  271,  272,  276, 
371  ;  made  Due  de  Bassano,  iii.  239 

Marie-Louise,  Empress,  Napoleon's 
letters  to,  iii.  26,  28,  250,  281,  347, 
348  ;  her  marriage,  iii.  9,  22,  25  ;  ap- 
pointed Regent,  iii.  243,  247,  292, 
300  ;  celebration  of  her  fete,  iii.  264  ; 
her  anxiety,  iii.  305 

Marine,  minister  of,  Napoleon's  letter 
and  notes  to,  ii.   148,  474;  iii.   39, 

40,  56 

Markoff,  M.  de,  Russian  ambassador,  1. 
385  ;  Napoleon  endeavours  to  pro- 
cure his  recall  by  the  Czar,  ii.  23, 
24  ;  offends  Napoleon,  ii.  86,  90 

Marmont,  General,  Napoleon's  letters 
an  I  notes  to,  i.  219,  225,  232,  242, 
250,  252  ;  ii.  67,  73,  124  ;  iii.  147, 
148,  149,  338  ;  at  Mayence,  i. 
48  ;  left  at  Alexandria,  i.  240  ;  re- 
places Massena  in  Spain,  iii.  78,  153  ; 
at  Salamanca,  iii.  1 70 ;  defeated  by 
the  allies  in  a  nocturnal  attack,  iii. 
335,336  ;  deserts  Napoleon  and  joins 
the  allies,  iii.  291,  34S,  362;  is 
chosen  as  instructor  by  Due  de 
Reichstadt,  iii.  427  n 

Martinique,  birthplace  of  Josephine,  i. 
362 

Marseilles  surrenders  to  Napoleon, 
1815,  iii.  372,  374 

Marshal  of  the  Palace,   Grand,  Napo- 

■    leon's  note  to,  iii.  226 


Massena,  Marshal,  Napoleon's  letters 
and  notes  to,  i.  318,  321;  ii.  449  ;  iii. 
374  ;  Napoleon's  note  on,  ii.  221  n  ; 
instructions  to,  in  Spain,  iii.  40,  41, 
60,  61 ;  in  Napoleon's  army,  i.  67  ; 
success  at  Rivoli,  i.  131  ;  success  in 
Switzerland,  i.  242  ;  embezzlements 
by,  i.  281  ;  ii.  203,  207  ;  shut  up  in 
Genoa,  i.  300  ;  capitulates  at  Genoa 
to  Melas,  i.  286,  308,  309  ;  treatment 
of  by  Lord  Keith,  i.  312 ;  super- 
seded by  Brune  in  Italy,  i.  321,  322  ; 
in  charge  of  the  army  in  Italy,  ii.  14  ; 
present  to,  ii.  149,  150  ;  with  the 
army,  1806,  ii.  202  ;  his  love  of 
money,  ii.  235  ;  his  character  and 
talents,  ii.  238  ;  in  Spain,  iii.  1 1  ; 
takes  Ciudad  Rodrigo,  iii.  53 ;  re- 
pulsed at  Busaco,  iii.  61,  76 ;  at 
Torres  Vedras,  iii.  68,  75  ;  removed 
from  command  in  Spain,  iii.  78  > 
Michaud's  note  on,  iii.  105  « ;  Na- 
poleon's note  on,  published  at  St. 
Helena,  i.  308 

Mattei,  Cardinal,  Napoleon's  letters  to, 
i.  no,  115,  132,  139 

Maury,  Cardinal,  agent  for  Louis  XV II  I. 
at  papal  court,  i.  347,  348 

Mayence  becomes  French,  i.  194 

Meaux,  Bishop  of,  Napoleon's  answer 
to  note  from,  i.  400 

Meerfelt,  General,  at  Leoben,  i.  150  ; 
taken  prisoner  by  the  French,  iii. 
278,  279 

Melas,  General,  opposed  to  Moreau, 
i.  285  ;  at  Marengo,  i.  286  ;  after 
Marengo,  ii.  157  ;  ignorant  of  Napo- 
leon's movements  in  Italy,  i.  306 

Melito,  Count  Miot  de,  sent  to  Rome, 
i.   99 ;    Napoleon's   letter   to,    160 ; 

•  his  opinion  on  war  with  Austria, 
1800,  i.  324 ;  sent  to  Corsica,  i.  329  ; 
opinions  on  Corsica,  i.  368  ;  quota- 
tions from  Memoirs  by,  ii.  13,  26, 
72,  73,  112,  113,207,  319,  406,418, 
419,  470;  iii.  60  »,  113,  114,  206, 
300  »,  358 

Melpomene,  frigate,  iii.  38 1 

Melzi,  General,  Due  de  Lodi,  iii.  287 ; 
Napoleon's  letters  to,  i.  388  ;  iii.  216, 
251,  287 

Menou,  General,  Napoleon's  letters  to, 
i.  218,  226,  327,  338,  379  ;  Napo- 
leon's criticism  of,  i.  267  ;  governor 
of  Piedmont  and  Venice,  i.  267, 
307  n ;  of  Italian  provinces,  i.  379  ; 
Napoleon's  allocution  to,  i.  391  ; 
Napoleon  attacks   his  reputation   at 


456 


INDEX. 


St.  Helena,  i.  391  ;  complains  of 
ecclesiastics,  ii.  239,  240 

Mery  retaken  by  Napoleon,  iii.  340 

Metternich,  Prince,  Memoirs  of,  quota- 
tion from,  ii.  243,  244,  250,  281,  340, 
356,  357,  4I2«,  413,  418,  429,  447  ; 
iii.  4,  6,  10,  297,  368  n ;  letter 
from,  on  Napoleon's  divorce,  ii.  340, 
341  ;  to  Stadion,  ii.  447  ;  despatch 
from,  ii.  352  ;  a  prisoner,  ii.  429, 
451  ;  Napoleon's  interview  with,  iii. 
253—255  ;  Napoleon's  early  opinion 
of,  i.  207 

Michaud,  biographer,  on  Massena  in 
Spain,  iii.  105  n,  106  n 

Milan,  Napoleon  at,  i.  84,  no,  157, 
171,  173—178,  286;  ii.  128— 
134 ;  allocution  by  Napoleon  to 
clergy  at,  i.  307  ;  Napoleon  orders 
a  Te  Deum  to  be  sung  in  the 
cathedral  of,  i.  307  ;  crowned  King 
of  Italy  at,  ii.  105,  109,  132  ;  decrees 
of,  ii.  347 

Millesimo,  battle  of,  i.  70 

Military  Correspondence  by  Napoleon, 

j-  391 

Mirabeau,  notice  of,  ii.  312,  313 

Modena,  Duke  of,  deposed,  i.  113; 
levies  made  on,  i.  161 

Modena,  Napoleon's  letter  from,  i. 
114 

Mohilef,  battle  of,  iii.  166 

Mollien,  General,  Napoleon's  letters  to, 
ii.  390  ;  iii.  91,  120,  372 

Moncey,  Marshal,  sent  to  coast  of  Brest, 
i.  51  ;  Napoleon's  order  to,  in  Spain, 
"•  358 

Mondovi,  battle  of,  i.  71 

Monge,  citizen,  Napoleon's  letter  to, 
i.  202 

Monnet,  General,  assumes  command 
at  Flushing,  ii.  9  ;  in  Walcheren,  ii. 
466  ;  trial  of,  ii.  473 

Montalivet,  Comte  de,  iii.  100 ;  minis- 
ter of  the  interior,  iii.  102  ;  Napo- 
leon's  letter   to,    iii.    51,    178,   286, 

325 

Montebello,  Napoleon  establishes  him- 
self at,  i.  159 

Montenotte,  battle  of,  i.  69 

Montesquieu,  Count  de,  grand  cham- 
berlain, Napoleon's  letter  to,  iii.  264  ; 
sent  to  Paris,  iii.  188  n,  l&gn 

Montesquieou,  Countess  de,  Napoleon's 
letters  to,  iii.  123,  158,  169,  179, 
250 

Montezemoto  captured,  i.  70 

Montmirail,  battle  of,  iii.  291,  310,  311 


Moore,  Sir  John,  hasty  retreat  of,  ii. 
428,  439  n 

Moreau,  General,  Napoleon's  letters  to, 
i.  296,  300,  316,  335  ;  Napoleon's 
jealousy  of,  i.  155;  criticism  of,  by 
Napoleon,    i.    336 ;    Napoleon's   in- 

.  structions  to,  i.  277  ;  his  success  in 
Austria,  i.  285,  316  ;  wins  battle  of 
Hohenlinden,  i.  287  ;  commander-in- 
chief  of  army  in  Germany,  i.  296;  re- 
ceives handsome  present  from  Na- 
p  ileon,  i.  326  ;  arrested,  ii.  63—65  ; 
transported,  ii.  51,  53 ;  joins  the 
allies,  ii.  86 ;  in  Berlin,  iii.  263 ; 
joins  the  Russians,  iii.  263  ;  letter  to 
his  wife,  iii.  266  ;  his  death,  iii.  202, 
263,  266;  Napoleon's  note  on  Moreau, 
published  at  St.  Helena,  i.  336 

Moreau,  J.  B.,  commander  at  Sois- 
sons,  tried  and  sentenced  to  death, 
iii.  332 

Morla,  General,  Napoleon  reproaches 
him  with  violation  of  treaty  of  Bay- 
len,  ii.  422  n 

Morpeth,  Lord,  ii.  264,  267 

Mortier,   General,   ii.    24 ;    Napoleon's 

-'letters  and  notes  to,  ii.  21  ;  iii.  295, 
314  ;  his  conduct  in  Hanover,  ii.  18, 
19  ;  instructed  to  burn  Moscow,  iii. 
181;  ordered  to  secure  the  safety  of 
wounded  soldiers,  iii.  182. 

Moscati,  citizen,  arrested,  i.  201  ;  Na- 
poleon's letter  on,  i.  201 

Moscow,  Napoleon  at,  iii.  174,  181  ; 
burning  of,  iii.  175,  183  ;  the  French 
retreat  from,  iii.  181 — -191 

Mourad  Bey  becomes  friend  of  France, 
i.  268 

Mulgrave,  Lord,  his  answer  to  Napo- 
leon, 1805,  ii.  112 

Munich,  Napoleon  at,  ii.  200 ;  cap- 
tured by  Bernadotte,  ii.  156 

Murat,  General,  Napoleon's  letters  and 
notes  to,  i.  363  ;  ii.  64,  68,  131,  251, 
369,  37o,  373,  375,  377—379,  383, 
387,  388,  391,  393—395,  397,  4*8, 
445;  m.  197,  '99,  269,  272,  274, 
275,  367  ;  accused  of  cowardice,  i. 
78 ;  conducts  Josephine  to  Italy,  i. 
79  ;  lord  high  admiral,  ii.  24  n ; 
enters  Briinn,  ii.  179;  receives 
Du'chies  of  Berg  and  Cleves,  ii.  197  ; 
Governor  of  Warsaw,  ii.  275  ;  sent 
to  Naples,  ii.  409 ;  King  of  the  two 
Sicilies,  ii.  409,  418  ;  his  evil  in- 
fluence over  Napoleon,  ii.  53  ;  King 
of  Naples,  ii.  425  ;  Napoleon  compli- 
ments him  on  his  navy,  iii   39  ;  de- 


INDEX. 


457 


.  feated  at  Winkowo,  iii.  179;  urges 
Napoleon  lo  close  the  war  in  1813, 
iii.  205  ;  meditates  treachery  to  Na- 
poleon, iii.  252  ;  Napoleon  begins  to 
doubt  him,  iii.  283,  joins  the  allies, 
205,  292,  299  ;  takes  arms  against 
Austria  and  loses  his  throne,  iii. 
368  n  ;  Napoleon  inquires  about  him, 
"'•  373.  374 

Muscat,  Imaun  of,  Napoleon's  letter 
to,  i.  244 


N. 


Napier,  quotations  from  History  of  the 
Peninsular  War  by,  ii.  439  n,  440  n 

Naples,  Napoleon  concludes  an  armis- 
tice with,  i.  95  ;  negotiations  witb, 
i.  180 ;  the  King  of,  menaced,  i.  340 ; 
Napoleon's  perfidy  to,  i.  354 ;  for- 
bidden to  interfere  with  the  Papal 
States,  i.  395 ;  occupied  by  the 
French,  ii.  205  ;  Joseph  Buonaparte 
made  King  of,  ii.  215,  219;  Murat 
made  King  of,  ii.  425 

Naples,  Joseph,  King  of;  see  Joseph 
Buonaparte 

Naples,  Murat,  King  of,  Napoleon's 
letters  to  ;  see  Murat 

Naples,  Queen  of,  Napoleon's  letters  to, 
ii.  22,  114,  118  ;  her  aid  to  Nelson 
rouses  Napoleon's  anger,  ii.  199;  his 
vengeance,  ii.  192,  198,  199 ;  her 
unpopularity  in  Naples,  ii.  248,  25 1 

Napoleon  III.,  birth  of,  ii.  383 

Napoleon,  Louis,  son  of  Louis,  birth  of, 
ii.  103  ;  created  Grand  Duke  of  Berg, 

ii.  443 

Narbonne,  General  Comte  de,  Napo- 
leon's order  to,  iii.  193 

Nassau  and  Frankfort  regiments  desert 
Napoleon,  iii.  285  n 

Naudin,  commissary,  Napoleon's  letter 
to,  i.  23 

Naval  Chronicle  on  Captain  Wright, 
ii.  163 

Nelson,  Lord,  letters  to  his  wife,  i.  43, 
96,  212  n  ;  to  Captain  Locker,  i.  102  ; 
to  George  Baldwin,  Esq.,  i.  245  ;  to 
Earl  Spencer,  i.  220  n  ;  ii.  96  n  ;  to 
Hon.  H.  Wyndham,  i.  25 1  «  ;  to  the 
Po  >e,  i.  314;  to  Hon.  H.  Addington, 
ii.  8,  126  ;  to  Sir  J.  Acton,  ii.  14  ; 
to  Lady  Hamilton,  ii.  15  ;  to  Mr. 
Drummond,  ii.  25  ;    to  Sir  A.   Ball, 


ii.  39  «  ;  to  French  prisoners  of  war, 
ii.  65  n  ;  note  by,  on  the  invasion  of 
England,  ii.  106  ;  bombards  Bastia, 
i.  42  ;  misses  Napoleon  at  Malta,  i. 
212 
Neucbatel,  Prince  of  ;  see  Berthier 
Neutral  League,  dissolution  of,  i.   332  ; 

reconstituted,  i.  332,  342 
Ney,   Marshal,   Napoleon's   letters    to, 
iii.  243,  277,  389  ;  notes  to,  iii.  259  ; 
accused  of  plundering  in  Spain,  iii. 
60 ;  in  Russia  ;  iii.  162  ;  repulsed  by 
the  Russians  at  Valtelina,   iii.    169; 
at  Krasnoi,  iii.    185,    186,  211,  212; 
defeated  at  Dennewitz,  iii.  203,  271  ; 
succeeds  Oudinot  in  command  of  a 
corps  at  Wurzburg,  iii.  233  ;  success- 
ful at  Dessau,  iii.  276  ;   in  command 
of  Army  of  the  North,  iii.  271  ;  re- 
joins  Napoleon,    iii.    366,    384 ;    at 
Ligny,  iii.  390—392  ;  at  Quatre  Bras, 
iii.    390,    394 ;    in   the  Chamber   of 
Peers  after  Waterloo,  iii.  412 
Nice,  Napoleon  in,  i.  37,  39,  64 
Nile,  battle  of  the,  i.  198,  218,  227,  228 
Novi,  battle  of,  i.  241 
Normandy,  Duke  of,  birth  of,  i.  13 
Norway  guaranteed   to   Denmark,   iii. 

208  ;  to  Sweden,  iii.  208  n 
Novosiltzoff,  M.   de,  Russian  ambassa- 
dor in  France,  ii.  105 


O. 

O'Hara,  General,  defeated,  i.  35 
Oldenburg,  Duke  of,  iii.  85,  86  ;  ducby 
of,  appropriated  by  Napoleon,  iii.  85 
Orange,  Prince  of,  Napoleon's  letter  to, 
ii.  271 ;  returns  to  Holland,  iii.  285 
Orchat,  the  French  reach,  iii.  185 
Orient,  Napoleon's  letters  on  board  the, 

i.  209 
Orleans,  Bi  hop  of,  ii    17  ;  Napoleon's 

note  to,  ii.  42 
Orleans,  Duchess  of,  receives  a  pension 
from  Napoleon,  ii.  4  ;  iii.  372,  373  n 
Osterode,  Napoleon  at,  ii.  295 — 304 
Ostralenka,  battle  of,  ii.  279,  295 
Otto,   citizen,  French  commissioner  in 
London,    ordered    to   exchange    pri- 
soners with  England,  i.  295  ;    Napo- 
leon's message  to,  i.  356  ;  instructions 
to,  i.  386  ;  letters  to,  ii.  81 
Ottoman  Empire  in  danger,  i.  306 
Oudinot,    General,   ordered    to    march 
upon    Amsterdam,    iii.    45,    46 ;    in 


458 


INDEX. 


disgrace,  iii.  270  ;  defeated  at  Gross- 
Beeren,  iii.  203,   27a,   271  ;  defeated 
at  Bar-sur-Aube,  iii.  331 
Ouvrard,  swindle  by,  ii.  212 — 214 


P. 

Pacca,  Cardinal,  ii.  461,  463,  465,  466 

Palafox,  General,  ii.  444 

Palm,   trial  and  execution  of,   ii.    197, 

249 
Paoli,  Corsican  patriot,  i.  3  ;  Napoleon's 

letters  to,  i.  r7  ;  elected  President  of 

Corsican  Assembly,  i.    21  ;    arrested 

by  order  of  Convention,  i.  29  ;  buried 

in  Westminster  Abbey,  i.  101 
Pappacmi,  Bruni  and  Cinni,  ii.  56 
Papal  States  invaded,  i.  135  ;    retained 

by  the  Pope,  but   Ancoi.a  occupied 

by  the  French,  i.  378  ;  annexed   to 

France,  ii.  430,  482 
Paradisi,  citizen,   arrested,    Napoleon's 

note  on,  i.  201 
Paris,   Napoleon  first   goes  to,   i.   44  ; 

crowned   Emperor    in,    ii.     55,    93  ; 

capitulates  to  the  allies,  iii.  291  ;  the 

allies  enter,  iii.  343,  345  n 
Paris,  Archbishop  of,  Napoleon's  letter 

to,  ii.  186,  187 
Parma,  its  destination,  i.  349  ;  in  French 

possession,  i.  404  ;  death  of  Duke  of, 

i.  406 
Passariano,  Napoleon  at,  i.  180,  190 
Paterson,  Miss  ;  see  Jerome's  marriage 
Paulz,  inventor  of  a  musket,  iii.  206 
Pavia,  Napoleon  at,  i.  89  ;  Alvinzi  at, 

i.  118  ;  university  destroyed,  i.  307 
Peninsular  War,  ii.  338,  344,  345,  369— 

374—431 
Perignon,      General,      exchanged      for 

General    Don,    i.     295  ;     afterwards 

Marshal,  i   296 
Perron,  General,  ii.  129,  130 
Perregaux,  citizen,  Napoleon's  letter  to, 

ii.  40 
Persia,  Shah  of,  Napoleon's  letters  to, 

ii.  117,  123,  124,  286,  362 
Pe-aro,  Napoleon  at,  i.  137 
Peschiera,  Beaulieu  at,  i.  93,  94;  Aus- 

trians  raised  siege  of,  i.  106 
Placentia,  Napoleon  at,  i.  77 
Pleiswitz,  armistice  of,  iii.  202 
Piedmont  annexed  to  France,  i.   377  ; 

ii.  S 
Pichegru,  General,  General-in-Chief  of 

army  of  the  South,  i.  30  ;    prepares 

to  cross  the  Rhine,  i.  47  ;  Napoleon's 


intentions   respecting,  i.    314 ;    con- 
spiracy by,  ii.   47,  53  ;    death  of,  ii. 

Si.  54,  55.  64 
Pichon,  citizen,    Napoleon's  speech  to, 

on  Jerome's  marriage,  ii.  74 
Picot,     false     evidence     against     Due 
d'Enghien,  ii.   48  ;   refuses  evidence 
against  Moreau,  ii.  52 
Pillau  captured  by  the  Russians,  iii.  222 
Pi-toja,  Napoleon  at,  i.  100 
Pitt,  Mr.,  death  of,  ii.  109 
Po,  Napoleon  crosses  the,  i.  77 
Poiignac,  Arnaud  de,  pardoned,  ii.  80 
Polish  Confederation,  Napoleon's  reply 

to  the  deputies  of,  iii.  164 
Pont  de  Briques,  Napoleon  at,  ii.  82 
Poute    Corvo,    i.    395  ;    ii.    235,    237  ; 

Princess  of ;  see  Clary,  Desiree 
Tope,  Pius  VI.,  Napoleon's  letters  to, 
i.  141,  174;  concludes  an  armistice 
with  France,  i.  99,  100 ;  signs  treaty  of 
Tolentino,  i.  125  ;  refuses  to  execute 
articles  of  armistice,  i.  134  ;  deserted 
by  the  Catholic  powers,  i.  140  ;  at- 
tack of  apoplexy,  i.  167  ;  restoration 
of  body  to  Rome,  i.  282,  283 
Pope,  Pius  VII.,  Napoleon's  letters  to, 
'•  363,  37o,  393.  400,  408  ;  ii.  56, 
61,  75,  93,  !3°,  20I>  2I5 — 2I7  ;  Na- 
poleon's messages  to,  ii.  325,  326  ; 
iii.  17 — 20,  199;  Nelson's  letter  to, 
i.  314  n,  315  «;  receives  two  ships 
from  Napoleon,  i.  401,  402  ;  crowns 
Napoleon,  ii.  55.  ~93  \  ill-treated 
by  Napoleon,  ii.  132,  133  ;  refuses 
to  recognise  the  King  of  Naples,  ii. 
241  ;  note  on,  ii.  453  ;  excommuni- 
cates Napoleon,  ii.  461  ;  arrest  cf, 
ii.  462,  464 — 466  ;  disposed  to  treat 
with  Napoleon,  iii.  74,  75  \  a  P"s- 
oner  at  Savona,  iii.  79  ;  fisherman's 
ring  demanded  from,  iii.  15  ;  a  spy 
placed  with  the,  iii.  125  ;  transferred 
to  Fontainebleau,  iii.  139,  158  ;  Na- 
poleon makes  an  arrangement  with, 
iii.  215  ;  his  position  in  1813,  iii. 
217 — 219  ;    sent  back   to   Italy,   iii. 

334,  334  «■ 
Popes,  notes  by  two,  on  democracy,   i. 

157 
Porta,  Dr.,  iii.  125 
Portalis,  citizen,  Napoleon's  letters  and 

notes  to,  i.  402  ;  ii.  44,  61,  150,  246 
Potfdam,  Napoleon  at,  ii.  265 
Portugal,   Queen  of,  offends  Napoleon, 

i.  226,  227  ;  war  between  Spain  and 

Portugal,  i.  358  ;  left  to  England,  i. 

37-8  ;  entered  by  the  French,  ii.  336, 


INDEX. 


459 


345  5  paid  for  remaining  neutral,  ii. 
336  n  ;  Napoleon's  designs  upon,  ii. 
333.  338  \  the  royal  family  go  to  Kio 
Janeiro,  ii.  349  ;  Napoleon  requires 
a  list  of  crown  jewellery  of,  ii.  391 

Portugal,  Prince  Regent  of,  Napoleon's 
letter  to,  ii.  16,  117 

Poussielgue,  citizen,  Napoleon's  letter 
to,  i.  232 

Pradt,  Abbe  de,  ii.  194,  195,  472 

Prague,  congress  of,  iii.  256,  259,  262 

Presburg,  treaty  of,  ii.  in,  198,  227 

President  of  Government  of  Amsterdam, 
Napoleon's  letter  to,  iii.  48 

Press,  Napoleon's  interference  with  the, 
ii.  45,  145,  204,  367,  374,  444 

Proclamations,  Napoleon's,  to  the  army, 
i.  64,  74,  86,  134,  142,  170,  192, 
208,  212,  213,  229,  248,  254,  273, 
276,  280,  343;  ii.  153,  156,  158, 
159,  181,  257,  266,  316,  412,  413, 
424,  448 — 450,  452  ;  iii.  160,  172, 
24°.  345.  362.  363»  371  :  to  the 
people  of  Lombardy,  i.  85,  88  ;  to 
the  Milanese,  i.  89  ;  to  the  Venetian 
republic,  i.  90  ;  to  the  inhabitants  of 
the  Tyrol,  i.  96 ;  to  the  people  of 
Goritz,  i.  144  ;  to  the  sailors  of  Ad- 
miral Brueys'  squadron,  i.  182  ;  to 
the  inhabitants  of  Cairo,  i.  239 ;  to 
sheiks,  ulemas,  and  commandant  of 
Jerusalem,  i.  249  ;  to  the  council  of 
elders  and  mational  guard  of  Pari-, 
i.  273 ;  to  the  inhabitants  of  St. 
Domingo,  i.  374,  375  ;  to  the  Hun- 
garians, ii.  452  ;  to  the  French  people 
on  his  return  from  Elba,  iii.  361  ;  on 
the  eve  of  Waterloo,  iii.  387 

Promotions,  Napoleon's  rapid,  i.  59 

Protestants,  persecution  of,  after  the  fall 
of  the  empire,  i.  364 

Protestation,  Napoleon's,  on  board  the 
Bellerophon,  iii.  415,  416 

Provence,  Comte  de,  Napoleon's  letter 
to,  i.  323   - 

Provera,  General,  to  be  expelled  from 
Rome,  i.  186  ;  Napoleon's  opinion  of 
him,  i.  187 

Provisional  Government,  June,  1815, 
Napoleon's  letter  10,  iii.  413 

Prussia,  Napoleon's  letters-  to  the  King 
of,  ii.  23,  91,  ioi,  187,  255,  259, 
260,  292,  296,  41 1  ;  Napoleon's 
letter  to  the  Queen  of,  ii.  412 ;  Na- 
poleon's note  to  the  Princess  Ferdi- 
nand of,  ii.  269;  Napoleon's  deference 
to  the  King  of,  i.  321  ;  the  King  of, 
his    alliance    with    the    Czar,     1805, 


ii.  179  ;  the  King  of,  his  flight  to 
Memel,  ii.  285 ;  Napoleon's  rude- 
ness to  the  Queen  of,  ii.  259,  265, 
267  ;  Napoleon  meets  the  Queen  of, 
at  Tilsit,  ii.  321  ;  neutral  in  1805, 
ii.  150;  at  war  with  France  in  1806, 
ii.  259  ;  position  of,  at  beginning  c-f 
1S06,  ii.  19^,  196;  courage  of,  in 
1807,  ii.  280  ;  her  war  indemnity  to 
France,  iii.  22,  38 

Public  worship,  minister  of,  Napoleon's 
orders  to,  ii.  461  ;  iii.  34,  35,  57, 
101,  116 

Pyramids,  battle  of  the,  i.  215  ;  Napo- 
leon's conversation  in  Grand;  i.  221 — 
225 


Quatre-Bras,  battle  of,  iii.  390,  394 
Quell,   Don  Jose,    Spanish   author   on 
Trafalgar,  ii.  174 — 177 


R. 


Rapp,  General,  Napoleon's  letter  to, 
iii.  207 

Rastadt,  Napoleon  at,  i.  193,  194; 
congress  of,  i.  126 

Ratiabonne,  Archbishop  of,  Napoleon's 
letter  to  the,  ii.  231 

Raynal,  AbDe,  Napoleon's  letter  to, 
i.  10 

Real,  citizen,  Napoleon's  letter  to,  ii. 
67,  68 

Regent  diamond,  used  for  Napoleon's 
sabre,  i.  369,  370 

Regnier,  General,  Napoleon's  letters 
and  notes  to,  ii.  31,  32,  41,  60;  de- 
feated, ii.  199;  with  the  army, 
1806,  ii.  203  :  defeated  at  Maida, 
ii.  245 

Reinhard,  citizen,  Napoleon's  note  on, 
ii.  46 

Remusat,  Comte  de,  Napoleon's  letter 
to,  iii.  22,  27,  28 

Remusat.  Madame  de,  quotations  from 
Memoirs  of,  i.  225,  226  ;  ii.  48,  50, 
53.  167,  168,  189,  195,  237,  246, 
270,  272 ;  iii.  5 

Rennes,  Bishop  of,  threatened  by  Na- 
poleon, i.  402 

Re,  ort  by  Napoleon  on  position  of  the 
armies  of  Piedmont  in  Spain,  i.  38 

Rissault,  M.,  Napoleon's  letter  to,  ii. 
284 

Revolution  in  France,  1791,  i.  23 


460 


INDEX. 


Rheims  retaken  by  Napoleon,  iii.  337, 

338 
Rhine,  Confederation  of  the,  formed  by 

Napoleon,  ii.  no 
Richelieu,   Due  de,  enters  the  Russian 

service,  ii.  9 
Richpance,  General,  tranquillises  Gua- 

daloupe,  i.  384 
Rimini  occupied  and  looted,  i.  137 
Rivoli,  battle  of,  i.  125,  130 
Robespierre,   A.   B.  J.,  despatches  by, 

i.  37  ;  assists  Napoleon,  i.  31 
Rohan,  Comte  de,  iii.  23,  24 
Rohan,   Princess  Charlotte  de,  ii.   47, 

Si 

Romana,  General,  ii.  408,  440  n,  445  ; 

joins  Wellington,  iii.  63 
Rome,   King  of,   birth  of  the,    iii.   93, 

94  ;  baptism  of,  iii.  100 
Rome,  Napoleon  endeavours  to  cultivate 

cotton  in,  iii.  51,  52 
Rouen,  Napoleon  at,  i.  404 
Roverbella,  Napoleon's  letters  from,  i. 

79.  i°ii  13° 

Roverdo,  battle  of,  i.  108 

Rumbold,  Sir  George,  arrested  by  Na- 
poleon's orders,  ii.  100 

Rusca,  General,  Napoleon's  letter  to, 
i.  128 

Russia,  Emperor  Paul  of,  Napoleon's 
letters  to,  i.  344  ;  becomes  Grand 
Master  of  Knights  of  Malta,  i.  261, 
369  ;  joins  France  against  England, 
i.  285  ;  assassinated,  i.  350  ;  ii.  332, 

334  « 

Russia,  Emperor  Alexander  of,  Napo- 
leon's letters  to,  i.  371,  385  ;  ii.  23, 
l8o,  323,  347,  364,  396,  399,  410, 
416,  440,  460,  478,  483  ;  iii.  38,  45, 
58,  68,  88,  90,  99,  150,  157,  161,  174  ; 
coronation  of,  ii.  334  n  ;  refuses  Na- 
poleon's matrimonial  overtures,  ii. 
342,  4I3??j  concludes  secret  treaty 
of  Tilsit,  ii.  317,  318;  his  energy  in 
France,  iii.  341 

Russia,  Napoleon's  conditions  of  peace 
with,  i.  338,  339  ;  Colbert's  message 
to,  ii.  6  ;  doubts  Napoleon's  faith,  ii. 
27  ;  orders  mourning  for  the  Due 
d'Enghien,  ii.  80 ;  Napoleon  takes 
measures  against,  ii.  91,  97,  98 ; 
enters  into  an  alliance  with  England, 
ii.  131  ;  at  war  with  Napoleon,  ii. 
166  ;  Napoleon's  accusations  against, 
ii.  169  :  cruelty  of  Russian  soldiers, 
ii.  169, 186 ;  armistice  signed  between, 
and  France,  ii.  316  ;  declares  war 
against  Sweden,  ii.  373,  374  ;  con'uet 


in  1809,  ii.  430 ;  French  invade,  iii. 
165  ;  the  Russians  devastate  the 
country  in  front  of  the  French, 
and  retreat  upon  Moscow,  iii.  1 70 ; 
the  policy  of,  towards  the  French,  iii. 
173  n  ;  Napoleon  in,  iii.  165 — -192  ; 
Russian  attitude  in  1813,  iii.  202 ; 
the  Russians  enter  Berlin,  iii.  227 


Sacken,  General,  in  France,  iii.  310; 
at  Meaux,  iii.  317 

Salamanca  taken  by  the  Spaniards,  i. 
481  ;  battle  of,  iii.  139,  171 

Salicetti,  citizen,  Napoleon's  letters  to, 
i.  104  ;  assists  Napoleon,  i.  31 

Salo  and  Corona,  i.  103 

San  Marino,  Napoleon's  imperious  mes- 
sage to  the  Regent  of,  i.  137. 

Saragossa,  siege  of,  ii.  404 ;  fall  of,  ii. 

443.  444 
Sardinia,  French  make  an  unsuccessful 

attack  upon,  i.  29  ;  war  with  France, 

i.  62 
Sardinia,  King  of,  cedes  Nice  and  Savoy 

to  France,  i.  62  ;  sues  for  peace,  i. 

71.  73  ;  signs  armistice,  i.  74  ;  signs 

a  treaty  with  France,  i.  142 
Sassy,  Collier  de,  minister  of  commerce, 

Napoleon's  letter  to,  iii.  164 
Savary,    General,   minister   of    police, 

Napoleon's  letters  to,   ii.   317,   330, 

334.  337.  339.  342,  399,  400, ;  iii. 

64,  70,  123,  127,  239,  251,  260,  274, 
312,  317,  320;  at  murder  of  Due 
d'Enghien,  ii.  43  ;  went  as  messenger 
to  Ihe  Czar,  ii.  180  ;  sent  as  ambas- 
sador to  Russia,  ii.  323  ;  his  reception 
in  Russia,  ii.  367 

Saxe,  Marshal,  quotation  from,  on  pro- 
visioning an  army,  iii.  140,  141 

Saxony,  Kin?  of,  Napoleon's  letters  to 
the,  ii.  288,  441,  449;  iii.  34,  54, 

65,  101,  214,  227,  234,  236,  243, 
247  ;  his  loyalty  to  Napoleon, 
iii.  237  ;  his  people  dissatisfied  with 
his  alliance  with  France,  iii.  237  ; 
enters  into  a  convention  with  Au-tria, 
iii.  239 

Say,  M.  J.  B.,  Napoleon's  letter  to,  i. 
202 

Schcenbrunn,  treaty  of,  ii.  198  ;  Napo- 
leon at,  ii.  168 

Schwartzenberg,  Prince,  iii.  169,  173, 
188,  266  ;  in  France,  iii.  297  ;  defeats 
Macdonald,  iii.  331 


INDEX. 


461 


Sebastiani,  General,  i.  401,  402 ;  ii.  238, 
239,  282,  322,  360,  361  ;  iii.  180,  182 

Sediman,  battle  of,  i.  232 

Segur,  M.  de,  grand  master  of  the  cere- 
monies under  the  empire,  ii.  84; 
Napoleon's  instructions  to,  ii.  332 

Seid  Mohamed  el-Koraim,  accused  of 
treason  to  Napoleon,  i.  217 

Senate,  Napoleon's  messages  to  the,  i. 
341  ;  ii.  72,  73,  151,  289,  409  ;  iii. 
73  ;  Napoleon's  leti  er  to  the,  i.  3 1 7 

Serurier,  General,  i.  66 ;  Napoleon's 
letter  to,  i.  71 

Scherer,  General,  report  on  Napoleon  by, 
i.  44  ;  goes  to  Italy,  i.  5 1 ,  65  ;  Napo- 
leon succeeds  him  in  Italy,  i.  65 ; 
defeated  by  Kray,  i.  241  ;  super- 
seded by  Moreau,  i.  241 

Schill,  ii.  301,  457 

Sheridan  on  Napoleon,  ii.  13 

Siborne,  historian,  quotation  from,  iii. 

Sicily  a  cause  of  war  in  1806,  ii.  198 

Sidney  Smith,  Sir,  Napoleon's  letter  to, 
i.  251  ;  aids  in  defence  of  St.  Jean 
d'Acre,  i.  6,  253  ;  Napoleon's  irrita- 
tion against,  i.  253,  256 

Sieyes,  i.  270,  284 

Sismondi,  historian,  on  Waterloo,  iii. 
408 — 410 

Smolensko  taken  by  the  French,  iii. 
168 

Soissons,  capitulation  of,  iii.  291,  331, 
332  ;    evacuated    by  the    allies,    iii. 

335  ,   ..    , 

Souham,  General,  11.  63 

Soult,  Mar.-hal,  Due  de  Dalmatia, 
Napoleon's  letters  to,  ii.  62,  64,  71, 
79,  410,  476 ;  iii.  256,  381  ;  in 
Naples,  i.  348  ;  in  command  of  the 
army  in  Spain,  ii.  477  ;  iii.  204,  206, 
256  ;  Napoleon  complains  of  his 
inactivity,  iii.  329  >  under  Louis 
XVIII.,  iii.  376  k;  his  salaries,  in. 
376;   on  Grouchy   at   Waterloo,  iii. 

404 
Southey  on  the  Peninsular  War,  11.  345 
Spain,   Charles  IV.,   King  of,    Napo- 
leon's letters  to,  i.  328,  406  ;  11.  7,  28, 

29,  80,  331,  336.  359. 369.  385.  44i  ; 

signs  treaty  of  Badajoz,  1.  334  ;  gives 
Napoleon  six  cordons  of  the  Golden 
Fleece,  ii.  138  ;  disputes  with  his  son, 
ii.  352—354;  dethroned,  ii.  354; 
his  abdication,  ii.  376,  381,  386; 
goes  to  Rome,  iii.  123 
Spain,  Joseph,  King  of;  see  Joseph 
Buonaparte 


Spain,  Julie,  Queen  of,  Napoleon's 
letter  to,  iii.  25 

Spain,  Louisa,  Queen  of,  Napoleon's 
letters  to,  ii.  441  ;  iii.  30 ;  dresses 
sent  to  her  by  Napoleon,  i.  306,  307 

Spain  enters  into  alliance  with  France, 
i.  320  ;  threatened  by  Napoleon,  ii. 
62  ;  summary  of  events  in,  1795 — 
1808,  ii.  350  ;  Napoleon's  request  for 
ships  from,  ii.  363  ;  Spanish  troops 
return  to  their  country,  ii.  408  ; 
Spanish  troops  defeated,  ii.  418 ; 
crown  jewels  of,  ii.  463  ;  divided 
into  military  provinces,  iii.  16  n 

Speeches  by  Napoleon,  iii.  108,  198, 
199,   223,   282,   286,   288,  377,  382, 

383 
Stael,  Madame  de,  ii.  32,  307 
Statues  sent  to  the  Tuileries  by  Napo- 
leon, i.  290 
St.   Aignan,   M.  de,    prisoner    of   the 

Prussians,  iii.  284 
St.  Andre,  Jean  Bon,  in  Corsica,  i.  42 
St.  Cloud,  Napoleon's  instructions  for 

furnishing,  i.  371 
St.  Cyr,  Marshal,  Napoleon's  notes  to, 
iii.  264,  270  ;  ambassador  at  Madrid, 

i-  379 

St.  Domingo,  Napoleon  sends  an  ex- 
pedition to,  i.  373 — 377  ;  to  be 
governed  by  special  laws,  i.  281  ;  end 
of  civil  war  in,  i.  328  ;  French  expe- 
dition to,  i.  373  ;  difficult  position  of 
the  French  in,  ii.  3 ;  archbishop  of, 
Napoleon  questions  the  nomination 
of,  i.  400 

Stein,  Baron,  ii.  411  ;  appointed  min- 
ister of  state  in  Russia,  iii.  213 

St.  Helena,  Napoleon  at,  iii.  426  ; 
quotations  from  his  Memoirs  and  ob- 
servations written  there,  i.  263,  265, 
308,  336,  395  ;  ii.  SI,  99,  220,  356  «  ; 
iii.  368  n,  41 7 — 425 

St.  Jean  d'Acre,  Napoleon's  letter  from, 
i.  251  ;  order  at,  i.  252  ;  defended 
by  Sir  Sidney  Smith,  i.  6  ;  attacked, 
i.  251  ;  siege  raised,  i.  242,  254  ; 
horrors  of  the  retreat  from,  i.  255 

St.  Jean  de  Luz  in  English  hands,  iii. 
283  n 

St.  Julien,  Comte  de,  sent  as  ambassa- 
dor to  Paris,  i.  311 

St.   Priest,  General,  ii.  299,  300;  iii. 

337,  338 
Strasburg,  Napoleon  at,  ii.  152,  153 
St.  Simon,  Sire.  ii.  437,  438 
Stuart,  Sir  J.,  victory  at  Maida,  ii.  199 
St.  Vincent,  Lord,  defeats  the  Spanish 


462 


INDEX. 


fleet,  i.  195,  196  ;  at  the  Tagus,  ii. 
200 

St.  Vitry  refuses  to  surrender  to 
Napoleon,  iii.  342 

Suchet,  General,  iii.  339,  386  ;  Napo- 
leon's letter  to,  i.  319 

Suchet,  Madame,  iii.  130  n 

Sucy,  commissary,  Napoleon's  letter 
to,  i.  50 

Suez  Canal,  Napoleon  proposes  to  cut 
the,  i.  204,  344,  345 

Sugar  industry,  ii.  368  ;    iii.  141 

Sussy,  Comte  de,  iii.  283 

Suwarrow,  General,  his  terms  on  the 
surrender  of  Mantua,  i.  320  ;  death 
of,  i.  242 

Sweden,  King  of,  Napoleon's  letters  to, 
iii.  59  ;  declares  war  against  Napo- 
leon, ii.  323  ;  deposed,  ii.  447 

Sweden,  Prince  of,  Bernadotte  elected, 
iii.  10  ;  his  overtures  to  Napoleon,  iii. 
86  ;  his  wife  ordered  to  leave  Paris, 
iii.  126 

Syria,  Napoleon's  campaign  in,  i.  248 
—257 


Tagliamen'o,  Napoleon's  victory  at,  i. 

143 

Talavera,  battle  of,  ii.  468 — 470 

Talbot,  Captain,  iii.  152 

Talleyrand,  M.  de,  Napoleon's  letters  to, 
i.  179,  185,  186,  190,  268,  288,  294, 
295.  298, 3°5.  32°>  33°,  338.  339, 342, 
345,  347,  349.  351,  353  ».  356-359, 
365,  367,  369,  372—375,  387,  388, 
395,  397,  4°3,  4°5  ;  »■  1°.  ",  18, 
26—28,  30,  33,  35,  37,  38,  40,  42,  44, 
46,  62,  78,  82,  83,  86,  88,  90,  99, 
102,  103,  124,  134,  139,  Hi,  143, 
145,  150,  165,   180,  181,   183,   191, 

221,  222,  228,  232,  238,  24O,  248  — 
250,   263,     275,     29O,    296,    297,    3OO, 

3[7,  322,  324,  384,  385,  389,  39i> 
395,  397  ;  iii.  57  ;  Bishop  of  Autun, 
i.  51  ;  his  marriage,  i.  395  ;  succeeds 
Delacroix  at  the  Foreign  office,  i. 
174  ;  secularised  by  the  Pope,  i.  395, 
399  ;  Napoleon's  questions  to  him 
about  Egypt,  i.  315  ;  endeavours  to 
induce  Napoleon  to  make  peace  with 
Austria,  ii.  184 ;  receives  Beneventum, 
ii.  235  ;  at  Erfurth,  ii.  413,  414  ;  in 
disgrace,  ii.  434 ;  his  opinion  of  Na- 
poleon,  i.    190  ;  iii.   430  ;  quotation  ' 


from  his  Memoirs,  ii.  3 1 2 ;  Napoleon's 
opinion  of  him,  iii  321 

Talleyrand,  Count  Auguste  de,  Napo- 
leon's letter  to,  iii.  132 

Tallien,  letter  to  his  wife,  i.  228 ;  ar- 
rested for  leaving  Egypt  without  a 
passport,  i.  335 

Tarentum,  evacuation  of,  ii.  12,  13 

Tascher,  citizen,  Napoleon's  letter  to, 
ii.  56 

Theatres,  Napoleon's  interference  with 
the,  ii.  266  ;  iii.  22,  27 

Thebes,  fighting  at,  i.  256 

Theodore,  last  King  of  Corsica,  i.  101 

Thielman,  General,  iii.  242,  243,  247 

Thiers,  M.,  quotations  from  history  by, 
ii.  110,  390;  iii.  5,  135 

Thome,  Thomas,  i.  274 

Thorn  invested  by  .the  Russians,  iii. 
222 

Three  Golden  Fleeces,  new  order  pro- 
posed by  Napoleon,  ii.  475,  476  n 

Thurreau,  General,  in  La  Vendee,  i.  390 

Tilly,   citizen,  Napoleon's   letter  to,  i. 

41 

Tippoo  Sahib,  Napoleon's  letter  to,  i. 
244;  overtures  to  France  from,  i.  244, 

245 

Tilsit,  treaty  of,  ii.  279,  280,  318,  319, 
347,  361 ;  iii.  70,  87  ;  Napoleon  at,  ii. 
316 — 322  ;  neutralisation  of,  ii.  317 

Tobago  taken  by  the  English,  ii.  3  ; 
restored  to  France,  ii.  5 

Tolentino,  treaty  of,  i.  125,  142  ;  Na- 
poleon's letters  from,  i.  141 

Tortona,  Napoleon  at,  i.  76,  96 

Toulon,  siege  of,  i.  31,  32  ;  Napoleon 
detained  at,  i.  208  ;  blockaded,  i.  260 

Toulouse,  Archbishop  of,  endeavours  to 
remove  Protestant  disabilities,  i.  364 

Tourville,  Admiral,  ii.  173,  220 

Toussaint  Louverture, Napoleon 's letters 
to,  i-  375,  376 ;  appointed  captain 
general  of  French  part  of  S  t .  Domingo , 
i.  337  ;  capture  and  ill-treatment  of, 
i-  398,  399  ;  fate  of,  ii.  3,  5 

Trafalgar,  battle  of,  ii.  108,  170,  171  «, 
173 — 178,  474  ;  Napoleon's  reference 
to,  in  the  Senate,  ii.  219,  220;  at 
St.  Helena,  ii.  220 

Treasure  levied  by  Napoleon  in  his 
wars,  i.  75,  78,  84,  85,  87,  88,  95, 
97,  99,  100,  118,  138,  140,  141,  153, 
154,  158,  161,  163,  182  ;  ii.  180 

Treasurer  of  the  Crown,  Napoleon's 
orders  to,  iii.  342 

Trebia,  battle  of,  i   241 

Trenta  Coste,  i.  21 


INDEX. 


463 


Trinidad  ceded  to  England,  i.  334,  362, 
378  ;  Napoleon's  views  on  cession  by 
Spain  of,  i.  391 

Tuileries,  palace  of,  decorations  for 
the,  i.  290  ;  Napoleon  takes  posses- 
sion of  the,  i.  291 

Tuleda,  battle  of,  ii.  421 

Turin,  Archbishop  of,  ordered  to  Paris, 

r   i.  403 

Turkey,  Sultan  of,  Napoleon's  letters 
to,  ii.  116,  274,  281,  282,  305  ;  Na- 
poleon's wish  to  preserve  his  friend- 
ship, i.  371  ;  incited  to  war  with 
Russia,  ii.  116  ;  fate  of,  ii.  322 

Turkey,  Napoleon's  note  on,  i.  55  ; 
Napoleon's  letter  to  the  Grand 
Vizier  of,  i.  261  ;  declares  « ar 
against  France,  i.  198  ;  French  ne- 
gotiations with,  i.  264  ;  Empire  of 
Turkey  threatened,  i.  327  ;  position 
of,  in  1806,  ii.  239  ;  Napoleon's  pro- 
mises to,  ii.  361 

Tuscany,  Grand  Duke  of,  Napoleon's 
letter  to  the,  i.  176  ;  iii.  355  ;  dis- 
possessed, i.  406 «  ;  duchy  of,  at- 
tacked by  Napoleon,  i.  109  ;  General 
Prune  in,  i.  326,  327  ;  becomes  king- 
dom of  Etruria,  i.  334  ;  exchanged 
for  Louisiana,  i.  320,  368 ;  claimed 
by  Napoleon,  ii.  343  ;  given  to  Eliza 
Buonaparte,  ii.  127 
Tweedale,  Marquis  of,  imprisonment 
and  death  of,  ii.  89,  90 

Tyrol,  disturbance  in  the,  ii.  463 


U. 

Ulm,  capitulation  of,  ii.  157 
Urquijo,  i.   349  ;    notice   of,  by  Lord 
Holland,  i.  349,  350 


V. 

Valais,  Republic  of,   i.  396  ;    annexed 

by  Napoleon,  iii.  72,  74 
Vandamme,  General,  Napoleon's  letter 

to,  iii.  265  ;  Napoleon's  instructions 

to,  iii.  265  ;  attacks  Prince  of  Wirtem- 

berg,  iii.  267,  268  ;  defeated  by  the 

Austrians,  iii.  269,  270 
Vaubois,  General,  defeated,  i.  119 
Vauchamps,  battle  of,  iii.  314 
Vedel,  General,  in  command  at  Willis, 

iii.  161  ;  at  Baylen,  ii.  4°9 
Venice,  Doge  cf,  Napoleon's  letter  to, 

i.    148;    Napoleon's  reassurance    to 


municipality  of,  i.  164  ;  Mas<ena  in, 
ii.  207  ;  closed  to  English  goods,  ii. 
218 

Venetian  Republic,  Napoleon  violates 
the  neutralityof,  i.  90, 91 ;  Napoleon's 
letter  to  the  Provediteur-General  of, 
i.  121  ;  destroyed  by  Napoleon,  i. 
126  ;  concludes  treaty  of  peace  with 
Napoleon,  i.  158 

Venus  de  Medicis,  sent  to  France,  i.  326 

Verdier,  General,  Napoleon's  letter  to, 
i.  243 

Ver  Huell,  Admiral,  ii.  40,  41 

Verona,  Napoleon  at,  i.  92,  116 — 121  ; 
resists  the  French,  i.  148  ;  Na- 
poleon's terms  to,  i.  1 56;  occupied 
by  the  French,  i.  92 

Versailles  used  as  a  hospital  for  w  ounded 
soldiers,  i.  275  ;  note  on  the  comple- 
tion of,  iii.  112 

Vernegues,  arrest  of,  ii.  58 

Victor,  Marshal,  Napoleon's  note  to, 
iii.  274  ;  instructions  sent  to,  iii.  185 

Victor  Hugo  on  Waterloo,  iii.  407, 
408  ;  his  father,  ii.  259 

Vienna,  congress  of,  iii.  3S7>  361 

Villach,  Napoleon's  letter  from,  reas- 
suring the  Burgomaster  of  Lienz,  i. 
146 

Villeneuve,  Admiral,  at  Tarentum,  i. 
355  ;  unsuccessful  against  the  Eng- 
lish, ii.  107,  108  ;  Napoleon's  views 
of  his  action,  ii.  140,  141  ;  in  dis- 
grace, ii.  147  ;  removed  from  com- 
mand of  the  squadron,  ii.  149 ;  at  Tra- 
falgar, ii.  170 — 173;  his  death,  ii.  171, 
178,  179;  his  conduct  vindicated  by 
his  nephew  the  Marquis  de  Ville- 
neuve, ii.  172,  177,  178;  Napoleon's 
estimate  of  his  character,  ii.  144 

Visconti,  Madame,  ii.  223,  224 

Vittoria,  battle  of,  iii.  204,  256,  257  ; 
Lord  Londonderry  on,  iii.  257 

Volney,  report  on  civil  condition  of 
Corsica,  1791,  i.  24 

Voltaire,  quotations  from,  ii.  113,  425 


W. 

Wagram,  battle  of,  ii.  430 
Walcheren,   French  defence  of,   ii.   9, 
30 ;   expedition,    ii.    432,  466,   471, 

474 
Walewska,  Count,  ii.  283 
War,  Minister  of,  Napoleon's  notes  and 

letters  to,  i.  169,  200,  203,  352,  396  ; 


464 


INDEX. 


ii.  469;  iii.  84,  in,  342,  384; 
instructions  to,  before  Waterloo,  iii. 
386 

War  waggons,  i.  348 

Warsaw,  Napoleon  at,  ii.  281 — 290  ; 
entered  by  the  Russians,  iii.  222 

Washington,  Napoleon  orders  funeral 
honours  to  be  paid  to,  i.  291 

Waterloo,  battle  of,  iii.  359 ;  orders 
for  the  day,  iii.  391,  392  ;  Napoleon's 
account  of,  iii.  395 — 400  ;  Jerome's 
account  of,  iii.  400,  401  :  Marquis 
de  Grouchy's  account  of,  iii.  402, 
403  ;  quotations  from  other  writers 
on,  iii.  404,  405,  407  ;  Victor  Hugo 
on,  iii.  407,  408  ;  Sismondi  on,  iii. 
408 — 410  ;  Drame  de  Waterloo,  iii. 
417,  421  n  ;  criticism  on  French  in- 
action before,  iii.  418 

Weiss,  quotation  from,  ii.  268 

Wellesley  ;  see  Wellington 

Wellington,  Duke  of,  his  letter  to  Lord 
Lyndoch,  iii.  385  n  ;  lands  in  Spain, 
ii.  431 ;  at  Talavera,  ii.  470  ;  repulses 
the  French  at  Busaco,  iii.  61  ;  joined 
by  Romana,  iii.  63  ;  at  Torres 
Vedras,  iii.  68,  75,  76 ;  successes 
in  Spain,  iii.  139;  at  Waterloo,  iii. 
419—421 


Westphalia,  King  of;  see  Jerome  Buona- 
parte 

Will,  Napoleon's,  iii.  426 — 429 

William  the  Conqueror,  statue  erected 
to,  ii.  230 

Wilson,  Sir  R.,  ii.  299 

Wirtemberg,  Elector  of,  Napoleon's 
letter  to,  ii.  168,  184 

Wirtemberg,  King  of,  Napoleon's 
letter  to,  iii.  97,  98,  227,  238,  262, 
268 

Wirtemberg,  Princess  of,  her  marriage, 
ii.  193 

Wrede,  Marshal,  defeated  at  Hanau  by 
Napoleon,  iii.  281 

Wright,  Captain,  English  officer  cap- 
tured by  the  French,  ii.  88,  162 — ■ 
164 

Wurmser,  General,  Napoleon's  letter 
to,  i.  114;  saves  Mantua,  i.  103, 
108  ;  driven  back,  i.  105,  108  ;  sur- 
renders Mantua,  i.  125 


Y. 

Yarmouth,  Lord,  ii.  197,  241 
York,  General,  iii.  209,  210,  213 


THE    END. 


LONDON  :   R.    CLAY,   SONS,   AND  TAYLOR,   PRINTERS. 


