w 


/^^       MEMORIAL  DE  SAINTE  HÉLÉî^^"^- 


'  ■  »    '   '■    '0  OF    THE 

PRIVATE    LIFE 

AND 

CONVERSATIONS 

OF    THE 

EMPEROR   NAPOLEON 

AT  SAINT  HELENA 


THE  COUNT  DE  LAS  CASES. 

:.  •  s,:i-"^iC  ^   VOL.  III.  .■-:^  ;^t:^ '<^ 

/.^^Z     r''\"~    PA^RT    THE    FIFTH. 


LONDON: 

PRINTED  FOR  HENRY  COLBURN  AND  CO. 

1823. 


B.   Bensi.et, 
Boit  Court,  Fleet  Street. 


CONTENTS 


THE    FIFTH    PART. 


Page 

The  Bill  respecting  our  Exile — Beaumarchais — Account  of 
the  Works  of  Cherbourg 1 

Long  audience  given  to  the  Governor — Remote  Conversa- 
tion            1 C 

On  the  beautiful  Women  of  Italy — Madame  Grassini — 
Madame  V ; — and  Berthier 19 

Faubourg  Saint  Germain — Aristocnjcy  ;  Democracy — The 
Emperor's  Intention  to  marry  a  French  Woman 23 

Our  Establishment  on  Fire — Etiquette  at  Longwood  ....        29 

Establishments  for  Mendicity  in  France — Napoleon's  Pro- 
jects  on  lUyria — Hospitals — The  Foundling — Prisoners 
of  State — Ideas  of  the  Emperor   31 

Egypt — Saint- Jean  d'Acre — The  Désert — Anecdotes,  &c.  58 

Paternal  Advice — Remarkable  Conversation — Cagliostro  ; 
Mesmer,  Gall,  Lavater,  &c 64 

Singular  Accumulation  of  Contrarieties,  &c.  &c 70 

Madame  de  B — Détails,  &c. — Anecdotes  respecting 

the  Emigrants 73 

The  Emperor  receives  Letters  from  his  Family — Conversa- 
tion with  the  Admirai — The  Commissioners  of  the  AUied 
Powers 76 

Fresh  Instance  of  the   Governor's  Malignity,  &c. — Des- 

perate  Project  of  Santini,  the  Corsican 82 

La  Harpe's  Mélanie — Nuns — Convents — Monks  of  La 
Trappe — The  French  Clergy 86 

Marie  Antoinette — The  Manners  of  Versailles — Anecdote 
— Beverley — Diderot's  Père  de  Famille 91 

Historical  Sketch  of  the  Emigration  to  Coblentz — Anec- 
dotes, &c ^ 94 

Napoleon's  Sentimental  Journey — Public  Spirit  of  the 
Time— Events  of  the  lOth  of  August 139 

Masked  Balls — Madame  de  Mégrigny — Piedmont  and  the 
Piedmontese — Canals  of  France — Dreams  on  Paris — 
Versailles — Fontainebleau,  &c 145 

Plan  of  a  History  of  Europe — Seliin  III. — Forces  of  a 
Turkish  Sultan — The  Mamelukes — On   the  Regency..      161 

Campaigns  of  Italy,  &c. — Epoch  of  1815,  &c. — Gustavus 

III.— Gustavus  IV. — Bernadotte — Paul  1 165 

Napoleon's  Patrimonial  Vine,  &c. — His  Nurse — His  Pa- 
ternal Roof — Tears  of  Joséphine,  during  Wurmger's 
Skirmishes  in  the  Environs  of  Mantua 179 


iv  CONTENTS. 

Pa?e 

The   Euiperor   liishop,  &c. — Had  never  suffered   in  his 

Stomach    185 

Campaign  of  1809,  &c.  &c 186 

On  the  War  with  Russia — Fatalities,  &c. — M.  de  Talley- 
rand,  &c. — The  Corinna  of  Madame  de  Staël. — M. 
Necker,  &c 188 

Shooting  Party  at  St.  Helena,  &c. — Eve  of  the  15th  of 
August,  (Sic 195 

The  Èmperurs  Birth-Dav 197 

Polytechnic  School  suppressed,  &c.— Indecency  of  the 
English  .Tournais — Ice  Machine ib- 

Religious  Ideas  of  Napoléon — Bishop  of  Nantez  (de 
Voisin) — The  Pope — Liberties  of  the  Gallican  Church 
— Anecdotes — Concordat  of  Fontainebleau 199 

Warm  Conversation  with  the  Governor,  in  the  Admiral's 
Présence  219 

The  Conversation  with  the  Governor  again  noticed,  &c. — 
EflFect  of  the  Libels  against  Napoléon — Treaty  of  Fon- 
tainebleau— The  Work  of  General  S n    224 

The  Baroness  de  S ,  &c 230 

Corvisard — Anecdotes  of  the  Saloons  of  Paris 233 

The  Emperor  continues  ill — Remarkable  Officiai  Docu- 
ment, addressed  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe    239 

Officiai  Document 241 

My  English  Family — Just  Debt  of  Gratitude  to  the  Eng- 
lish on  the  part  of  the  Emigrants,  &c. — General  Jou- 
bert  —  Petersburg  —  Moscow  ;  the  Fire — Projects  of 
Napoléon,  had  he  returned  victorious    254 

On  the  Coronation,  &c. — Decrees  of  Berlin  and  Milan — 
The  Grand  Cause  of  the  Ilatred  of  the  English    281 

Account  of  the  Campaign  of  Waterloo,  dictated  by  Napo- 
léon       286 

INDEX    311 


MY  RESIDENCE 

WITH 

THE  EMPEROR  NAPOLEON 
AT  ST.  HELENA. 


The  Bill  respccttng  our  Exile. — Beaumarchais, — Account  of 
the  IVoris  of  Cherbourg. 

Ji'LY  lo,  ISIG.  Abolit  ten  o'clock,  the  Emperor 
entered  my  apartment;  lie  came  imawares,  as  he 
wished  to  take  a  walk.  I  followed  him,  and  he 
walked  for  some  time  towards  the  wood,  where 
\ve  were  taken  up  by  the  calash.  A  considérable 
interval  had  elapsed  since  he  made  use  of  it.  I 
was  the  only  person  with  him,  and  the  bill,  which 
related  to  him,  and  with  the  nature  of  which  we 
were  unacquainted,  was,  diiring  the  whole  time, 
the  subject  of  our  conversation ,     . 


Upon  our  return,  the  Emperor,  after  some  hé- 
sitation, whether  he  should  breakfast  under  the 
trees,  determined  to  go  in,  and  remained  at  home 
the  whole  of  the  day.     He  dined  alone. 

Vol.  III.  Part  V.  b 


3  MY    RESIDENCE    WITH  [July, 

He  sent  for  me  after  dinner  ;  I  found  him  en- 
gaged  in  reading  some  Mercuries  or  old  journals. 
They  supplied  varions  anecdotes  and  circum- 
stances  respecting  Beaumarchais,  whom  the  Em- 
peror,  during  his  consulate,  had,  notwithstanding 
ail  his  wit,  uniformly  discountenanced,  on  ac- 
count  of  his  bad  character  and  his  gross  immo- 
rality.  The  différence  of  manners  imparted  a 
poignancy  to  the  anecdotes,  although  the  différ- 
ence of  times  was  so  trifling.  He  found  an  account 
of  Louis  the  Sixteenth's  visit  to  Cherbourg,  on 
which  he  dvvelt  for  some  time.  He  next  adverted 
to  the  Works  of  Cherbourg,  and  took  a  rapid  re- 
view  of  them,  with  the  clearness,  précision,  and 
lively  manner  that  characterized  every  thing  he 
said. 

Cherbourg  is  situated  at  the  bottom  of  a  semi- 
circular  bay,  the  two  extremities  of  which  are  the 
the  isle  Pelée  on  the  right,  and  the  point  Quer- 
queville  on  the  left.  The  line,  by  which  thèse 
two  points  are  connected,  forms  the  chord  or  the 
diameter,  and  runs  East  and  West. 

Opposite,  to  the  North,  and  at  a  very  small 
distance,  about  20  leagues,  is  the  celebrated 
Portsmouth,  the  grand  arsenal  of  the  English. 
The  rcmainder  of  their  coast  runs  nearly  parallel 
opposite  to  ours.  Nature  has  donc  every  thing 
for  our  rivais  ;  nothing  for  us.  Their  shores  are 
safe  and  every  day  freed  from  obstruction.  They 
abound  in  good  soundings,  iu  the  moans  of  shel- 


1816]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON.  |^ 

ter,  in  harbours  and  excellent  ports  ;  ours  are,  on 
the  contrary,  filled  with  rocks,  their  water  is  shal- 
low,  and  tliey  are  every  day  clioaking  up.  We 
hâve  not  in  thèse  parts  a  single  real  port  of  large 
dimensions,  and  it  might  be  said,  that  the  Eng- 
lish  are,  at  the  same  moment,  both  at  home  and 
on  our  coast,  since  it  is  not  requisite  for  their 
squadrons,  at  anchor  in  Portsmouth,  to  put  to  sea 
to  molest  us.  A  few  light  vessels  are  sufficient 
to  convey  intelligence  of  our  movements,  and,  in 
an  instant,  without  trouble  and  danger,  they  are 
ready  to  seize  upon  their  prey. 

If,  on  the  contrary,  our  squadrons  are  daring 
enough  to  appear  in  the  British  Channel,  which 
ought,  in  reality,  to  be  called  the  French  sea 
only,  they  are  exposed  to  perpétuai  danger;  their 
total  destruction  may  be  effected  by  the  hurri- 
canes  or  the  enemy's  superiority,  because  in  both 
thèse  cases  there  is  no  shelter  for  them.  This  is 
what  happened  at  the  famous  battle  of  La  Hogue, 
where  Tourville  might  hâve  been  enabled  to  unité 
the  glory  of  a  skilful  retreat  with  that  of  a  hard- 
fought  and  so  unequal  a  contest,  had  there  been. 
a  port  for  him  to  take  shelter  in. 

In  that  state  of  things,  men  of  great  sagacity 
and  attached  to  the  good  of  their  country,  pre- 
vailed  upon  government,  by  dint  of  projects  and 
memorials,  to  seek,  by  the  assistance  of  art,  for 
those  resources  of  which  we  had  been  deprived 
by  nature  ;  and  after  a  great  deal  of  hésitation, 

B  2 


i  MY    RESIDENCE    WITtt  [July, 

the  bay  of  Cherbourg  was  selected,  and  was  to 
be  siiited  to  the  design  by  the  means  of  an  im- 
mense dike,  projecting  into  the  sea.  In  that  way, 
"we  were  to  acqnire,  even  close  to  the  enemy,  an 
artificial  road,  whence  oiir  ships  might  be  en- 
abled,  in  ail  tinics  and  weather,  to  attack  his,  and 
where  they  might  escape  from  their  pursuit. 
"  It  was,"  said  the  Emperor,   '*  a  magnificent 

*  and  glorioiis  undertaking,  very   difficiilt  with 

*  respect  to  the  exécution  and  to  the  finances  of 
'  that  period.  The  dike  was  to  be  formed  by 
'  immense  cônes  constructed  empty  in  the  port 
'  and  towed  afterwards  to  the  spot,  where  they 

*  were  sunk  by  the  weight  of  the  stones  with  which 

*  they  were  filled.*  There  certainly  was  great 
'  ingenuity   in  the  invention.     Louis  XVI.    ho- 

*  nourcd  thèse  opérations  with  his  présence.    His 

*  departure  from  Versailles  was  a  great  event. 

*  In  those  times,  a  king  never  left  his  résidence, 
'  his  excursions  did  not  extend  beyond  the  limits 
'  of  a  hunting  party  ;  they  did  not  hurry  about 
'  as  at  présent,  and  I  really  believe,  that  I  con- 
'  tributed  not  a  little   to  the  rapidity  of  their 

*  movements. 

**  However,    as  it  was  absolutely  necessary, 

*  that  things  should  be  impressed  with  the  cha- 
'  racter  of  the  âge,  the  eternal  rivalry  between 

*  the  land  and  sea,  that  question  which  can  never 

*  Tlic  (liameter  of  thèse  cônes,  which  were  60  feet  high,  was 
]04  i'eet  at  the  base^  and  CD  at  the  top. 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON'.  "       5 

*'  be  decided,  continued  to  be  carried  on.     It 
"  might  hâve  been  said  in  that  respect,  that  there 
**  were  two  kings  in  France,   or  that  he,   who 
**  reigned,  had  two  interests,  and  ought  to  hâve 
"  two  wills,  which  proved  rather,   that  he  had 
"  none  at  ail.     Hère  the  sea  was  the  only  subject 
**  for  considération,  yet  the  question  was  decided 
**  in  favour  of  the  land,  not  by  superiority  of  ar- 
'*  gument,  but  by  priority  of  right.     Where  the 
"  fate  of  the  empire  was  at  stake,  a  point  of  pre- 
"  cedence  was  substituted,  and  thus  the  grand 
**  object,  the  magnificent  enterprize,  failed  of  suc- 
**  cess.     The  land-party  established  itself  at  the 
•'  isle  Pelée  and  at  fort  Querqueville  ;  it  was  em- 
"  ployed  there  mereîy  to  lend  an  auxiliary  hand 
"  to  the  construction  of  the  dike,  which  was  itself 
"  the  chief  object  ;  but  instead  of  that,  it  began  by 
**  establishing  its  own  prédominance,  and  after- 
**  wards  compelled  the  dike  to  become  the  instru- 
•*  ment  of  its  convenience,  and  subservient  to  its 
**  plans  and  discrétion.     What  was  the  resuit? 
"  The  harbour,  that  was  forming  and  which  ought 
**  to  contain  the  mass  of  our  navy,  whether  de- 
**  signed  to  strike  at  the  heart  of  the  enemy's 
**  power,  or  to  take  occasional  shelter,  could  only 
•*  accommodate   fifteen  sail    at  most,   while  we 
"  wanted  anchorage  for  more   than  a  hundred, 
**  which  might  hâve  been  effected  without  more 
**  labour  and  with  little  more  expense,  had  the 
**  Works  been  carried  more  forward  into  the  sea, 


è  MT    RESIDENCE    WÏTII  [July, 

"  merely  beyond  the  limits,  which  the  land-party 
**  had  appropriated  to  itself. 

*•  Another  blunder  highly  characteristic  and 
*'  scarcely  conceivable  took  place.  AU  the  prin- 
**  cipal  measures  for  completing  the  harbour  were 
**  fixed  upon  ;  the  dike  commenced  ;  oiie  of  the 
"  channels,  that  to  the  eastward,  finished,  and 
"  the  other  to  the  westward  was  on  the  point  of 
**  being  formed,  without  an  exact  and  précise 
"  knowledge  of  ail  the  soundings.  This  over- 
*'  sight  Avas  so  great,  that  the  channel  already 
"  formed,  that  to  the  eastward,  five  hundred 
"  fathoms  broad,  having  been  extended  too  closely 
*'  to  the  fort,  did  not,  without  inconvenience,  ad- 
•*  mit  of  vessels  at  low  water,  and  that  the  other 
"  which  was  aboiit  to  be  constructed  to  the  west- 
"  ward  would  hâve  been  impracticable,  or  at 
*'  least  very  dangerous,  but  for  the  individual 
*'  zeal  of  one  officer  (M.  de  Chavagnac),  who 
*'  made  that  important  discovery  in  time,  and 
**  caused  the  works  on  the  left  extremity  of  the 
*'  dike  to  be  stopped  at  the  distance  of  twelve 
**  hundred  fathoms  from  Querqueville  fort,  by 
•'  which  it  was  to  be  defended.  This  seems  to 
**  me,  and  is,  in  fact,  too  great  a  distance.* 

*  It  was  not  until  1*89^  tive  years  after  the  commencement 
of  thèse  works,  that  orders  were  gîven  by  government  for  tak- 
ingthe  soundings  of  the  harbour  and  ascertaining  the  state  of 
the  bottom.  Up  to  that  time,  the  works  had  been  carried  on 
■olelyon  >ague  and  imperfect  notions!  !  (Mémoire  du  Baron  Ca- 
chin,  inspecteur  général  des  ponts  et  chaussées.) 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR   ^^APOLEO^^  7 

**  The  System  adopted  in  the  works  of  the  dike, 
"  which  is  more  than  a  league  from  the  shore, 
**  and  more  than  1900  fathoms  long  by  90  feet 
"  broad,  was  also  liable  to  numeroiis  changes, 
*'  siiggested,  however,  by  expérience.  The  cônes, 
**  which,  according  to  the  established  principle, 
**  ought  to  hâve  touched  each  other  in  their  bases, 
**  were,  in  that  respect,  either  separated  by  acci- 
**  dent  or  with  a  view  of  economy.  They  were 
**  damaged  by  storms,  eaten  by  worms,  or  they 
"  rotted  with  âge.  They  were  at  length  altoge- 
**  ther  neglected,  with  the  exception  of  stones 
**  thrown  at  random  into  the  sea,  and  when  it 
**  was  observed,  that  thèse  were  scattered  by  the 
**  rolling  of  the  waves,  recourse  was  had  to  enor- 
*'  mous  blocks,  which  finally  answered  every  ex- 
"  pectation. 

"  The  Works  were  continued,  without  interrup- 
"  tion,  under  Louis  XVI.  An  encreased  degree 
**  of  activity  was  imparted  to  them  by  our  legis- 
**  lative  assemblies;  but  in  conséquence  of  the 
**  commotions,  which  soon  followed,  they  were 
*'  completely  abandoned,  and  at  the  time  of  the 
*'  Consulate,  there  was  not  a  trace  of  that  famous 
**  dike  to  be  seen.  Every  thing  had  been  de- 
'*  stroyed  for  several  feet  under  low  water  level, 
**  by  the  original  imperfection  of  the  plan,  by  the 
**  length  of  time  and  the  violence  of  the  waves. 

"  The  moment,  however,  I  took  the  helm  of 
^*  afFairs,  one  of  my  first  employraents  was  to 


8  MY    UESIDEKCE    WITH  [July, 

**  tuni  my  attention  to  so  important  a  point.     I 

'*  ordered  commissions  of  inquiry,  I  had  the  sub- 

**  ject  discussed  in  my  présence,  I  made  myself 

*•  acquainted  with  the  local  circumstances,  and 

*•  I  decided,  that  the  dike  should  be  run  iip  with 

*'  ail   possible    means  and   expédition,   and  that 

*'  two  solid  fortifications  should,  in  the  course  of 

**  time,  be  constructed  at  the  two  extremities; 

•*  but  that  measures  should  be  immediately  taken 

*'  for  the  establishment  of  a  considérable  provi-, 

"  sional  battery.    I  had  then  to  encounter,  on  ail 

•*  sides,  the  inconveniencies,  the  objections,  the 

"  particular  views,  the  fondness  which  attaches 

•*  itself  to  individual  opinions,  kc.  kc.     Several 

"  maintained,  that  the  thing-  certainly  could  not 

•*  be   done  ;    I  continued   steady,    I    insisted,   I 

"  commanded,  and  the  thing  was  done.     In  less 

•'  than  two  years,  a  real  island  was  seen  to  rise, 

•*  as  it  were  by  magie,  from  the  sea,  on  which 

♦'  was  erected  a  battery  of  large  calibre.     Until 

'*  that  moment,  our  labours  had  almost  constantly 

**  been  the  sport  of  the  English  ;  they  had,  thay 

♦*  said,   been  convinced  from   their  origin,  that 

"  they  would  prove  fruitless;  they  had  foretold, 

"  that  the  cônes  would  destroy  themselves,  that 

**  the  small  stones  would  be  swept  away  by  the 

•*  waves,   and   above  ail,   they  relied  upon  our 

"  lassitude  and  our  inconstancy.   But  hère  things 

**  were  completely  altered,  and  they  made  a  shew 

'*  of  molesting  our  opérations  ;  they  were,  how- 


1S16.]  THE    KMrr:ilOR    XAPOLEOX.  9 

"  ever,  too  late;  I  was  already  preparecl  for 
**  them.  The  western  channel  naturally  conti- 
"  niied  very  wide,  and  the  two  extrême  fortifica- 
**  tions,  which  defended,  each  its  peculiar  passage, 
'*  being  incapable  of  maintaining  a  cross-fire,  it 
*'  was  probable,  tliat  an  enterprising  enemy  niight 
"  be  enabled  to  force  the  western  channel,  corne 
"  himself  to  an  anchor  within  the  dike,  andthere 
'*  renew  the  defeat  of  Aboukir.  But  Ihad  al- 
"  ready  guarded  against  this  with  my  central 
**  provisional  battery.  However,  as  I  am  for  per- 
**  manent  establishments,  I  ordered  within  the 
"  dike,  in  the  centre,  by  way  of  support,  and 
"  which  in  its  turn  might  serve  as  an  envelope, 
"  an  enormous  elliptical  pie  to  be  constructed, 
**  commanding  the  central  battery,  and  mounted 
"  itself  in  two  casemated  tiers,  bomb  proof,  with 
**  50  pièces  of  large  calibre  and  20  mortars  of  an 
**  extensive  range,  as  well  as  barracks,  powder- 
*'  magazine,  cistern,  c^c.  kc. 

**  I  hâve  the  satisfaction  of  having  left  this  nol:;le 
**  work  in  a  finished  state. 

*'  Having  provided  for  the  défensive,  my  only 
**  business  was  to  prépare  oftensive  measures, 
"  which  consisted  in  the  means  of  collecting  the 
**  mass  of  our  fleets  at  Cherbourg.  The  harbour, 
**  however,  could  contain  but  fifteen  sail.  For 
•*  the  purpose  of  increasing  the  number,  I  caused 
**  a  new  port  to  be  dug  ;  the  Romans  never  un- 
"  dertook  a  more  important,  a  more  difficult  task, 


iO  MV    RESIDENCE    WITII  [July, 

"  or  one  which  promised  a  more  lasting  dura- 
**  tion  !  It  was  sunk  into  the  granité  to  the  depth 
*'  of  50  feet,  and  I  caused  the  opening  of  it  to  be 
**  celebrated  by  the  présence  of  Maria  Louisa, 
**  while  I  myself  was  on  the  fields  of  battle  in 
'*  Saxony.     By  this  means  1  procured  anchorage 
"  for  25  sail  more.     Still  that  niimber  was  not 
"  sufficient,  and  I  therefore  relied  upon  very  dif- 
"  ferent  means  of  aiigmenting  my  naval  strength. 
"  I  was  resolved  to  renew  the  wonders  of  Egypt 
"  at  Cherbourg.     I  had  already  erected  my  py- 
"  ramid  in  the  sea;  I  would  hâve  also  had  my 
*'  lake  Mœris.    My  great  object  was  to  be  enabled 
**  to  concentrate  ail  our  maritime  force,  and  in 
**  time,   it  would  hâve  been  immense  and  ade- 
"  quate  to  strike  a  fatal  blow  against  the  enemy. 
**  I  was  preparing  my  scène  of  action  in  such  a 
*'  way,  that  the  two  nations,   in    their  totality, 
"  might  hâve  been  enabled  to  grapple  with  each 
**  other,  man  to  man,  and  the  issue  could  not  be 
"  doubtful,  for  we  would  hâve  been  more  than 
"40  millions  of  French  against  15  millions  of 
**  English.     I  should  hâve  wound  up   the  war, 
**  with  a  battle  of  Actium,  and  afterwards  what 
"  did  I  want  of  England  ?  Her  destruction  ?  Cer- 
*'  tainly  not.      I   merely  wanted  the  end  of  an 
**  intolérable  usurpation,  the  enjoyment  of  impre- 
*'  scriptible  and  sacred  rights,   the  deliverance, 
*'  the  liberty  of  the  seas,  the  independence,  the 
*'  honour  of  flags.     I  was  speaking  in  the  name 


1R16.1  THE    EMPEROR   NAPOLEOX,  Il 

*'  of  ail  and  for  ail,  and  I  should  hâve  succeeded 
**  by  concession  or  by  force.  I  had,  on  my  side, 
*'  power,  indisputable  right,  the  wishes  of  na- 
"  tions,"  &c.  kc. 

I  hâve  reasons  for  believing,  that  the  Emperor, 
disgusted  with  the  losses,  occasioned  by  partial 
attempts  at  sea,  and  enlightened  by  fatal  ex- 
périence, had  adopted  a  new  system  of  maritime 
>Yar. 

The  war  between  England  and  France  had  in- 
sensibly  assimied  the  aspect  of  a  real  stniggle  for 
îife  or  death.  The  irritation  of  ail  the  English 
against  Napoléon  was  raised  to  the  highest  de- 
gree.  His  Berlin  and  Milan  decrees,  his  conti- 
nental System  and  offensive  expressions  had 
shocked  ail  minds  on  the  other  side  of  the  chan- 
nel,  while  the  ministers,  by  their  libels,  fabrica- 
tions, and  ail  imaginable  raeans,  had  succeeded 
in  exciting  every  passion  to  render  the  quarrel 
altogether  national.  On  this  ground,  it  was  dé- 
clare d  in  full  parliament,  that  the  war  was  per- 
pétuai or  at  least  for  Iife.  The  Emperor  thought 
it  his  duty  to  shape  his  plans  in  conformity  to 
that  state  of  things,  and  from  that  instant,  as 
much  from  calculation  as  from  necessity,  he  gave 
up  ail  kind  of  cruizing,  distant  enterprizes,  and 
hazardous  attempts.  He  determined  upon  a  strict 
défensive  system,  until  his  continental  affairs 
should  be  finally  settled,  and  the  accumulation  of 
his  maritime  force  should  allow  him  to  strike,  with 


12  MV     RESIDENCE    WJTII  [July, 

certainty,  at  a  later  period.  He,  therefore,  re- 
taincd  the  whole  of  his  shipping  in  port,  and  con- 
fined  himself  to  the  graduai  augmentation  of  our 
naval  resoiirces,  without  exposing  theni  to  any 
further  risk.  Evcry  thing  was  calculated  on  the 
basis  of  a  remote  resuit. 

Our  navy  had  lost  a  great  nuniber  of  vessels, 
the  greatest  part  of  our  good  seamcn  Avere  prison- 
ers  in  England,  and  ail  our  ports  wereblockaded  by 
the  English,  who  straitened  their  communications. 
The  Emperor  ordered  canals  to  be  constructed  in 
Britanny,  by  the  means  of  which  and  in  spite  of 
the  enemy,  points  ol  communication  for  provid- 
ing  Brest  with  ail  kinds  of  supplies  were  esta- 
blished   between  Bordeaux,  Rochefort,   Nantes, 
Holland,  Antwerp,  Cherbourg,  and  that  port.  He 
was  desirous  of  having  wet  docks  at  Flushing  or 
in  its  neighbourhood,  for  the  purpose  of  contain- 
ing  the  Antwerp  squadron,  completely  equipped 
and  ready  to  put  to  sea  in  four-and-twenty  hours, 
which  was  necessarily  coniined  in  the  Scheldt, 
four  or  five  months  of  the  year.     Finally,  he  pro- 
jected  near  Boulogne,  or  on  some  spot  along  that 
coast,  the  construction  of  a  dike  similar  to  that  of 
Cherbourg,   and  a  harbour  between  Cherbourg 
and  Brest,  suitable  to  the  Ile-à-Bois.  Ail  this  was 
planned,  for  the  purpose  of  securing,  at  ail  times 
and  without  danger,  a  fuU  and  free  communica- 
tion to  our  ships  from  Antwerp  as  far  as  Brest. 
To  obviate  the  want  of  seamen,  and  the  great  dif- 


l8ld.]  THt    ElIPEROR    NAPOLEÔY.  \ti 

ficulty  of  forming-  them,  it  was  ordered,  that  the 
young'  coiiscripts  should  be,  every  day,  trained  in 
ail  our  ports.  Tliey  were,  at  first,  to  be  putonboard 
of  small  liglit  vessels,  and  a  flotilla  of  that  kind  was 
even  to  navigate  the  Zuiderzee  ;  they  were  after- 
wards  to  be  turned  over  to  large  ships  and  imme- 
diately  replaced  by  others  of  the  same  class.  The 
vessels  were  ordered  to  get  under  sail  every  day, 
to  go  throiigh  every  possible  manœuvre  and  évo- 
lution, and  even  to  exchange  shots  with  the 
enemy,  without  exposing  themselves  to  the 
chance  of  an  engagement. 

The  last  point  was  the  force  and  number  of  our 
vessels  ;  they  were  considérable  notwithstanding- 
ail  our  losses,  and  the  Emperor  calculated  on 
being-  enabled  to  build  20  or  25  yearly.  The 
crews  would  be  ready  as  fast  as  they  were  want- 
ed,  and  thus,  at  the  expiration  of  four  or  six 
years,  he  could  hâve  relied  upon  having  200  sail 
of  the  line,  and  perhaps  300,  had  that  number 
been  necessary,  in  less  than  10  years.  And  what 
was  that  period  of  time  \vith  regard  to  the  perpé- 
tuai or  the  war  for  life,  which  was  declared  against 
us  ?  The  affairs  of  the  continent  would,  in  the 
mean  time,  be  brought  to  a  termination  ;  the 
whole  of  it  would  hâve  embraced  our  System  ; 
the  Emperor  would  hâve  marched  back  the  great- 
est  part  of  his  troops  to  our  coast,  and  it  was  in 
that  situation,  that  he  looked,  with  confidence  te, 
a  décisive  issue  of  the  contest.     Ail  the  respective 


14  MY    RESIDENCE    WITII  [Juîy, 

resources  of  the  two  nations  woiild  liave  been 
called  into  action,  and  we  should  then,  in  his 
opinion,  subdiie  our  enemies  by  moral  energy,  or 
strangle  them  by  our  natural  strength. 

The  Emperor  entertained  several  projects  for 
the  improvement  of  the  navy,  and  adapted  to  that 
end  part  of  his  military  tactics.  He  intended  to 
establish  his  offensive  and  défensive  line  from 
Cape  Finisterre  to  the  mouths  of  the  Elbe.  He 
was  to  hâve  had  three  squadrons  with  admirais 
commanding  in  chief,  as  he  had  corps  d'armée 
with  their  gênerais  in  chief.  The  admirai  of  the 
centre  was  to  establish  his  head  qiiarters  at  Cher- 
bourg ;  of  the  left  at  Brest,  and  of  the  right  at 
Antwerp.  Smaller  divisions  were  to  be  stationed 
at  the  extremities,  at  Rochefort,  and  at  Ferrol,  in 
the  Texel,  and  at  the  mouths  of  the  Elbe,  for  the 
purpose  of  turning  and  outflanking  the  enemy. 
Ail  thèse  points  were  to  be  connected  by  nume- 
rous  intermediate  stations,  and  their  respective 
commanders  in  chief  were  to  be  considered  as 
constantly  présent,  by  the  assistance  of  tele- 
graphs,  which  lining  the  coast,  preserved  an  un- 
interrupted  communication  between  the  parts  of 
the  grand  system. 

Let  us  consider,  however,  what  would  hâve 
been  the  conduct  of  the  English  during  our  pré- 
parations and  the  progressive  increase  of  our 
naval  power?  Would  they  hâve  continued  the 
blockade  of  our  ports  ?  We  should  hâve  had  the 


18160  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON.  15 

satisfaction  of  witnessing  the  wear  and  tear  of 
their  cruising  squadrons  ;  we  should  hâve  com- 
pelled  them  to  maintain  100  or  150  vessels  con- 
stantly  exposed  on  oiir  coasts  to  the  violence  of 
tempests,  to  the  danger  of  rocks,  to  ail  the  hazards 
of  disaster,  while  v^^e,  on  the  contrary,  had  every 
chance  of  success,  should  any  unforeseen  catas- 
trophe présent  itself  from  natural  events,  or  the 
faults  of  their  admirais,  which  could  not  fail  to 
happen  in  the  course  of  time.  What  advantagea 
should  we  not  hâve  derived  from  the  event  ?  We, 
fresh  and  in  excellent  condition  ;  we,  who  waited 
for  the  opportunity,  always  ready  to  set  sail  and 
engage!  Should  the  English  be  tired  out?  Our 
vessels  would  immediately  put  to  sea  for  the  pur- 
pose  of  exercising  and  training  their  crews. 

On  the  completion  of  our  armaments  and  at 
the  approach  of  the  décisive  moment,  were  the 
English,  frightened  for  the  safety  of  their  island, 
to  collect  their  strength  in  front  of  their  principal 
arsenals,  Plymouth,  Portsmouth,  and  the  Thames, 
our  three  divisions  of  Brest,  Cherbourg,  and  Ant- 
werp,  would  attack  them,  and  our  wings  would 
turn  then  on  the  side  of  Ireland  and  Scotland. 
Were  they,  relying  upon  their  skill  and  bravery, 
resolved  to  oppose  us  in  one  great  body,  then  the 
struggle  would  be  reduced  to  a  décisive  issue,  of 
which  we  should  hâve  been  at  liberty  to  choose 
the  time,  the  place,  and  the  opportunity  ; — and  this 
is  what  the  Emperor  called  the  battle  of  Actium, 


in  which,  if  we  werc  defeated,  we  e.tpcrienced 
but  simple  losses,  while,  if  we  proved  victorioiis, 
the  enemy  ceased  to  exist.  But  our  triumph, 
he  maintained,  was  certain,  for  the  two  nations 
would  hâve  to  contend  man  to  man,  and  we  were 
iipwards  of  forty  millions  against  fifteen.  This 
'Nvas  the  favourite  position  on  which  he  uniformly 
dwelt.  Such  was  one  of  lus  grand  ideas,  his  gi- 
gantic  conceptions. 

Napoléon  has  been  the  founder  of  so  many 
establishments,  that  his  works  and  monuments  are 
injurions  to  each  other  by  their  number,  variety, 
and  importance.  It  was  my  earnest  wish  to  hâve 
given  a  full  relation  of  his  works,  which  were 
executed  at  Cherbourg,  as  well  as  of  those  which 
he  had  projected.  A  person  precisely  of  the  pro- 
fession, best  qualified  to  appreciate  the  subject, 
and  one  of  its  brightest  ornaments,  has  promised 
me  a  description  of  them.  Should  he  keep  his 
Word,  it  will  be  found  in  the  following  volume. 


Long  Audience  gu-en   to  ihc   Oovcrnor.-^Iiemote 
Conversation. 


IGth. — About  nine  o'clock,  the  Emperor  took 
an  airing  in  the  calash.  There  was  a  vessel  in 
sight,  at  which  he  looked  through  the  glass.  He 
invited  the  Doctor,  whom  he  found  employed  in  the 
same  way,  to  accompany  him.  On  our  return,  we 
breakfasted  under  the  trees.  He  conversed  at  great 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR    XAPOLEOX.  17 

leiigth  witli  tlie  Doctor  respecting^  the  Governor's 
conduct  to  us,  his  endless  vexations,  &c.  &c. 

About  two  o'clock,  a  messag-e  was  brouglit  to 
the  Emperor  to  ascertain,  whether  lie  was  willing 
to  receive  the  Governor.     He  gave  him  an  audi- 
ence that  lasted  nearly  two  hours,  and  ran  over, 
without  falling  into  a  passion,  he  said,  ail  the  ob- 
jects  under  discussion.     He  recapitulated  ail  oui* 
grievances  ;  enumerated  ail  his  wrongs  ;  addressed 
himself,  he  observed,  by  turns  to  his  understand- 
ing,  his  imagination,  his  feelings,  and  his  heart.  He 
put  it  in  his  power  to  repair  ail  the  mischief  he 
had  donc,  to  recommence  upon  a  plan  altogether 
new,  but  in  vain,  for  that  man,  he  declared,  was 
without  fibres  ;  nothing  was  to  be  expected  from 
him. 

This  Governor,  said  the  Emperor,  had  assured 
him,  that  when  the  détention  of  M.  de  Montho- 
lon's  servant  took  place,  he  did  not  know  he  wafl 
in  our  service,  and  lie  added,  that  he  had  not  read 
Madame  Bertrand's  sealed  letter.  The  Emperor 
observed  to  him,  that  his  letter  to  Count  Bertrand 
was  altogether  répugnant  to  our  manners  and  in 
direct  opposition  to  our  prepossessions  ;  that  if  he, 
the  Emperor,  were  but  a  simple  gênerai  and  pri- 
vate  individual,  and  had  received  such  a  letter 
from  him,  the  Governor,  he  would  hâve  called 
him  ont  ;  that  a  man  so  weîl  known  and  respected 
in  Europe,  as  the  Grand  Marshal,  was  not  to  be 
insulted,  under  the  penalty  of  social  réprobation;. 

Vol..  III.  Part  y.  c 


18  MY    RESIDENCE    WITII  [July, 

tliat  he  (licl  not  take  a  correct  vievv  of  his  situa- 
tion with  regard  to  us;  that  ail  his  actions  hère 
came  within  the  province  of  history,  and  that 
even  the  conversation  which  passed  at  that  mo- 
ment belonged  to  history  ;  that  he  injured  every 
day  by  his  conduct,  his  own  government  and  his 
own  nation,  and  that  in  time  he  might  feel  the 
conséquences  of  it;  that  his  government  would 
disclaim  his  conduct  in  the  end,  and  that  a  stain 
would  attach  itself  to  his  name,  which  would  dis- 
grâce his  children.     "  Will  you  allow  me,"  said 
the  Emperor,  "  to  tell  you  what  we  tliink  of  you? 
*'  We  think  you  capable  of  every  thing  ;  ycs,  of 
*'  evertj  t/iim»;  ;  and  while  you  retain  your  hatred, 
**  we  shall  retain  our  opinion.     I  shall  still  wait 
"  for  some  time,  because  I  like  to  act  upon  cer- 
"  tainties;  and  I  shall  then  hâve  to  complain,  not 
**  that  the  worst  proceeding  of  ministers  was  to 
'*  send  me  to  St.  Helena,  but  that  they  gave  you 
**  the  command  of  it.    You  are  a  greater  calamity 
*'  to  us  tlian  ail  the  wretchedness  of  this  horrible 
**  rock." 

The  Governor's  answer  to  ail  this  was,  that  he 
was  about  to  transmit  an  account  of  it  to  his 
government;  tliat  he  learned  at  least  something 
from  the  Emperor,  but  that  he  received  only  pro- 
voking  treatment  from  us,  and  that  we  made  mat- 
ters  worse. 

With  respect  to  the  commissioners  of  the 
powers,  whom  the  Govemor  wished  to  présent,  the 


1816.]  THE    EMPEllOIl    NAPOLEOX.  19 

Emperor  rejected  them  in  their  political  capacity, 
but  assured  the  Governor,  that  he  woiild  readily 
receive  them  as  private  individuals  ;  that  he  had 
110  dishke  to  any  one  of  them,  not  even  to  the 
French  commissioner,  M.  de  Montchenu,  who 
might  be  a  very  worthy  maii,  who  had  been  his 
subject  ten  years,  and  having  been  an  emi- 
grant,  was  probably  indebted  to  him,  the  Empe- 
ror, for  the  happiness  of  returning  to  France  ; 
that,  besides,  after  ail,  he  was  a  Frenchman  ;  that 
that  title  was  indelible  in  his  eyes,  that  there  was 
no  opinion  which  could  destroy  it  in  his  estima- 
tion, (1n:c.  &c. 

With  regard  to  the  new  buildings  at  Longwood 
which  were  the  great  object  of  the  Governor's 
visit,  the  Emperor  replied  to  his  communication 
on  that  topic,  that  he  did  not  wish  for  them  ;  that 
he  preferred  his  présent  inconvénient  résidence 
to  a  better  one  situated  at  a  great  distance,  and  at 
the  expense  of  a  great  deal  of  noise  and  the  trou- 
ble of  moving  ;  that  the  buildings  which  he  had 
just  mentioned  to  him  required  years  to  be  corn- 
pleted,  and  that  before  that  time,  eitherwe  should 
not  be  worth  the  cost  incurred  for  us,  or  provi- 
dence v%^ould  hâve  delivered  him  from  us,  8cc.  &c. 

On  the  heaut'ifnl  JFonien  of  liait/. — Madame  Grassini-' 
Madame  F.  .  .  .  and  Berthier, 

17th. — The  Emperor  sent  for  me  about  two 
o'clock;    he   dressed   himself  and   wcnt  out  in 

c2 


20  MY    RKSIDENCE    WITH  [July, 

the  calash.  Madame  de  Montholon  was  one  of 
the  party.  It  was  lier  first  appearance  since  her 
accouchement.  The  conversation  tiirned  parti- 
cularly  on  the  Italian  ladies,  their  character  and 
beaiity. 

The  young  General,  who  efFected  the  conqiiest 
of  Italy,  excited  in  that  country,  from  the  first 
moment,  every  feeling-  of  enthusiasni  and  ambi- 
tion. The  Emperor  was  delighted  in  acknow- 
ledging  and  telling  it.  Above  ail,  there  was  not 
a  beauty,  who  did  not  aspire  to  please  and  touch 
his  heart,  but  in  vain.  His  mind,  he  said,  was 
too  strong  to  be  caught  in  the  snare  ;  the  préci- 
pice, concealed  under  the  iiowers,  was  présent  to 
his  view.  His  situation  was  singularly  délicate  ; 
he  had  the  command  of  vétéran  gênerais  ;  the  task 
he  had  to  exécute,  he  observed,  was  immense,  ail 
his  motions  were  watched  by  jealous  eyes;  his 
circumspection  was  extrême.  Ilis  fortune  con- 
sisted  in  his  prudence  ;  he  might  hâve  forgotten 
himself  for  a  single  hour,  and  how  many  of  his 
victories,  said  he,  had  been  connected  with  a 
point  of  no  superior  importance! 

Several  years  afterwards,  at  the  time  of  his  co- 
ronation  at  Milan,  his  attention  was  attracted  by 
Gra.s.suù,  the  celebrated  singer.  Circumstances 
were  then  more  auspicious.  He  desired  to  see 
her,  and  immediately  after  her  introduction,  she 
put  him  in  mind,  that  she  had  made  her  début 
prccisely  during  the  early  achievements  of  the 


>i'     Ji 


1816.]  THE    EMPEHOH     XAPOLEON.  '21 

General  of  the  army   of  Italy.     "  I  was  then," 
said  she,  "  in  the  full  lustre  of  my  beauty  and 
"  my  talent.     My  performance  in  the  Virgins  of 
*'  the  Sun  was  the  topic  of  universal  conversation. 
"  I  fascinated  every  eye  and  inflamed  every  heart. 
"  The  young-  General  alone  was  insensible  to  my 
"  charms,  and  yet  he  was  the  onîy  object  of  my 
.'*  wishes!  What  caprice,  what  singularity!  When 
"  I  possessed  some  value,  when  ail  Italy  was  at^  -,viho  ;?^ 
"  my  feet,  and  I  heroically  disdained  its  admiraC%|^T^ 
"  tion  for  a  single  glance  from  you  ;  I  was  ui^î*     '^v^l    '-^ 
"  able  to  obtain  it,   and  now,  how  strange  an    ~  ''''■■^£:h 
"  altération,  you  condescend  to  notice  me — now,'-  ■  '*V\îsfi^ 
**  when  I  am  not  worth  the  trouble  and  am  no 
"  longer  worthy  of  you!' 

The   celebrated    Madame  V was    also 

among  the  crowd  of  Armidas  ;  but  tired  with 
losing  her  time,  she  lowered  her  pretensions  to 
Berthier,  who,  from  the  first  instant,  lived  but  for 
her.  The  Commander-in-Chief  made  him  a  pré- 
sent one  day  of  a  magnificent  diamond  worth 
more  than  100,000  francs.  "  Hère,"  said  he, 
**  take  that;  we  often  play  high,  lay  it  up  against 
"  a  rainy  day."  —  Four-and-twenty  hours  had 
scarcely  elapsed,  when  Madame  Buonaparte  came 
to  tell  her  husband  of  a  diamond  which  was  the 
subject  of  her  admiration.  It  was  the  présent  that 
was  to  hâve  been  laid  up  against  a  rainy  day,  which 
had  already  found  its  way  from  Berthier's  hand 


«5  MY    RESIDENCE    M'ITH  [July, 

to  Madame  V *s  Iiead.     He  lias  since,  in  ail 

the  circumstances  of  his  life,  been  iiniformly  go- 
verned  by  lier. 

The  Emperor,  having  gradually  heaped  riches 
and  honours  upon  Bcrthier,  pressed  him  often  to 
marry,  but  he  as  constantly  refused,  declaring, 

that  Madame  V could  alone  make  him 

happy.     The  son,  however,  of  Madame  V 

having  got  acquainted  with  a  duchess  of  Bavaria, 
who  had  come  to  Paris,  with  the  hope  of  obtain- 
ing  a  husband,  throngh  the  Emperor's   favour, 

Madame  V. thought  she  was  doing  won- 

ders  and  advancing  her  son's  fortune  by  the  mar- 
riage  of  her  lover,  and,  with  this  impression,  she 
prevailed  upon  Berthier  to  espouse  the  Bavarian 
princess.  But,  said  the  Emperor,  there  is  no 
projectj  however  excellent,  wliich  does  not  be- 
come  the  sport  of  fortune  ;  for  scarcely  was  the 

marriage  concluded,  when  IMadame  V 's 

husband  died  and  left  his  wife  at  liberty.  That 
event  proved  to  her  and  to  Berthier  the  source 
of  real  despair;  they  were  inconsolable.  Ber- 
thier came  with  tears  in  his  eyes  to  communicate 
his  wretched  fate  to  the  Emperor,  wlio  laughed 
at  his  misfortune.  To  wliat  a  misérable  condi- 
tion, he  exclaimed,  was  he  reduced  ;  with  a  little 

more  constancy,   Madame  V might  hâve 

beeîi  his  wife!  *kc.  &c. 


1816.J  THE    KMPEROR    NAPOLEON.  33 

Faubourg  Saint  Germain. — Aristocmcy;  Democracy. —  The 
Eniperor's  inlcnlion  to  marri/  a  frciich  Woman. 

18th.— Abolit  four  o'clock,  I  was  sent  for  by 
the  Emperor,  who  was  in  a  very  weak  state.  He 
had  by  an  absence  of  mind  remained  three  hours 
in  a  very  hot  bath  and  biirnt  his  right  thigh 
with  the  boiling"  water.  He  had  read  two  vo- 
lumes in  the  bath.  He  shaved,  but  would  not 
dress  himself. 

Ai  half-past  seven,  the  Emperor  ordered  two 
covers  to  be  hiid  in  his  cabinet,  and  was  very 
much  out  of  temper,  bccause  his  papers  were 
thro\vn  into  confusion  by  using  the  table  on  which 
they  lay.  They  were  rephiced  by  his  direction, 
and  the  covers  laid  upon  another  small  table. 

We  conversed  for  a  long  time  ;  he  brought  me 
back  to  topics,  which  often  suggested  themselves 
to  him  when  we  vv^ere  together,  and  upon  which 
I  must  endeavour  not  to  be  guilty  of  répétitions, 
the  more  so,  as  they  possess  attractions,  v>iiich  to 
me  are  peculiarly  interesting.  We  talked  a  great 
deal  about  our  youthful  years  and  the  time  we 
passed  at  the  military  scliool.  This  subject  led 
him  again  to  notice  the  new  schools  lie  had  esta- 
blished  at  Saint  Cyr  and  at  Saint  Germain,  and 
he  finally  recurred  to  the  emigrants  and  those  he 
called  nos  encroûtes.  He  became  gay  and  lively 
in  conséquence  of  some  anecdotes  of  the  Fau- 
bourg   Saint   Germain,    respecting    his    person, 


24  AIV    RESIDENCK    WITH  [Tulv, 

which  I  relatcd,  and  as  the  slightest  things  grew 
into  importance,  tîie  moment  lie  toiiched  npon 
tliem,  lie  said — *'  I  see  plainly  that  my  plan  witli 
'*  respect  to  your  Faubonrg  Saint  Germain  Avas 
**  ill  managed.  I  did  too  much  or  too  little.  I 
*'  did  enoiigh  to  dissatisfy  tlie  opposite  party, 
"  and  not  enough  to  connect  the  other  with  me 
"  altogether.  Although  some  of  them  were  fond 
"  of  money,  the  multitude  would  hâve  l^een  con- 
"  tent  with  the  rattles  and  sound,  with  which  I 
"  could  hâve  crammed  them,  without  any  injury, 
"  in  the  main,  to  oar  new  principles.  My  dear 
"  Las  Cases,  I  did  too  much  and  not  enough,  and 
**  yet  I  Avas  earner-tly  occupied  with  the  business. 
"  Unfortunately,  l  v/as  the  only  one  seriously  en- 
"  gaged  in  the  undertaking.  AU  who  were  about 
"  me  thwarted,  instead  of  promoting  it,  and  yet 
'*  there  were  but  two  grand  measures  to  be  taken 
"  with  regard  to  you  ; — that  of  annihilating,  or 
**  that  of  melting  you  down  in  the  great  mass  of 
"  Society.  The  former  could  not  enter  my  head, 
*'  and  the  lattcr  was  not  an  easy  task,  but  I  did 
*•  not  consider  it  beyond  my  strength.  And,  in 
"  fact,  although  I  had  no  sup])ort,  and  was  even 
"  counteracted  in  my  vicws,  I  nearly  realized 
"  them  at  îengtli.  Ilad  1  remained,  the  thing 
"  would  hâve  been  accomplished.  This  will  ap- 
**  pear  astonishing  to  him,  who  knows  how  to 
"  appreciate  the  heart  of  man  and  the  state  of 
"  Society.     1  do  not  think  that  history  can  fur- 


1S16.]  THE    EMPEROR    SWOU'OS.  25 

"  nish  any  case  of  a  similar  kiiid,  or  that  so  im- 
"  portant  a  resuit,  obtained  in  so  short  a  space 
'*  of  time,  can  be  found.  I  should  hâve  carried 
**  that  fusion  into  effect,  and  cemented  that  union 
"  b}^  every  sacrifice  ;  it  woiild  hâve  rendered  us 
"  invincible.  The  opposite  conduct  lias  ruined 
**  us,  and  may  for  a  long  time  protract  the  mis- 
,'*  fortunes,  perhaps  the  last  gasps,  of  unhappy 
"  France.  I  once  more  repeat,  that  I  did  too 
"  much  or  too  little.  I  ought  to  hâve  attached 
"  the  emigrants  to  me  npon  their  return;  I  might 
"  hâve  easily  become  an  object  of  adoration  with 
"  the  aristocracy.  An  establishment  of  that  na- 
*'  ture  was  necessary  for  me.  It  is  the  real,  the 
"  only  support  of  monarchy — its  guide — its  lever 
*' — its  point  of  rcsistance.  Without  it,  the 
*'  state  is  but  a  vessel  without  a  rudder,  a  real 
"  balloon  in  the  air.  But,  the  essence  of  aristo- 
**  cracy,  its  talismanic  charm,  consists  in  anti- 
"  quity,  in  âge;  and  thèse  were  the  only  things 
**  I  could  not  create.  The  intermediate  means 
*'  were  wanting.  M.  de  Brctciàl,  who  had  insinu- 
"  ated  himself  into  my  favour,  encouraged  me. 

**  On  the  contrary,  M.  de  T ,  who  cer- 

*'  tainly  was  not  a  favourite  with  the  emigrants, 
*'  discouraged  me  by  every  possible  means.  Rea- 
"  sonable  democracy  contents  itself  with  hus- 
**  banding  equality  for  ail,  as  a  fair  ground  of  pre- 
'*  tension  and  possession.  The  real  line  of  conduct 
*'  would  hâve  been  to  employ  the  remains  of  aris- 
"  tocracy,  together  with  the  forms  and  design  of 


W  MY    RESIDENCE    M'ITIl  [July, 

democracy.  Above  ail,  it  was  necessary  to 
collect  the  ancient  iianics,  those  celebrated  in 
our  history.  This  is  the  oiily  mode  oï  giving 
an  instantaneoiis  air  of  old  âge  to  the  most  mo- 
dem institutions. 

**  I  entertained,  upon  that  subject,  ideas  which 
were  altogether  peculiar  to  myself.  llad  any 
ditficulties  been  started  by  Aiistria  and  Russia, 
I  would  hâve  married  a  French  Avoman,  I  would 
hâve  selected  one  of  the  most  illustrions  names 
of  the  monarchy.  That  was  even  my  original 
thought,  m  y  real  inclination.  M  y  ministers 
Avere  unable  to  prevent  me,  but  by  their  earn- 
est  appeals  to  political  views.  Had  I  been  sur- 
rounded  by  the  Montmorencies,  the  Nesles, 
and  the  Glissons,  I  shonld,  by  adopting  their 
daughters,  hâve  united  them  with  foreign  sove- 
reigns.  My  pride  and  my  delight  would  hâve 
been  to  extend  thèse  noble  French  stocks,  had 
they  taken  part  with,  or  given  themselves  up  to 
us  altoo-ether.  Tliev  and  those  belongino-  to 
me  thought,  that  I  was  influenced  by  préjudice 
alone,  when  I  was  acting  in  conformity  with 
the  most  profound  combinations.  Be  that  as 
it  will,  y  our  friends  hâve  lost  more  in  me  than 

they  are  aware  of! They  are  destitute 

of  soûl,  of  the  feeiiiig  of  true  glory.  By  what 
unhappy  propcnsity  ,have  they  preferred  wal- 
lowing  in  the  mire  of  the  allies  to  the  noble  task 
of  following  me  to  the  top  of  mount  Simplon, 
and  commanding,  from  its  summit,  the  respect 


181(J.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON.  «7 

**  and  admiration  of  the  rest  of  Europe.  Sense- 
"  less  men  ! — I  had,  however,"  he  continiied,  "  a 
**  project  in  niy  port-folio;  time  alone  was  want- 
**  inj^  to  mature  it,  wliich  woiild  hâve  rallied 
"  round  me  a  great  number  of  that  description  of 
"  persons,  and  wliich,  after  ail,  would  hâve  been 
'*  but  just.  It  was,  that  every  descendant  of  an- 
"  cient  marshals,  or  ministers.  Sec.  kc.  should  be 
"  considered  at  ail  times  capable  of  getting-  him- 
"  self  declared  a  duke,  by  presenting  the  requi- 
"  site  endowment.  AH  the  sons  of  gênerais  and 
"  governors  of  provinces  wcre,  upon  the  same 
"  principle,  to  be  qualified  to  assume  the  title  of 
**  count,  and  so  on  in  gradation.  This  would 
*'  hâve  advanced  some,  raised  the  hopes  of  others, 
"  excited  the  émulation  of  ail,  and  hurt  the  pride 
"  of  none;  grand,  but  altogether  harmless  rattles, 
**  and  belonging,  besides,  to  my  System  and  my 
"  combinations. 

*'  Old  and  corrupt  are  not  governed  like  ancient 
**  and  virtuous  nations.  For  one  individual,  at 
"  présent,  who  would  sacrifice  himself  for  the 
"  public  good,  there  are  thousands  and  millions 
**  M'ho  are  insensible  to  every  thing  but  their  own 
**  interests,  enjoyments,  and  vanity.  To  prétend, 
"  therefore,  to  regenerate  a  people  in  an  instant, 
"  or  as  if  one  were  travelling  post,  would  be  an 
**  act  of  madness.  The  genius  of  the  workman 
**  ought  to  consist  in  knowing  how  to  employ  the 
**  materials  he  has  at  hand,  and  that  is  one  of  the 


28  M  Y    RESIDENCE    WriH  [July, 

"  causes  of  the  resumption  of  ail  the  monarchical 
**  forms,  of  the  re-establishment  of  titles,  of 
"  classes,  and  of  the  insignia  of  orclers.  The 
**  secret  of  the  legislator  shoiild  consist  in  know- 
**  ing  how  to  dérive  advantage  even  from  the  ca- 
"  price  and  irregularities  of  those  whoni  he  pre- 
'*  tends  to  rule  ;  and  after  evcry  considération,  ail 
"  thèse  gewgaws  were  attended  with  few  incon- 
"  veniencies  and  not  destitute  of  some  benefit. 
"  At  the  point  of  civilization,  to  which  we  hâve 
"  now  attained,  they  are  calculated  to  attract  the 
"  respect  of  the  multitude,  provided  always,  that 
"  the  person  decorated  with  them,  préserves  re- 
**  spect  for  himself.  They  may  satisfy  the  vanity 
"  of  the  wcak,  without  scaring,  in  the  slightcst 
"  degree,  strong  and  powerful  minds,"  Ikc.  ttc. — ■ 
It  was  very  late,  and  the  Emperor  said,  at  part- 
ing,  "  there  is  another  pleasant  evening  spent." 

N.B.  How  many  conversations  of  this  kind 
hâve  I  notlost  froni  the  want  of  elucidation,  since 
I  first  noted  them  dovrn  !  For  there  was  not  one, 
however  différent  the  subject,  that  was  not  occa- 
sionally  characterized  by  very  extraordinary  ex- 
pressions and  sallies.  The  reader  will,  ])erhaps, 
bc  gratified  witli  my  narrative;  for  myself,  I  feel, 
1  think  only  of  what  1  hâve  lost  !  When  I  made  a 
careless  entry  of  some  lines  in  my  journal,  my 
mind  was  full  of  the  entire  object,  v/hich,  accord- 
ing  to  my  design,  was  to  be  explained  and  dis- 
played  a  short  time  aflerwards,  and,  besides,  I 


1S1(>]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON'.  29 

was  close  to  the  source,  from  which  ï  expectecl 
fresh  supplies  the  following-  day.  At  présent, 
every  thing  is  obliterated  by  time,  vexation,  and 
affliction  ;  a  single  day  does  not,  however,  pass 
by,  in  which  some  scattered  fragments,  some 
ideas,  some  sentences,  some  isolated  expressions, 
do  not  recur  to  my  memory  ;  but  where  are  they 
to  be  placed  ?  How  are  they  to  be  suitably  intro- 
duced  ?  That  is  a  difficulty  which,  however  easy 
and  agreeable  in  appearance,  is  beyond  my  facul- 
ties,  and  to  which  my  state  of  health  is  inadé- 
quate. 

Onr  Establishment  onjlre. — Etiquette  at  Lovgwood. 

19th. — The  chimney  of  the  saloon  took  fire  in 
the  night,  but  the  liâmes  did  not  break  out  until 
day-light.  Two  hours  sooner,  and  the  building 
would  hâve  been  a  heap  of  ashes. 

The  Emperor  took  a  walk  ;  he  was  attended 
by  several  of  us,  and  we  went  round  the  park  on 
foot. 

One  of  his  shoe-buckles  fell  out,  and  we  ail 
eagerly  strove  to  put  it  in  a^ain  ;  he,  who  suc- 
ceeded,  considered  himself  the  most  fortunate. 
The  Emperor,  who  would  not  hâve  allowed  us  to 
behave  so  at  the  Tuileries,  seemed  hère  to  feel  a 
kind  of  satisfaction  at  our  conduct  ;  he  let  us  do 
as  we  liked,  and  we  were  thankful  to  him  for  in- 
dulging  us  in  an  action,  that  did  honour  to  us,  in 
our  own  opinion. 


30  M  Y    RESIDENCE    WIÏII  [July, 

Tins  leads  me  to  observe,  that  I  hâve  not  yet 
spoken  of  our  customary  manners  near  his  per- 
son,  and  I  am  more  peculiarly  induced  to  notice 
them,  because  \ve  bave  received  several  London 
newspapers,  which  circulate,  in  this  respect,  a 
thousand  idle  stories,  and  assert,  that  the  impé- 
rial étiquette  was  as  strictly  maintained  at  Long- 
wood  as  at  the  Tuileries. 

The  Emperor  behaved  to  us  in  the  kindest  man- 
ner,  and  with  a  paternal  familiarity.  We  were, 
on  our  part,  the  most  attentive  and  respectful  of 
courtiers.  We  uniiormly  endeavoured  to  antici- 
pate  his  wishes  ;  we  carefully  watched  ail  his 
wants,  and  he  had  scarcely  time  to  make  a  sign 
with  his  hand,  before  we  were  in  motion. 

None  of  us  entered  his  apartment  without  being 
sent  for,  and  if  any  thing  of  importance  was  to 
be  communicated  to  him,  he  was  previously  made 
acquainted  with  it.  If  he  walked  separately  Vv-ith 
ai^y  of  us,  no  other  presumed  to  intrude.  In  the 
begining,  we  constantly  ?*emained  uncovered  near 
his  person,  whicli  appeared  strange  to  the  Eng- 
lish,  who  had  been  ordered  to  ])ut  on  their  hats, 
after  the  first  sainte.  This  contrast  appeared  so 
ridiculous  to  the  Emperor,  that  he  commanded 
us,  once  for  ail,  to  behave  like  them.  Nobody, 
except  the  two  ladies,  took  a  seat  in  his  présence, 
unless  desired  to  do  so.  He  was  ne  ver  spoken 
to  but  at  his  own  peculiar  instance,  and  when  the 
conversation  became  gênerai,  which  was,  always 


1816.J  THE    E.ArPEROIl    XATOLECX.  31 

and  in  ail  cases,  under  lus  control  and  guidance. 
Such  was  tlie  étiquette  of  Longwood,  whicli  en- 
tirely  was,  as  it  miist  be  évident,  that  of  our  re- 
collections and  feelings. 

On  our  return  the  Emperor  received  and  ques- 
tioned,  for  a  long  time,  the  master  of  the  Xew- 
castle. 

In  conséquence  of  the  fire  in  the  saloon  and 
the  laying  down  of  a  billiard  table  in  the  dining- 
room,  \ve  adjourned  to  the  topographical  cabinet. 
After  dinner,  there  being  no  other  apartment  to 
retire  to,  we  were  obliged  to  remain  a  long  time 
at  table.  That  circumstance  seemed,  however, 
to  give  an  additional  interest  to  the  conversation; 
we  became  more  acquainted,  more  nnited  with 
each  other  ;  we  gave  a  greater  scope  to  our  îan- 
guage,  and  the  evening  passed  ofF  more  rapidly. 

Establishments  for  Mend'icify  iii  France. — Napoléon' s  pro- 
jects  on  Illyria. — Hospitals. —  The  Foundling. — Piisoneis 
of  State. — Ideas  of  the  Emperor. 

20th. — The  Emperor  sent  for  me  in  the  morn- 
ing  ;  I  found  him  reading  an  English  work  on  the 
poor's  rate,  the  immense  sums  ralsed,  and  the 
vast  number  of  individuals  maintained  at  the  ex- 
pcnse  of  their  parishes  ;  the  account  embraced 
millions  of  men  and  hundreds  of  millions  of 
money.* 

•  See  Ihe  first  part^  note,  page  3S1. 


32  M  Y    RESIDENCE    MlTll  [July, 

The  Emperor  was  apprehensive  tliat  lie  liad  not 
read  the  work  correctly,  or  that  he  had  mistaken 
the  sensé.  The  thing,  he  said,  seemed  altogether 
impossible.  He  could  not  conceive  by  what  vices 
and  defects  so  many  poor  could  be  foiind  in  a 
country  so  opulent,  so  industrious,  and  so  abun- 
dant  in  resources  for  labour  as  England.  He  was 
still  less  capable  of  comprehending,  by  what  pro- 
digy,  the  proprietors,  overloaded  with  a  horrible 
ordinary  and  extraordinary  taxation,  were  also 
enabled  to  provide  for  the  wants  of  sucli  a  multi- 
tude. "  But  we  hâve  nothing,"  he  observed, 
**  in  France  to  be  compared  to  it  in  the  propor- 
"  tion  of  a  hundredth  or  a  thousandth  deg^ree. 
**  Hâve  you  not  told  me,  that  I  sent  y  ou  into  the 
**  departments  on  a  particular  mission  with  re- 
"  gard  to  mendicity  ?  Let  us  see,  what  is  the 
"  number  of  our  beggars  ?  What  did  they  cost? 
*'  How  many  poor-houses  did  I  establish  ?  What 
"  was  the  number  they  lield  ?  What  effect  had 
**  they  in  removing  mendicity  ?  " 

To  this  crowd  of  questions  I  was  compelled  to 
answer,  that  a  considérable  periud  of  time  had 
since  elapsed,  that  my  mind  had  been  occupied 
with  several  other  objects,  and  that  it  was  impos- 
sible for  me  to  enter  into  correct  statemcnts  Ironi 
mère  recollection  ;  but  that  I  had  the  officiai  re- 
port itself  among  the  few  papers  1  had  preserved, 
and  tliat  the  first  time  he  might  be  pleased  to 
send  fur  me,  1  should  be  enabled  to  satisfy  him. 


ÎS16,]  THE    EMPEROR    XAPOLEOX.  33 

"  But,"  said  he,  "  g'o  instantly  and  look  for  it, 
•'  tiiings  are  not  profitable  unless  seasonably  ap- 
*'  plied,  and  I  sliall  soon  run  it  over  ^cith  mij 
"  thumh,  as  Abbé  de  Pradt  inçeniously  said;  al- 
'*  thougli,  to  deal  candidly  witli  yoii,  I  am  not 
**  at  présent  over  désirons  to  give  up  my  atten- 
"  tion  to  such  objects;  tliey  put  me  in  mind  of 
**  mustard  after  dinner." 

In  two  minutes  the  report  was  in  bis  hand. 
*'  Well!"  said  the  Emperor  to  me,  also,  in  a  very 
few  minutes,  for  it  miglit  be  really  said  that  he 
had  not  turned  over  the  leaves;  "  well,  tliis,  in 
**  fact,  lias  no  resemblance  whatever  to  England. 
**  Our  organization,  however,  had  failed  ;  I  sus- 
**  pected  as  much,  and  it  was  on  that  account  ï 
**  intrusted  you  with  the  mission.  Your  report 
**  would  havebeen  in  perfect  conformity  withmy 
**  views.  You  took  up  the  considération  ingenu- 
**  ously  and  like  an  honest  man,  without  the  fear 
"  of  exciting  the  displeasure  of  the  minister,  by 
"  depriving  him  of  a  great  many  appointments. 

"  I  am  pleased  with  a  great  number  of  your 
**  détails.  Why  did  you  not  corne  and  converse 
"  with  me  about  them  yourself  ?  You  would  hâve 
*'  satisiied  me,  and  1  should  hâve  known  how  to 
**  value  your  services." — "  Sire,  as  things  were 
**  then  situated,  it  would  hâve  been  impossible 
**  for  me  ;  we  were  then  involved  in  the  confusion. 
"  and  embarrassment  caused  by  our  misfortunes." 
'*  — Your  observation  is  perfectly  correct  ;  von 

Vol.  III.  Fart  V.  o 


34  M  Y    RESIDENCE    WITIT  [July, 

"  establisli  an  iinquestionable  position.  The  fact 
*'  is,  that  in  the  floiirishing  state  to  which  I  hacl 
*'  raised  the  empire,  no  hands  could  any  where 
*'  be  foiuîd  destitate  of  employment.  It  was 
**  laziness  and  vice  alone  that  could  produce 
*'  mendicants. 

*'  You  think  that  their  complète  annihilation 
"  was  possible  ;  and,  for  my  part,  I  am  of  the 
"  same  opinion. 

"  Your  levy,  in  mass,  of  a  vast  and  single  prison 
"  in  each  department,  was  equally  adapted  to  the 
*'  tranquillity  of  society,  and  the  well-being-  of 
"  those  confined  in  it  ; — your  idea  of  construct- 
"  ing  monuments  to  last  for  centuries  would  hâve 
*'  attracted  my  attention.  That  gigantic  under- 
*'  taking,  its  utility,  its  importance,  the  perma- 
"  nence  of  its  results,  ail  thèse  points  belonged  tô 
"  my  System. 

"  With  respect  to  your  university  for  the  peo- 
**  pie,  I  am  very  apprehensive,  that  it  would  hâve 
*'  been  but  a  beautifid  chimera  of  philanthropy, 
*'  wortliy  of  the  unsophisticated  Abbc  de  Saint 
*'  Pierre.  There  is,  however,  some  merit  in  the 
*'  aggregate  of  those  conceptions;  but  an  energy 
**  of  character,  and  an  unbending  persévérance, 
"  for  which  we  are  not  generally  distinguished, 
"  would  be  requisite  to  produce  any  good  resuit. 

'*  As  for  the  rest,  I  every  day  collect  ideas 
"  from  you  in  this  place,  of  which  I  did  not  ima- 
*'  gine  you  capable;  but  it  was  not  at  ail  my 


1S16.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON.  35 

"  faiilt.  Yoli  were  near  me;  why  dicl  you  not 
*'  open  your  miiid  to  me  ?  I  clid  not  possess  the 
"  gift  of  divination.  Had  you  been  minister, 
*'  those  ideas,  however  fantastical  they  might  at 
'*  first  hâve  appeared  to  me,  would  not  hâve  been 
*'  the  less  attended  to,  becaiise,  there  is,  in  my 
"  opinion,  no  conception  altogether  unsusceptible 
"  of  some  positive  good,  and  a  w^rong  notion, 
"  vi'hen  properly  controlled  and  regulated,  often 
"  leads  to  a  right  conclusion.  I  should  hâve 
"  handed  you  over  to  commissioners,  who  would 
''  hâve  analyzed  your  plans;  you  would  havede- 
"  fended  them  by  your  arguments,  and  after  a 
"  thorough  knowledge  of  the  subject,  I  alone 
*'  should  hâve  finally  decided  according  to  my 
"  own  judgment.  Such  was  my  way  of  acting 
"  and  my  intention,  I  gave  an  impulse  to  in- 
**  dustry  ;  I  put  it  into  a  state  of  complète  acti- 
**  vity  throughout  Europe  ;  I  was  désirons  of 
"  doing  as  much  for  ail  the  faculties  of  the  mind, 
''  but  time  was  not  allowed  me.  I  could  not 
*'  bring  my  plans  to  maturity  in  fuil  gallop  ;  and, 
"  unfortunately,  I  but  too  often  wasted  them 
"  upon  a  sandy  foundation,  and  consigned  them 
"  to  unproductive  hands. 

*'  What  were  the  other  missions  with  which  I 
"  entrusted  toyou?" — '*  One  in  HoUand,  another 
**  in  Illyria." — "  Hâve  you  got  the  reports  ?  " — 
"  Yes,  Sire."—"  Go  for  them."  But  I  had  not 
got  to  the  door,  when  he  said,  "  Never  mind, 

d2 


3rt  M  Y    RÈSÏDÉXCE    WITH  [.hily, 

"  coWe  baek,  sépare  me  the  trouble  of  reading 
"  sucli  matters! — They  are  liencefortb,  in  reality, 
"  altogether  useless." — What  discoveries  did  not 
tbese  words  enable  me  to  make  !  * 

The  Emperor  resumed  the  subject  of  Illyria. — 
*'  Iii  obtaining  possession  of  Illyria,  it  was  never 
"  my  intention  to  retain  it;  I  never  entertained 
"  the  idea  of  destroying-  Aiistria.  Her  existence, 
"  was,  on  the  contrary,  indispensably  reqiiisite 
*'  for  the  exécution  of  my  plans.  But  illyria  was, 
"  in  our  hands,  a  van-guard  to  the  heart  of  Au- 
"  stria,  calculated  to  keep  a  check  upon  her;  a 
"  sentinel  at  the  gâtes  of  Vienna  to  keep  her 
**  steady  to  our  interests.  Besides,  I  was  desir- 
"  ous  of  introducing  and  establishing  in  that 
*'  country  our  doctrines,  our  System  of  govern- 
*'  ment,  and  our  codes,  It  was  an  additional 
"  step  to  the  régénération  of  Europe.  I  had 
"  merely  taken  it  as  a  pîedge,  and  intended,  at  a 
**  later  period,  to  exchange  it  for  Gallicia,  at  the 
"  restoration  of  Poland,  which  I  hurried  on 
"  against  my  own  opinicn.  I  had,  however, 
*'  more  than  one  project  with  regard  to  Illyria; 
*'  for  I  frequently  fluctuated  in  my  designs,  and 

•  However  short  the  report  on  meiulicity  may  be — however 
necessîiry  l'!)r  more  tlislinctly  uiulerstanilini^  the  Einperor's  ob- 
servations, ;!n(l  altliougli  not  destitutc  of  intercst  for  those  who 
are  fond  of  the  stiuiy  of  philanthropie  econoiny,  I  hâve  declined 
tbc  insertion  of  it  hère,  out  of  dcforeucc  to  the  ereatcr  number 
of  my  readcrs. 


1816.]  THE    EJ^IPEROU    NAPOLEON*.  3? 

**  had  few  ideas  that  were  fixed  on  solid  grounds. 
**  This  arose  ratlier  from  adapting  myself  to  cir- 
**  ciimstances  than  from  giving  an  impulse  and 
**  direction  to  them,  and  I  was  every  instant  com- 
"  pelled  to  shift  abont.  The  conséquence  was, 
"  that,  for  the  greater  part  of  the  time,  I  cune  to 
"  no  absoliite  décision,  and  was  occupied  merely 
"  with  projects.  My  prédominant  idea,  how- 
**  ever,  partie ularly  after  my  marriage,  was  to 
"  give  it  up  to  Austria  as  an  indemnity  for  Gal- 
"  licia,  on  the  re-establishment  of  Poland,  with 
"  ail  its  conséquences,  as  a  separate  and  inde- 
*'  pendent  kingdom.  Not  that  I  cared  upon 
**  whose  head,  whether  on  that  of  a  friend,  an 
*'  enemv,  or  an  ally,  the  crown  was  placcd,  pro- 
**  vided  the  thing  was  efiected.  The  results  were 
*'  indiffèrent  to  me.  I  hâve,  my  dear  Las  Cases, 
**  formed  vast  and  numerous  projects,  ail  unques- 
*'  tionably  for  the  advanccment  of  reason  and  the 
**  welfare  of  the  human  race.  I  was  dreaded  as 
*'  a  thunderbolt;  I  was  charq-ed  with  having  a 
*'  hand  of  iron  ;  but  the  moment  that  hand  had 
**  struck  the  last  blow,  every  thing  would  hâve 
*'  been  softened  down  for  the  happiness  of  ail. 
*'  How  many  millions  would  hâve  poured  their 
'*  bénédictions  on  me,  both  then  and  in  future 
"  times  !  But  how  numerous,  it  must  be  confess- 
"  ed,  the  fatal  misfortunes  which  were  accumu- 
**  lated  and  combined  to  effect  my  overthrow, 
'*  at  the  end  of  my  career!  My  unhappy  mar- 


38  MY    RESIDENCE    "VVITH  [Juljr, 

riage  ;  the  perfidies  which  résultée!  from  it  ;  that 
villainous  affair  of  Spain,  from  which  I  could 
not  disengage  mysclf  ;  that  fatal  war  witli  Rus- 
sia,  which  occiirred  through  a  misunderstand- 
ing  ;  that  horrible  rigour  of  the  éléments,  which 

devoured  a  whole  army  ; and  then,  the 

whole  universe  against  me  !  .  .  .  .  Is  it  not  won- 
derfiil,  that  I  was  still  able  to  make  so  long  a 
résistance,  and  that  I  was  more  than  once  on 
the  point  of  siirmounting  every  danger  and 
emerging  from  that  chaos  more  powerful  than 

ever  t O  !  destiny  of  man! — What  is  liu- 

man  vvisdom,  hunian  foresigîit!"  —  And  then 
abruptly  adverting  to  my  report,  lie  said,  *'  I 
observed,  that  yoii  travelled  over  a  great  num- 
ber  of  departments.  Did  your  mission  last 
long?  Was  your  journey  agreeable?  Was  it 
of  real  benefit  to  you  ?  Did  you  collect  much 
information  ?  Were  you  enabled  to  form  a  cor- 
rect judgment  on  the  State  of  the  country,  on 
that  of  public  opinion  ?  Sec.  Sec. 
"  I  now  recoUect,  that  I  selected  you  precisely, 
because  you  had  just  returned  from  your  mis- 
sion to  Ulyria,  and  I  found  in  your  report  seve- 
ral  things,  which  made  a  strong  impression 
upon  me;  for  it  is  surprising,  how  many  circum- 
stances  at  présent  are  every  day  brought  back 
to  my  memory,  which,  at  the  time,  struck  me 
with  respect  for  you,  and  which,  by  asingular  fa- 
tality,  were  immediately  afterwards  completely 


1S16.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON.  39 

forg'otten.  When  aiiy  appointments  were  about 
to  take  place  to  those  spécial  and  coniidential 
missions,  tlie  decree,  witli  blanks  for  the  names, 
was  laid  before  me,  and  I  filled  tliem  up  witli 
persons  of  my  own  sélection — I  miist  hâve 
written  your  naine  witli  my  own  hand." 
"  Sire,"  I  replied,  "  there  never  was,  perhaps, 
a  mission  more  agreeable  and  satisfactory  in 
every  point  of  view.  I  commenced  it  early  in 
the  spring,  and  proceeded  from  Paris  to  Tou- 
lon, and  from  Toulon  to  Antibes,  foliowing  the 
line  of  coast  and  occasionaliy  divcrging  into  the 
interior.  I  travclled  nearly  thirteen  hundred 
leagues,  but  unfortunately  the  time  was  short. 
The  minister,  in  his  instructions,  had  strictîy 
limited  the  period  to  tliree,  or  at  most,  to  four 
months.  It  would  be  difficuit  for  me  to  give 
an  adéquate  description  of  ail  the  delight,  en- 
joyments,  and  advantages  which  I  derived  from 
the  journey.  I  was  a  member  of  your  council, 
an  officer  of  your  household.  I  was  evèry 
where  considered  as  one  of  your  missi  domuùci, 
and  was  received  with  suitable  respect.  The 
more  I  behaved  with  discrétion,  modération, 
and  simpiicity,' visiting  myself  the  high  func- 
tionaries,  whose  attendance  I  was  authorized 
to  require,  the  more  I  was  treated  with  défér- 
ence and  complaisance.  For  one,  who  shewed 
any  distrust,  or  betrayed  any  symptom  of  ill- 
humour  or  envv  ;  for  I  afterwards  '  learnt  from 


40  MV    RESîDKyCF,    WITII  t-^uly> 

themselves,  that  my  character,  as  a  nobleman, 
emigrant,  and  Chamberlain,  formée!  three  cer- 
tain gTonnds  for  réprobation  ;  for  one,  I  repeat, 
who  looked  iipon  me  witli  a  jealoiis  eye,  I  found 
many  others  whose  communications  were  alto- 
getlier  unreserved,  even  npon  objects,  respect- 
ing  which  I  should  not  hâve  presumed  to  make  an 
inquiry.  They  assured  me,  that  they  took  plea- 
sure  in  unbosoming  themselves  to  me  with  per- 
fect  openness,  that  they  viewed  my  situation, 
near  the  person  of  the  sovereign,  as  a  favourable 
médium,  and  considered  me  as  the  confessor 
upon  whom  they  relied  for  transmitting  their 
most  secret  thoughts  to  the  Most  High,  kc.  ^c. 
The  more  I  endeavoured  to  convince  them,  that 
they  were  mistakcu  with  regard  to  my  situa- 
tion and  the  nature  of  my  mission,  the  more 
they  were  confirmed  in  the  contrary  opinion. 
In  so  short  a  period,  what  a  lesson  for  me 
on  mankind  !  There  were  none  of  thèse  high 
functionaries  who  did  not  differ  from  each  other 
with  regard  to  the  views,  means,  and  designs  of 
ail  the  objects  under  considération  ;  and  yet 
they  were  ail  men,  selected  with  care,  of  tried 
ability,  and  generally  possessed  of  a  great  deal 
ofmerit.  Persons  in  private  life,  also,  looked 
up  to  me  as  to  a  ray  of  providence,  and  applied 
to  me  either  publicly  or  in  secret.  How  many 
things  did  I  not  learn  ?  How  numerous  the  de- 
nunciations  and  accusations,  communicated  to 


1S16.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON.  41 

"  me!  What  a  multitude  of  local  abuses,  ofpetty 
"  intrig-ues  disclosed  to  me  ! 

"  Altogether  unacquainted  witli  afFairs,  and 
*'  until  then  absolutely  ignorant  of  officiai  pro- 
"  ceedings,  I  made  use  of  that  peculiar  opportu- 
*'  nity  to  obtain  information.  I  did  not  fail  to 
**  make  myself  acquainted  witli  ail  the  objects 
**  and  particular  circumstances  of  every  party. 
*'  I  was  not  appreliensive  of  shewing-  my  igno- 
*'  rance  to  the  first  who  presented  tliemselves, 
**  for  I  was  tlius  enabled  to  qualify  myself  for  dis- 
*'  cussing  business  witli  the  others. 

"  It  is  true,  Sire,  that  my  spécial  mission  was 
"  restricted  to  the  m.endicity  establishments  and 
**  the  houses  of  correction;  but  feeling,  as  I  did, 
"  ail  the  wantof  a  stock  of  knowledge,  fit  to  ren- 
*'  der  myself  useful  to  the  council  of  state,  and 
*'  taking  advantage  of  my  appointment,  I  con- 
*'  nected  with  it,  of  my  own  accord,  the  minute 
"  inspection  of  prisons,  hospitals,  and  beneficent 
"  institutions,  and  I  also  took  a  survey  of  ail  our 
*'  ports  and  squadrons. 

*'  How  magnificent  the  combination  which  thus 
"  presented  itself  to  my  view  !  I  every  where  be- 
"  held  the  most  perfect  tranquillity  and  complète 
"confidence  in  the  government  ;  every  hand, 
*'  every  faculty,  every  branch  of  industry  was 
"employed;  the  soil  was  embellished  by  the 
*'  flourishing  state  of  agriculture,  it  was  the  finest 
**  time  of  the  year;   the  roads  were  excellent; 


43  MY    RESIDENCE    WITK  [July, 

"  public  Works  were  carried  on  almost  in  every 
"  quarter; — the  canal  of  Arles,  the  noble  bridge 
**  of  Bordeaux,  the  works  of  Rocliefort,  the  ca- 
"  nais  from  Nantes  to  Brest,  to  Rennes,  to  Saint 
"  Malo  ;  the  foundation  .of  Napoléon  town,  in- 
*'  tended  to  be  the  key  of  the  whole  peninsula  of 
"  Britanny;  the  magnificent  works  of  Cherbourg, 
*'  those  of  Antwerp,  sluices,  moles,  or  other  im- 
"  provements  in  most  of  the  tovv-ns  of  the  channel. 
"  Such  is  the  sketch  of  what  I  saw. 

**  On  another  side,  the  ports  of  Toulon,  Roche- 
"  fort,  L'Orient,  Brest,  Saint  Malo,  Havre,  and 
"  Antwerp,  displayed  an  extraordinary  degree 
"  of  activity;  our  roads  were  filled  with  ves- 
**  sels,  and  the  nunibers  increased  daily;  our 
"  crews  were  training  in  spite  of  every  obstacle, 
"  and  our  young  conscripts  were  becoming  good 
"  seamen,  fit  for  future  service.  ï,  who  belonged 
"  to  the  old  naval  establishment,  was  astonished 
"  at  every  thing  I  saw  on  board,  so  very  great 
*'  were  the  improvements  made  in  the  art,  and  so 
"  far  did  they  exceed,  in  every  point  of  view,  ail 
"  that  1  had  witnessed. 

*'  The  squadrons  belonging  to  ilie  différent 
*'  ports  got  under  sail  every  day,  and  executed 
"  their  regular  manœuvres  like  the  parades  of 
"  garrisons,  and  ail  this  took  place  within  sight 
*.*  of  the  English,  who  thought  it  a  ridiculous 
"  farce,  without  foreseeing  the  danger  with  wliich 
*'  they  were  threatened  ;  for,  uever  at  any  period, 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEOX.  43 

"  was  oiir  navy  more  formidable,  nor  our  ships 
"  more  luimerous.  We  already  had  upwards 
"  of  100  afloat  or  on  tbe  stocks,  and  we  made 
"  daily  additions  to  the  niimber.  The  officers 
"  were  excellent,  and  animxated  witli  zeal  and 
*'  ardour.  I  had  no  idea  whatever  of  the  forward 
"  state  of  oiir  préparations,  before  I  witnessed  it 
"  inperson,  and  should  not  hâve  believed  it,  were 
*'  I  not  confidently  assured  of  the  fact. 

"  With  respect  to  the  mendicity  establish- 
"  ments,  the  spécial  object  of  my  mission,  your 
"  intentions,  Sire,  had  been  ill  understood,  and 
"  the  plan  was  altogether  imsuccessftd.  In  most 
"  of  the  departments,  mendicity  not  only  re- 
"  mained  with  ail  its  defects,  but  no  steps  what- 
"  ever  had  been  taken  for  its  annihilation.  The 
"  fact  was,  that  several  prefects,  far  from  mak- 
*'  ing  the  establishments  a  terror  to  the  mendi- 
"  ccDîts,  had  merely  considered  them  as  a  refuge 
''  for  the  poor.  Instead  of  holding  out  coniine- 
\'  ment  as  a  punishment,  they  caused  it  to  be 
"  sought  after  as  an  asylum,  and  thus  the  lot  of 
*'  the  persons  shut  up  in  them  might  be  envied 
*'  by  the  hard-working  peasantry  of  the  neigh- 
*'  bourhood.  France  might,  in  that  way,  hâve  been 
*'  covered  with  similar  establishments,  which, 
"  however  fiill,  would  not  hâve  diminished  the 
*'  number  of  mendicants,  wlio  commonly  make  a 
"  trade  of  begging,  and  folio w  it  in  préférence. 
*/  I  was,  however,  enabled  to  judge,  that  the  ex- 


44  MV    RESIDENCE    MTTll  [July, 

tirpation  of  the  evil  was  possible,  and  theexam- 
])lc  of  some  departments,  in  which  the  prefects 
had  taken  a  better  view  of  the  subject,  was 
sLifficient  to  producc  that  conviction.  There 
were  a  few  in  which  it  had  entirely  disap- 
peared. 

"  It  is  an  observation  which  makes  an  immé- 
diate and  striking  impression,  that  ail  other 
things  fairly  averaged,  mendicity  is  much  more 
rare  in  those  parts,  which  are  poor  and  barren, 
and  much  more  common  in  those,  which  are 
fruitful  and  abundant.  It  is  also  infinitely 
more  difficnlt  to  effect  its  destruction  in  the 
places  where  the  clergy  hâve  enjoyed  superior 
wealth  and  power.  In  Belgium,  for  instance, 
mendicants  were  seen  to  dérive  honour  from 
their  trade,  and  boast  of  having  followed  it  for 
several  o-enerations.  Thèse  claims  belono'ed 
peculiarly  to  them,  and  that  country  was  ac- 
cordingly  the  rendezvous  of  mendicity."  "  But 
I  am  not  surprised  at  it,"'  resumed  the  Emperor, 
the  difficulty  of  this  important  considération 
consists  entirely  in  discriminating  accurately 
between  the  pour  man  who  commands  our  re- 
spect, and  the  meml'icant  who  onght  to  excite 
our  indignation;  besides,  our  religions  oddities 
confound  thèse  two  classes  so  completely,  that 
they  seem  to  make  a  merit,  a  kind  of  virtue  of 
mendicity,  and  to  encourage  it  by  the  promise 
of  heavenly  rewards.     The  mendicants  are,  in 


1.S16,]  THE    KMPKROR    XAPOLKOX.  45 

"  reality,  neither  more  nor  less,  than  monks  au  petit 
*'  pied,  and  tliat  siich  is  tlie  fact  is  évident  from  the 
"  mendicant  monks  being  ^o  classed  in  the  voca- 
"  biilary.  How  was  it  possible  for  sucli  ideas  not 
**  to  produce  confusion  in  the  mind,  and  disorder 
"  in  societv?  A  ^Teat  number  of,saints  hâve  been 
**  canonized,  whose  only  apparent  merit  was 
"  mendicity.  They  seem  to  hâve  been  trans- 
**  planted  to  Heaven,  for  that,  which,  considered 
**  as  a  niatter  of  sound  police,  ought  to  hâve  sub- 
**  jected  them  to  castigation  and  confinement  in 
'*  this  world.  This  would  not,  however,  hâve 
"  prevented  them  from  being  worthy  of  Heaven. 
"  But  go  on." — "  It  was  not.  Sire,  without  e^no- 
*'  tion  that  I  observed  the  détails  of  the  charitable 
**  establishments.  In  contemplating  the  anxiety, 
**  the  cares,  the  ardent  charity  of  so  many  sym- 
"  pathetic  liearts,  I  was  enabled  to  ascertain  that 
**  we  were  far  from  yielding  the  palm,  whatever 
**  might  be  the  considération,  to  any  other  peo- 
*'  pie,  and  that  we  mereiy  had  less  ostentation, 
**  and  made  less  use  of  artificial  means  to  enhance 
"  our  merits.  The  South  above  ail,  and  Langue- 
"  doc  in  particular,  displayedazeal  and  animation 
"  of  which  it  would  be  difficult  to  form  an  ade- 
'•  quate  conception.  Thehospitals  and  alms-houses 
**  were  every  where  numerous  and  well  attended 
"  to.  The  foundlings  had  increased  tenfold  since 
**  the  révolution  and  I  instantly  ascribed  it  to 
"  the  corruption  of  the  tirnes  ;  but  I  was  desired 


46  MY    IIESTDEXCE    WITH  [July, 

to  remark,  and  constant  reflcction  convinced 
me  of  the  triith,  that  the  residt  was,  on  the 
contrary,  to  be  attributed  to  very  satisfactory 
causes.  I  was  assured,  that  formerly  the  foimd- 
lings  v/ere  so  wretchedly  taken  care  of,  and  so 
badly  fed,  that  the  whole  of  their  population 
was  diminutive,  sickly,  and  short-Uved,  and 
that  from  seven  to  nine  perished  out  of  ten  ; 
while  at  présent  their  food,  cleanliness,  and  the 
care  taken  of  them  in  every  respect  are  such,  that 
nearly  ail  of  them  are  preserved,  and  constitute 
a  fine  race  of  children.  They  are  thus  indebted 
for  their  numbers  solely  to  their  own  préserva- 
tion. Vaccination  has  also  contributed,  in  an 
immense  proportion,  to  their  increase.  Thèse 
children  are  now  treated  Avith  such  attention 
as  to  give  rise  to  a  singular  abuse.  Mothers, 
even  in  easy  circumstances,  are  tempted  to  ex- 
pose their  infants  ;  they  afterwards  apply  at 
the  hospital,  and  under  a  charitable  pretence, 
oifer  to  bring  up  onc  themselves;  it  is  their 
own  which  is  restored  to  them  with  the  benefit 
of  a  small  allowance.  AU  this  is  carried  on 
through  the  favour  of  the  agents  themselves,  and 
often  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  a  trifling  pen- 
sion for  one  of  their  relations.  Another  abuse 
of  this  kind  and  not  less  extraordinary,  was  that 
which  I  observed  in  Belgium,  of  persons  get- 
ting  their  names  entered  a  long  time  before, 
for  the  purpose  of  entitling  them  to  send  their 


181G.]  TIIE    EMPEROR    NAI'OLEOX.  47 

"  children  to  the  hospital.  Any  yoiing  couple, 
*'  on  their  marriage,  strove  to  get  tlieir  names 
"  entered  for  vacancies,  wliich  fell  to  them  some 
"  years  afterwards,  as  a  matter  of  right,  it  was  a 
*'  partof  the  marriage  arrangement." — "  O  Jésus! 
"  Jésus  !  "  exclaimed  the  Emperor,  shrugging  up 
his  shoulders  and  laughing,  "  and  after  this  make 
"  laws  and  régulations!  "" — "  But  with  regard  to 
'*  the  prisons,  Sire,  they  were  almost  uniformly 
"  the  scènes  of  horror  and  real  misery,  the  shame 
"  and  disgrâce  of  our  provinces,  absolute  sinks  of 
**  corruption,  abominable  intrenchments,  whicli 
"  I  was  obliged  to  pass  through  with  the  utmost 
"  haste,  or  from  which  I  was  driven  back  in  spite 
"  of  ail  my  exertions.  I  had  formerly  visited  cer- 
*'  tain  prisons  in  England,  and  indulged  in  a 
"  smiie  at  the  kind  of  luxury  which  I  observed 
"  in  them,  but  it  was  quite  a  différent  thing  with 
"  respect  to  ours,  and  my  indignation  was  excited 
"  by  the  contrary  extrême.  There  are  no  offences, 
*'  I  might  even  say  crimes,  thatarenot  sufficiently 
"  punished  by  such  habitations,  and  those,  who 
"  leave  them,  should  not,  in  strict  justice,  hâve 
"  any  further  expiation  to  make.  Yet  after  ail, 
*'  those  confined  in  them  were  merely  under  a 
"  simple  accusation,  while  those  who  had  been 
"  found  guilty,  the  real  criminals,  and  hardened 
*'  villains,  had  their  spécial  prisons,  their  houses 
"  of  correction,  where  they  were,  perhaps,  too 
*'  well  taken  care  of  ;  and  even  in  the  latter  case, 


48  MV    RESIDENCE    WITH  [July, 

**  the  honest  day-labourer  rnight  hâve  reason  to 
*'  envy  their  lot,  and  make  comparisoiis  injurions 
**  to  providence  and  society.  Another  striking 
*'  inconsistency  was  observable  in  thèse  liouses 
*'  of  correction  ;  it  was  the  amalgamation,  the 
"  habituai  mixture  of  ail  the  classes  npon  wliom 
"  sentence  had  been  passed.  Some  being'  im- 
"  prisoned  for  small  oftences  only  for  a  year,  and 
**  others  for  fifteen,  twenty  years,  or  for  life,  on 
"  account  of  the  dreadfûl  crimes  they  had  perpe- 
**  trated,  it  necessarily  followed,  that  thcy  woiikl 
**  be  ail  reduced  to  one  moral  levcl,  not  by  the 
**  amélioration  of  the  latter,  but  rather  Ijy  the 
**  corruption  of  the  former. 

"  What  struck  me  also  very  forcibly  in  La 
**  Vendée  and  the  adjacent  country  was,  that 
**  madmen  had  increascd  there,  perhaps,  tenfold 
**  more  than  in  any  other  part  of  the  empire,  and 
"  that  individuals  were  detained  in  the  mendi- 
**  city  establishments  and  other  places  of  confme- 
*'  ment,  who  were  treated  as  vagabonds,  or  likeiy 
"  to  become  so,  and  whohaving  been  taken  np  in 
"  their  childhood,  had  no  knowledge  of  their  pa- 
"  rents  or  origin.  Some  of  them  had  wounds  on 
"  their  persons,  but  were  ignorant  how  they  had 
"  been  inflicted.  They  were  marks  which  had, 
"  no  doubt,  been  made  upon  them  in  their  in- 
*•'  fancy.  The  opportunity  of  employing  thèse 
"  individuals,  who  had  not  acquired  a  single  so- 
"  cial  idea,  lias  been  sulfered  to  pass  by;  they 


1816.1  THE    EMPEROR    XAPOLEOK.  49 

"  are  now  imfit  for  any  purpose." — **  Ah!"  ex- 
claimed  the  Emperor,  "  this  is  civil  war  and  its 
*"'  hideous  train  ;  its  inévitable  conséquences  and  its 
"  certain  fruits!  If  some  leaders  make  fortunes, 
"  and  extricate  themselves  from  danger,  the 
"  dregs  of  the  population  are  always  trodden 
"  under  foot,  and  become  the  victims  of  every  ca- 
*'  lamity  !  " 

*'  With  respect  to  other  matters,  I  found  in  the 
*'  aggregate  of  thèse  establishments,  a  consider- 
*'  able  number  of  persons  who,  I  was  told,  whe- 
**  ther  right  or  wrong,  were  prisoners  of  state, 
*'  and  were  kept  in  custody  by  order  of  the  high, 
*'  the  intermediate,  or  the  low  police. 

*'  I  listened  to  ail  those  prisoners,  I  heard 
"  their  complaints,  and  received  their  pétitions, 
'*  certainly,  without  any  engagement  on  my  part; 
*'  for  I  had  no  right  to  contract  any,  and  besides, 
**  I  was  perfectly  aware,  that  having  heard  their 
*'  own  testimony  only,  I  could  not  attach  guilt  to 
*'  any  person.  With  the  exception,  however,  of 
*'  some  notorious  villains,  they  did  not  really,  in 
*'  gênerai,  deserve  more  at  farthest  than  the  com- 
'*  mon  punishments  of  the  correctional  police. 

''I  found  among  them,  in  the  prisons  of  Rennes,  a 
'*  boy  between  twelveand  fourteen,  who  had,  when 
*'  only  a  few  months  old,  been  taken  with  a  band 
"  of  Chauffeurs.  They  had  been  ail  executed,  and 
*'  the  child  had  remained  there  ever  since,  without 
*'  any  décision  on  his  case.     His  moral  capabili- 

VoL.  III.  Part  V.  B 


50  -MY    RESIDENCE    WITH  •       [July,. 

"  ties  may  be  easily  appreciated.  He  never  saw, 
**  knew,  or  heard  any  but  villains  ;  they  were  the 
**  only  kiiid  of  people  of  whose  existence  he  was 
**  able  to  form  an  idea. 

**  At  Mont  Saint-Michel,  awoman,  whose  name 
*'  I  hâve  forgotten,  particularly  attracted  my  at- 
**  tention.  She  had  rather  a  pretty  face,  pleasinp^ 
*'  manners,  and  a  modest  deportment.  She  had 
*'  been  imprisoned  fourteen  years,  having  taken 
"  a  very  active  part  in  the  troubles  of  La  Vendée, 
"  and  constantly  accompanied  lier  husband,  who 
**  was  the  chief  of  a  battalion  of  insurgents,  and 
**  whom  she  succeeded,  after  his  death,  in  the 
"  command.  The  wretchedness  she  suifered,  and 
*'  the  tears  she  shed,  had  sensibly  impaired  her 
"  charms.  I  assumed  a  severe  air  during  the 
**  récital  of  her  misfortunes,  but  it  was  put  on 
"  for  the  purpose  of  concealing  the  émotions  she 
'*  excited.  She  had,  by  the  kindness  of  her  man- 
"  ners  and  her  other  qualifications,  created  a 
*'  kind  of  empire  over  the  vulgar  and  depraved 
**  women  that  were  about  her.  She  had  devoted 
*'  herself  to  the  care  of  the  sick;  the  prison  infir- 
*'  mary  was  entrusted  to  her,  and  she  was  be- 
"  loved  by  every  one. 

"  With.  the  exception  of  that  woman,  a  few 
"  priests,  and  two  or  three  old  Chouan  spies, 
"  the  rest  exhibited  but  a  filthy  compound  of 
*"  disgusting  or  extravagant  depravity. 

**  I  met  with  a  married  man,  with  an  annual  in- 


1816;]  TUE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON.  51 

**  corne  of  15,000  livres,  evidently  confined  in  con-" 
*'  séquence  of  his  wife's  intrigues,  after  tlie  manne 
*'  of  the  ancient  lettres  de  cachet;  and  with  pro 
"  stitutes,  who  assured  me  they  were  detained, 
*'  not  as  a  punishment  for  the  indiscriminate  pro- 
**  fusion  of  their  faveurs,  but  out  of  spite  for  want 
**  of  complaisance  for  a  single  person.  They  told 
"me  lies,  or  they  did  not;  but  in  either  case 
"  ought  they  to  be  honoured  with  the  title  of 
"  prisoners  of  state,  to  be  maintained  at  the  ex- 
*'  pense  oftwo  francs  a  day,  and  to  be  m.ade  sub- 
**  servient  in  rendering  the  government  odious 
'*  and  ridiculous  ?  Finally,  I  met  with  an  un- 
*'  happy  man  in  a  town  of  Belgium,  who  had 
*'  married  one  of  tliose  girls  for  whom  the  muni- 
"  cipalities  provide  marriage  portions  on  great 
**  occasions.  He  was  inprisoned  for  having  stolen, 
"  as  I  was  informed,  the  portion,  because  he  had 
"  neglected  to  e*ra  it.  He  was  positively  re- 
"  quired  to  acquit  himself  of  that  important  debt, 
"and  he  as  positively  refused.  lie  was,  perhaps, 
*'  required  to  do  that,  which  was  not  in  his 
"  power,  tScc.  &c. 

"  Immediately  upon  my  return  to  Paris,  I 
*'  called  on  M.  Real,  prefect  of  police  of  the  dis- 
"  trict  I  had  just  revisited.  I  considered  it  my 
"  duty,  I  said,  to  communicate  to  hirn,  in  a 
"  friaidlj/  manner,  the  resuit  of  my  observations. 
"  I  must  do  him  justice;  for  whether  he  was 
**  very  far  from  having  a  bad  heart,  whether  he 


52  MV    RESIDENCE    WITH  {Jv^Y, 

*'  was  impressed  with  my  plain  dealing,  or  aiFected 
"  perhaps,  Sire,  by  the  magie  influence  of  your 
*'  iiniform,  he  thanked  me,  observed  that  I  was 
*'  doing"  him  a  real  service,  and  assured  me,  that 
**  he  would  take  immédiate  steps  for  relicving 
"  and  redress'nig,  siich  were  his  words,  the  cases 
*'  I  had  laid  before  him.  Meeting  him,  however, 
*'  a  few  days  afterwards  at  an  assembly,  he  said, 
"  with  apparent  grief,  *  That  is  an  iinfortunate 
**  business,  and  very  unfavourable  to  your  Amazon, 
**  (he  alluded  to  General  Mallet's  rash  enter- 
*'  prise,)  which  I  thought  myself  capable  of 
**  doing  a  few  days  ago  of  my  own  accord.  I 
*'  cannot  now  prétend  to  undertake  it  without  an 
"  order  from  a  superior  quarter.' — I  do  not  know 
**  how  the  thing  ended." 

The  Emperor  dwelt  some  time  on  the  abuses 
I  had  pointed  out,  and  then  concluded:  "  In  the 
*'  first  place,  in  order  to  proceed  regularly,  it  was 
**  incumbent  upon  you  to  ascertain,  whether  your 
*'  information  was  well  grounded,  and  to  hear 
*'  the  évidence  against  the  persons  accused;  and 
*'  then  it  must  be  frankly  admitted,  that  abuses 
**  are  inhérent  in  every  human  establishment. 
*'  You  see,  that  almost  every  thing,  of  which  you 
**  complained,  was  committed  by  the  very  per- 
"  sons,  who  were  expressly  entrusted  with  the 
**  means  of  prévention.  Can  a  remedy  be  pro- 
**  vided,  when  it  is  impossible  to  see  what  passes 
'*  every  where  ?    There  is  something  like  a  kind 


181G.]  THE    EMPEROIl    NAPOLEOX.  ÔS 

**  of  net-work,  which,  extended  on  flat  groiinds, 
*'  envelops  the  lower  classes.  A  mesh  miist  be 
**  broken  and  discovered  by  a  fortunate  observer 
'*  like  you,  before  any  thing  of  the  matter  is  known 
**  in  the  iipper  régions.  Accordingly,  one  of  my 
**  dreams  would  hâve  been,  when  the  grand 
**  events  of  war  were  completely  terminated,  and 
**  I  returned  to  the  interior  in  tranquillité^  and 
**  at  ease,  to  look  ont  for  half  a  dozen,  or  a 
"  dozen,  of  real  good  philanthropists,  of  those 
"  worthy  men  who  live  but  to  do  good.  I  should 
**  hâve  distributed  them  through  the  empire 
*'  v^^hich  they  would  hâve  secretly  inspected  for 
'*  the  purpose  of  raaking  their  report  to  me.  They 
*'  would  hâve  been  the  spies  of  virtuel  They 
"  would  hâve  addressed  themselves  directly  to 
*'  me,  and  would  hâve  been  my  confessors,  my 
*'  spiritual  directors,  and  my  décisions  with  them, 
**  would  hâve  been  my  good  works  in  secret. 
**  My  grand  occupation,  whenatfull  leisure,  and 
"  at  the  height  of  my  power,  would  hâve  been 
"  the  amélioration  of  every  class  of  society.  I 
"  should  hâve  descended  to  the  détails  of  indivi- 
*'  dual  comfort,  and  had  I  found  no  motive  for 
*•  that  conduct  in  mynatural  disposition,  I  should 
*'  hâve  been  actuated  by  the  spirit  of  calculation  ; 
"  for  after  the  acquisition  of  so  much  glory,  what 
"  other  means  would  hâve  been  left  to  me  to 
,"  make  any  addition  to  it?  It  was,  because  I 
*'  was  well  aware,  that   that   swarm   of  abuses 


*4  MY    RF.SIDEXCE    WITH  l^^^y> 

**  necessarily  existed,  because  I  wished  for  the 
*'  préservation  of  my  subjects,  and  was  désirons 
"  of  throwing-  every  impediment  in  the  way  of 
*'  subordinate  and  intermediate  tyrauny,  that  I 
*'  conceived  my  system  of  state  prisons,  adapted 
'*'  toanycrisis  that  mightoccur."' — "Yes,  Sire,  but 
"  it  was  far  from  being  well  received  in  our 
*'  saloons,  and  did  not  a  little  contribute  to  make 
**  you  unpopular.  An  ontcry  was  every  wliere 
*'  raised  against  the  j/eic  bastilcs,  against  the  re- 
■"  newal  of  lettres  de  cachet.'^ — "  I  know  it  very 
"'  well,"said the Emperor,  "the outcry was echoed 
"  by  ail  Europe,  and  rendered  me  odious.  And  y  et, 
*'  observe  how  powerful  the  influence  of  words, 
*'  envenomed  by  perfidy!  The  whole  of  the  dis- 
"  content  was  principally  occasioned  by  the  pre- 
^'posterous  title  of  my  decree,  which  escaped  me 
•■'  from  distraction,  or  some  other  cause  ;  for  in 
"  the  main,  I  contend,  that  the  law  itself  was  an 
*'  eminent  service,  and  rendered  individual  liberty 
"  more  complète  and  certain  in  France  than  in 
"  any  other  country  of  Euro])e. 

**  Considering  the  crisis,  from  which  we  had 
"  emerged,  the  factions  by  which  we  had  been 
*'  divided,  and  the  plots  which  had  been  laid, 
"  and  were  still  contriving,  imprisonment  became 
"indispensable.  It  was,  in  fact,  a  benefit;  for 
"  it  superseded  the  scaffold.  But  I  was  desirous 
**  of  sanctioning  it  by  légal  enactments,  and  of 
*^  placing  it  beyond  the  reach  of  caprice,  of  arbi- 


ISIC]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEOX.  '55 

'*  trary   power,    of  hatred,    and   of   vengeance. 
**  Nobody,  according  to  my  law,  could  be  im- 
*'  prisoned  and  detained  as  a  prisoner  of  state, 
"  without  the  décision  of  my  privy  council,  which 
"  consisted  of  sixteen  persons  ;  the  first,  the  most 
**  independent  and  most  distinguished  characterS 
*'  of  the   state.     What   iinworthy  feeling  would 
**  hâve  dared  to  expose  itself  to  the  détection  of 
"  such  a  tribunal?     Had  I  not  volimtarily  de- 
*'  prived  myself  of  the  power  of  consigning  indi- 
**  viduals  to   prison  ?     None  could  be    detained 
"  beyond  ayear,  without  a  fresh  décision  of  the 
'*  privy  council,   and  four  votes  out  of  sixteeti 
*'  were  sufficient   to    effect   his    release.      Two 
"  counsellors  of  state  were  bound  to  attend  to 
"  the  statements  of  the   prisoners,  and  became 
**  from  that  moment  their  zealous  advocates  with 
**  the  privy  council.     Thèse  prisoners  were  also 
"  under  the  protection  of  the  Committee  of  indi- 
"  vidual  liberty,  appointed  by  the  Senate,  which 
"  was  the  object  of  public  dérision,  merely  be- 
"  cause  it  made  no  parade  of  its  labours,  and 
*•  their    results.      Its    services,    however,    were 
*'  great  ;  for  it  would  argue  a  defective  know- 
"  ledge  of  mankind  to  suppose,   that  Senators, 
'*  who  had  nothing  to  expect  from  ministers,  and 
"  who  were  their  equals  in  rank,  would  not  make 
**  use  of  their  prérogative  to  oppose  and  attack 
**  them  ;    whenever  the  importance  of  the  ca^e 
"  called  for  their  interférences.     It  must  also  be 


56  MY    RESIDENCE    WITH  [July» 

considérée!,  tliat  I  had  assigned  the  superiii- 
tendance  of"  the  prisoners  of  the  police  of  the 
prisons  to  the  tribunals,  which,  from  that  in- 
stant, paralized  the  exercise  of  every  kind  of 
arbitrary  authority,  belonging  to  the  other 
branches  of  administration,  and  their  numerous 
subordinate  agents.  After  such  précautions, 
I  do  not  hesitate  to  maintain,  that  civil  liberty 
was  as  efFectually  secured  by  that  law  in  France 
as  it  could  possibly  be.  The  public  miscon- 
ceived,  or  pretended  to  misconceive  that  truth, 
for  it  is  necessary  for  us  Frenchmen  to  murmur 
at  every  thing  and  on  every  occasion. 
'*  The  fact  is  that  at  the  time  of  my  downfal,  the 
state  prisons  scarcely  contained  250  individuals, 
and  I  found  nine  thousand  in  them,  when  I 
became  Consul.  It  will  appear  from  the  list 
of  those  who  were  imprisoned,  and  upon  an 
examination  into  the  causes  and  motives  of 
their  confinement,  that  almost  every  one  of 
them  deserved  death,  and  would  hâve  been 
sentenced  to  it  by  regular  process  of  law  ;  and 
it  consequently  follows,  that  their  imprisonment 
was,  on  my  part,  a  bencfit  conferred  upon  them. 
Why  is  there  nothing  published  against  me  on 
this  subject  at  présent  ?  Where  are  the  serious 
grievances  to  be  found  with  which  I  am  re- 
proached  ?  There  are  none  in  reality.  If  some 
of  the  prisoners  afterwards  made  a  merit  of 
their  sufferin^^s  with  the  King,  on  account  of 


1816.)  THE    EMPEUOR    NAPOLEON.  57 

"  their  exertions  in  his  favour,  did  they  not  by 
"  that  proceeding  pronounce  their  own  sentence 
**  and  attest  my  justice  ?  For  wliat  may  seem  a 
**  virtuous  action  in  the  King's  eye,  was  incon- 
**  testably  a  crime  under  me;  and  it  was  only 
**  because  I  was  répugnant  to  the  shedding  of 
**  blood  on  account  of  political  crimes,  and  be- 
**  cause  such  trials  would  hâve  but  tended  to  the 
**  continuance  of  commotion  and  perplexity  in 
**  the  heart  of  the  country,  that  I  commuted  the 
*'  punishment  for  simple  détention. 

''  I  repeat  it,  the  French  were,  at  my  era,  the 
*'  freest  people  of  ail  Europe,  without  even  ex- 
'*  cepting  the  English  ;  for  in  England,  if  any 
*'  extrême  danger  causes  the  suspension  of  the 
*'  Habeas  Corpus  act,  every  individu  al  may  be 
**  sent  to  prison  at  the  mère  will  of  ministers, 
'*  who  are  not  called  upon  to  justify  their  mo- 
"  tives,  or  give  an  explanation  of  their  conduct. 
*'  My  law  was  very  differently  restricted."  He 
concluded  with  saying; — *' And  then  at  last,  if, 
**  in  spite  of  my  good  intention,  and  notwith- 
*'  standing  my  utmost  care,  ail  that  you  hâve  just 
*'  said,  and  no  doubt,  many  other  tliings,  were 
*'  well  founded,  it  must  not  still  be  considered 
*'  so  easy  a  task,  as  it  is  thought,  to  create  a 
"  bénéficiai  establishment  for  a  nation.  It  is 
"  a  remarkable  circumstance,  that  the  countries, 
**  which  hâve  been  separated  from  us,  hâve  re- 
**  gretted  the  laws,  with  which  I  governed  them. 


15S  MY    RKSIDKXCE    WITH  [Ju^y. 

**  This  is  a  homage  paid  to  their  superiority. 
**  The  real,  the  only  mode  of  passing  a  décisive 
*'  sentence  iipon  me  with  regard  to  their  defects, 
**  would  be  to  shew  the  existence  of  a  better  code 
*'  in  any  other  country!  New  times  are  drawing 
*'  near,  it  will  be  seen,"  &c.  &c. 

Abolit  five  o'clock,  I  was  told  by  the  Grand 
Marshal,  who  had  just  left  the  Emperor,  that  he 
Avished  to  see  me.  He  had  staid  at  home  the 
whole  of  the  day.  I  found  him  engaged  in  exa- 
mining  the  new  billiard  table.  He  was  appre- 
hensive  that  the  weather  was  too  damp  for  walk- 
ing,  and  he  played  at  chess  until  dinner.  In  the 
evening,  he  read  us  Crebillon's  Atrce  et  Thyeste. 
That  pièce  seemed  horrible  to  us  ;  we  found  ît 
disgusting,  and  by  no  means  of  a  tragic  cast.  The 
Emperor  could  not  finish  it. 

Egypt. — Saint-Jean    d'Acre. — The    Désert. —  Anec- 
dotes, S^c.  ^c. 

21  st. — About  three  o'clock  the  Emperor  called 
for  his  calash.  He  sent  for  me,  and  we  walked 
together  to  the  bottom  of  the  wood  where  he  had 
ordered  the  carriage  to  take  him  up.  I  had  some 
particulars  of  no  great  moment  to  communicate, 
which  personally  concerned  him 

We  observed,  in  the  course  of  our  ride,  two 
vessels  under  sail  for  the  island. 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEOX.  6d 

At  dinner  the  Emperor  seemed  very  fond  of 
conversation.  He  had  been  just  employed  on  his 
campaign  of  Egypt,  which  he  had,  for  some  time, 
neglected,  and  which,  he  said,  woiild  be  as  inter- 
esting  as  an  épisode  of  romance.  In  speaking 
of  his  position  at  Saint- Jean  d'Acre,  he  observed  :  — 
*'  The  position  which  I  occupied  in  the  middle 
*'  of  Syria,  with  12,000  men  only,  was,  it  must  be 
"  admitted,  a  very  enterprizing  measure.  I  was 
*'  at  the  distance  of  500  leagues  from  Desaix,  who 
*'  formed  the  other  extremity  of  my  army.  It 
*'  has  been  related  by  Sydney  Smith,  that  I  lost 
''  18,000  men  before  Saint- Jean  d'Acre,  although 
"  my  army  consisted  but  of  12,000.  An  obscure 
"  person  M.  .  .  .  ,  who  had  just  gone  through  his 
"  exercises  at  collège,  as  it  seemed,  who  knows 
"  nothing  of  what  he  describes,  and  whose  only 
"  talent  is  that  of  tacking  some  sentences  toge- 
*'  ther,  with  a  view,  no  doubt,  of  converting 
"  them  to  his  émolument,  the  brother,  however, 
**  of  one,  whom  I  hâve  loaded  with  favours,  and 
*'  who  was  one  of  my  council  of  state,  has  re- 
**  cently  published  something  on  that  subject,  on 
"  which  I  hâve  cast  a  glance,  and  which  vexes 
'*  me  on  account  of  its  silliness  and  the  gloomy 
*'  tint  it  endeavours  to  shed  on  the  glory  and  ex- 
**  ploits  of  that  army,  &c.  &c. 

"  Had  I  been  master  of  the  sea,  I  should  hâve 
"  been  master  of  the  East,  and  the  thing  was  so 
**  practicable,  that  it  failed  only  through  the  stupi- 


60  M  Y    RESIDENCE    WITH  [Jul}"» 

dity  or  bad  conduct  of  some  officers  of  the 
navy. 

"  Voliiey,  wlio  travelled  in  Egypt  before  the 
révolution,  had  stated  his  opinion,  tliat  tliat 
country  could  not  be  occupied  without  tliree 
great  wars  against  England,  the  Grand  Signior, 
and  the  inhabitants.  The  latter,  in  particular, 
seemed  difficult  and  terrible  to  him.  He  was 
altogether  niistaken  in  that  respect,  for  it  gave 
us  no  trouble.  We  had  even  succeeded  in 
making  friends  of  the  inhabitants,  in  the  course 
of  a  short  time,  and  of  Connecting  their  cause 
witli  ours.  A  handful  of  Frenchmen  had  then 
been  sufficient  to  conquer  that  fine  country, 
which  they  ought  never  to  hâve  lost.  We  had 
actually  accomplished  prodigies  in  war  and  in 
politics.  Our  undertaking  was  altogether  dif- 
férent from  the  crusades  ;  the  crusaders  were 
innumerable  and  hurried  on  by  fanaticism.  My 
army,  on  the  contrary,  was  very  small,  and  the 
soldiers  were  so  little  inclined  to  the  enter- 
prize,  that  they  were  frequently  tempted  to 
carry  ofF  the  colours  and  return.  I  had,  how- 
ever,  succeeded  in  familiarizing  tliem  with  the 
country,  which  supplied  every  thing  in  abund- 
ance,  and  at  so  cheap  a  rate,  that  I  was  one 
time  on  the  point  of  placing  them  on  half  pay 
for  the  purpose  of  laying  by  the  other  half  for 
them.  I  had  acquired  such  an  ascendency 
over  them,  that  I  had  it  in  my  power,  by  a 


1S16.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON'.  61 

*'  simple  order  of  the  day,  to  couvert  them  to 
"  Mahometanism.  They  woiild  hâve  treated  it  as 
"  a  joke,  the  population  would  hâve  been  gratified, 
''  and  the  Christians  of  the  East  themselves  would 
"■  hâve  considered  themselves  gainers,  and  ap- 
''  proved  of  it,  as  they  knew  that  \ve  could  not 
*'  act  better  for  them  and  for  ourselves. 

"  The  English  were  struck  with  consternation 
**  at  seeing  us  in  possession  of  Egypt.  We  ex- 
"  posed  to  Europe  the  certain  means  of  wresting 
*'  India  from  them.  They  hâve  not  y  et  dismissed 
**  their  appréhensions,  and  they  are  in  the  right. 
*'  If  40  or  50,000  European  families  ever  succeed 
*"•  in  establishing  their  industry,  laws,  and  g'o- 
*'  vernment  in  Egypt,  India  will  be  more  effec- 
*'  tually  lost  to  the  English  by  the  commanding 
"  influence  of  circumstances,  than  by  the  force 
"  of  arms." 

In  the  course  of  the  evening,  the  grand  Marshal 
put  the  Emperor  in  mind  of  one  of  his  conver- 
sations with  Monge,  the  mathematician,  at  Cute- 
kié,  in  the  midst  of  the  désert.  *'  What  do  you 
"  think  of  ail  this,  citizen  Monge?"  said  Napo- 
léon.— "Why,  citizen  gênerai,"  answered  Monge, 
*'  I  think,  if  there  are  ever  seen  in  this  place  as 
*'  many  équipages  as  at  the  Opéra  house,  there 
*'  must  be  some  wonderful  révolutions  on  the 
*'  globe."  The  Emperor  laughed  very  heartily 
at  the  recollection.  He  had,  however,  he  ob- 
served,  a  carriage  with  six  horses  on  the  spot. 


âd  MY    RESIDENCE    AVITII  [-luly, 

It  was  iinquestionably  the  first  of  the  kind  that 
travelled  over  the  désert,  and  accordingly  it  very 
much  surprised  the  Arabs. 

The  Emperor  remarked,  that  the  désert  always 
had  a  peculiar  influence  on  his  feelings.  He  had 
never  crossed  it  without  being  subject  to  a  cer- 
tain émotion.  It  seemed  to  him,  he  said,  the 
image  of  immensity  :  it  shewed  no  boundaries, 
and  had  neither  beginning  nor  end  ;  it  was  an 
océan  on  terra  firnia.  His  imagination  was  de- 
lighted  with  the  sight,  and  he  took  pleasure  in 
drawing  our  attention  to  the  observation  that 
Napoléon  meant  Lioji  of  the  dcsert  !  ..... 

The  Emperor  also  told  us,  that  when  he  was  in 
Syria,  it  was  a  settled  opinion  at  Cairo,  that  he 
never  would  be  seen  there  again,  and  he  noticed 
the  thievery  and  impudence  of  a  little  Chinese, 
who  was  one  of  his  servants.  "  It  was,"  said 
he,  *'  a  little  deformed  dwarf,  whom  Joséphine 
**  once  took  a  fancy  to  at  Paris.  He  was  the 
**  only  Chinese  in  France,  and  was  generally 
"  placed  behind  her  carriage.  She  took  him  to 
**  Italy,  but  as  he  was  in  the  constant  habit  of 
•*  pilfering,  she  wished  to  get  rid  of  him.  With 
"  that  view,  I  put  him  on  board  of  my  Egyptian 
'*  expédition.  Egypt  was  a  lift  to  him  half-way 
**  on  his  journey.  This  little  monster  was  en- 
*'  trusted  with  the  care  of  my  cellar,  and  I  had 
<*  no  sooner  crossed  the  désert,  than  he  sold,  at  a 
**  very  low  priée,  2,000  bottles  of  delicious  claret. 


1816.}  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEOX. 


63 


"  His  only  object  was  to  make  money,  and  lie 
**  was  convinced,  that  I  should  never  corne  back. 
**  He  was  not  at  ail  disconcerted  at  my  return, 
"  but  came  eagerly  to  meet  me,  and  acquainted 
**  me,  as  he  said,  like  a  faithful  servant,  witli  the 
"  loss  of  my  wine.  The  robbery  was  so  glaring, 
**  that  he  was  himself  compelled  to  confess  it.  I 
**  was  much  urged  to  hâve  him  hanged,  but  I  re- 
*'  fused,  because,  in  every  sensé  of  justice,  I 
**  ought  to  hâve  donc  as  much  to  those  in  em- 
*'  broidered  clothes,  who  had  knowingly  bought 
"  and  drank  the  wine.  I  contented  myself  with 
"  discharging  and  sending  him  to  Suez,  where  he 
*'  was  at  liberty  to  do  what  he  pleased." 

With  respect  to  tins  topic  I  must  observe,  that 
we  were  induced,  in  this  place,  to  give  momentary 
crédit  to  a  very  singular  coincidence.  We  were 
informed  a  few  months  ago,  that  on  board  one  of 
the  Chinese  traders,  which  were  then  off  the 
island,  on  their  return  to  Europe,  there  was  a 
Chinese,  who  said,  he  had  been  in  the  Emperor's 
service  in  Egypt.  The  Emperor  instantly  ex- 
claimed,  that  it  was  his  little  thief,  wliose  story 
I  hâve  just  told  ;  but  it  was,  in  fact,  a  cook  that 
had  belonged  to  Kleber. 

The  Emperor  put  a  sudden  stop  to  the  conver- 
sation, and  with  more  gaiety  than  usual,  turning 
to  Madame  Bertrand,  said  with  a  smile,  "  When 
**  will  you  be  at  your  apartments  in  the  Tuileries  ? 
**  When  will  you  give  your  splendid  dinners  to 


64  MY    RESIDENCE    WITII  [July, 

**  the  ambassadors  ?  But  you  will  be  obliged,  at 
**  least,  I  am  told  so,  to  hâve  new  furniture,  for 
"  it  is  reported,  that  the  fashion  has  entirely 
**  changed  in  that  country."  The  conversation 
then  naturally  tiirned  on  '  the  magnificence  and 
luxiiry,  which  we  had  witnessed  under  the 
Emperor. 

Paternal    advice — Remarkahle    conversation  — Cagliostro  ; 
Mesmer,  Gall,  Lavater,  éfc. 

22d. — The  Emperor  came  to  my  apartment  aboiit 
10  o'clock,  and  took  me  ont  to  walk.  We  ail 
breakfasted  iinder  the  trees.  The  weather  was 
delightfiil,  and  the  heat,  though  intense,  whole- 
some.  The  Emperor  ordered  his  calash,  two  of 
us  were  with  him,  and  the  third  accompanied  us 
on  horseback.  The  Grand  Marshal  could  not 
attend.  The  Emperor  reciirred  to  some  misun- 
derstanding,  which  had  taken  place  among  us 
a  few  days  before,  He  took  a  view  of  our  situa- 
tion and  our  natural  wants; — "  You  are  bound," 
said  he,  "  when  you  are  one  day  restored  to  the 
**  w^orld,  to  considcr  yourselves  as  brothers,  on 
**  my  account.  My  memory  will  dictate  this 
**  conduct  to  you.  Be  so,  then,  from  this  mo- 
**  ment!"  He  next  described  how  we  might  be 
of  mutual  advantage  to  each  other,  the  sufFerings 
we  had  it  in  our  power  to  alleviate,  &c.  &c.  It 
"Nvas,  ail  at  once,  a  family  and  moral  lesson,  alike 


1S16.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON".  65 

distinguished  for  excellent  sentiment  and  prac- 
tical  rules  of  conduct.  It  ought  to  hâve  been 
written  in  letters  of  gold.  It  lasted  nearly  an 
hour  and  a  quarter,  and  will,  I  think,  never  be 
forgotten  by  any  of  us.  For  myself,  not  only 
the  principles  and  the  words,  but  the  tone,  the 
expression,  the  action,  and  above  ail,  the  entire 
affection  with  which  he  delivered  them,  Avill  never 
be  erased  from  my  mind. 

About  five  o'clock,  the  Emperor  entered  my 
apartment,  where  I  was  employed,  with  my  son, 
on  the  sketch  of  the  battle  of  Arcola.  He  had. 
something  to  say  to  me  and  I  followed  him  to- 
the  garden,  where  he  resumed,  at  great  length, 
the  conversation  that  had  taken  place  in  the- 
calash 

We  now  dined  in  the  old  topographical  cabinet, 
adjoining  that  of  the  Emperor  and  the  apartment 
formerly  occupied  by  Montholon's  family,  which, 
with  the  help  of  the  books  and  shelves  lately 
received  from  Engiand,  was  converted  into  a 
tolerable  library. 

As  the  damage  done  by  the  fire  in  the  salooii 
was  long  in  repairing,  we  were  obliged  to  con- 
tinue at  table  in  our  new  dining-room  until  the 
Emperor  withdrew.  This  circumstance,  how- 
ever,  gave  additional  interest  to  the  conversation. 

The  Emperor  was  very  communicative  to-day. 
The  conversation  turned  on  dreams,  presenti- 
ments,   and  foresights,   which   the  English  call 

Vol.  III.  Fart  V.  r 


€6  MY    RESIDENCE    WITH  [Julv* 

second  sight.  We  employed  every  common-place 
topic,  ordinarily  connected  with  thèse  objects, 
and  came  at  last  to  speak  of  sorcerers  and  ghosts. 
The  Emperor  concliided  with  observing;  ''Ali 
"  thèse  quackeries,  and  as  many  others,  such  as 
"  those  of  Cagliostro,  Mesmer,  Gall,  and  Lavater, 
"  Sec.  Sec,  are  destroyed  by  this  sole  and  simple 
'''  argument;  A/i  tJiat  mcnj  e.vist,  but  it  does  not 
"  e.rh-t. 

*'  Man  is  fond  of  the  marvelloiis  ;  it  has  for  him 
"  irrésistible  fascinations  ;  he  is  ever  ready  to 
"  abandon  that,  which  is  near  at  hand,  to  run  after 
"  that,  which  is  fabricated  for  him.  He  volun- 
**  tarily  lends  himself  to  his  own  deliisions.  The 
''  truth  is,  that  every  thing  about  us  is  a  wonder. 
^'  There  is  nothing  which  can  be  properly  called 
*'  a  phenomenon.  Every  thing  in  nature  is  a  phe- 
"  nomenon.  My  existence  is  a  phenomenon.  The 
*'  wood  that  is  put  in  the  fire-place  and  warms 
**  me,  is  a  phenomenon  ;  that  candie  there,  which 
■"  gives  me  light,  is  a  phenomenon.  Ail  the  first 
"  causes,  my  understanding,  my  faculties,  are 
*'  phenomena  ;  for  they  ail  exist  and  we  cannot 
"  define  them.  I  take  leave  of  you  hère,"  said 
he,  "  and  lo  !  I  am  at  Paris,  entering  my  box 
**  at  the  opéra.  I  bow  to  the  audience  ;  I 
"  hear  the  acclamations;  I  see  the  performers; 
*'  I  listen  to  the  music.  But  if  I  can  bound  over 
*'  the  distance  from  Saint  Helena,  why  should  I 
**  not  bound  over  the  distance  of  centuries  ?  Why 


1S16'.]       THE  EMPEROR.  NAPOLEON".  67 

should  I  not  see  the  future  as  well  as  the  past  ? 
Why  should  the  one  be  more  extraordinary, 
more  wonderful  than  the  other  ?  The  only  rea- 
son  is,  that  it  does  not  exist.  This  is  the  argu- 
ment which  will  always  annihilate,  without  the 
possibility  of  reply,  ail  visionary  wonders.  AU 
thèse  quacks  deal  in  very  ingenious  spécula- 
tions; their  reasoning  may  be  just  and  seduc- 
tive  ;  but  their  conclusions  are  false,  because 
they  are  unsupported  by  facts. 
"  Ifesme?'  and  Mesmcrism  hâve  never  recovered 
from  the  blow  dealt  at  them  by  Bailly's  report 
in  the  name  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences.  Mes- 
mer produced  effects  upon  a  person  by  mag- 
netizing  him  to  his  face,  yet  the  same  person, 
magnetized  behind,  without  his  knowing  it, 
experienced  no  effect  whatever.  It  was  there- 
fore,  on  his  part,  an  error  of  the  imagination,  a 
debility  of  the  sensés  ;  it  was  the  act  of  the 
somnabule,  who,  at  night  runs  along  the  roof 
without  dange^r,  because  he  is  not  afraid;  but 
who  would  break  his  neck  in  the  day,  because 
his  sensés  would  confound  him. 
**  I  once  attacked  the  quack  Puységur,  on  his 
somnabulism,  at  one  of  my  public  audiences. 
He  wished  to  assume  a  very  lofty  tone  ; 
brought  him  down  to  his  proper  level  with  only 
thèse  words.  If  yoiir  doctrine  is  so  instructive, 
let  it  tell  us  something  new  !  Mankind  will,  no 
doubt,  make  a  very  considérable  progress  iu 

F  2 


G8  MY    BESIDENCE    WITH  [July, 

the  next  200  years,  let  it  specify  any  single 
improvement,  which  is  to  take  place  within  that 
period  !  Let  it  tell  me  what  I  shall  do  within 
the  following  week  !  Let  it  ascertain  the  num- 
bers  of  the  lottery,  which  will  be  drawn  to- 
morrow!  Sec.  &c. 

"  I  behaved  in  the  same  manner  to  Gall,  and 
contributed  very  much  to  the  discrédit  of  his 
theory.  Corvisart  was  his  principal  follower, 
He,  and  ail  who  resemble  him,  had  a  great  at- 
tachment  to  materialism,  which  was  calculated 
to  strengthen  their  theory  and  influence.  But 
nature  is  not  so  barren.  Were  she  so  cîumsy 
as  to  make  herself  known  by  external  fomis^ 
we  should  go  to  work  more  promptly  and  ac- 
quire  a  greater  degree  of  knowledge.  Her 
secrets  are  more  subtle,  more  délicate,  more 
evanescent,  and  hâve  hitherto  escaped  the  most 
minute  researches.  We  find  a  great  genius  in 
a  little  hunch  back,  and  a  man,  with  a  fine 
commanding  person,  turns  out^to  be  a  stupid 
fellow.  A  big  head  with  a  large  brain  is  some- 
times  destitute  of  a  single  idea,  while  a  small 
brain  is  found  to  possess  a  vast  understanding. 
And  observe  the  imbecility  of  Gall.  He  attri- 
butes  to  certain  protubérances,  propensities 
and  crimes,  which  are  not  inhérent  in  nature, 
which  arise  solely  from  society  and  the  com- 
pact of  mankind.  What  becomes  of  the  pro- 
tubérance, denoting  thievery,  where  there  is  no 


1816.J  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON.  69 

*  property  to  steal  ; — of  that  indicating  drimken- 

*  ness,  where  there  are  no  fermented  liquors,  and 
'  of  that  characterising-  ambition,  where  there  is 

*  no  social  establishment  ? 

"  The  same  remarks  apply  to  that  egregious 

*  charlatan,  Lavater,  with  his  physical  and  moral 

*  relations.  Our  credulity  lies  in  the  defect  of  our 
'  nature.  It  is  inhérent  in  us  to  wish  for  the 
'  acquisition  of  positive  ideas,  when  we  oiight, 

*  on  the  contrary,  to  be  carefuUy  on  our  guard 

*  against  them.     We  scarcely  look  at  a  man's 

*  features,  before  we  undertake  to  ascertain  his 
'  character.   We  should  be  wise  enough  to  repel 

*  the  idea  and  to  neutralize  those  deceitful  appear- 

*  ances.  I  was  robbed  by  a  person  who  had 
'  grey  eyes,  and  from  that  moment  am  I  never  to 

*  look  at  grey  eyes  without  the  idea  of  the  fear  of 

*  being  robbed  ?  It  was  a  weapon,  that  wounded 

*  me,  and  of  that  I  am  apprehensive  wherever  I 

*  see  it,  but  was  it  the  grey  eyes  that  robbed 

*  me  ?  Reason  and  expérience,  and  I  hâve  been 

*  enabled  to  dérive  great  benefit  from  both,  prove, 

*  that  ail  those  external  signs  are  so  many  lies  ; 

*  that  we  cannot  be  too  strictly  on  our  guard 

*  against  them,  and  that  the  only  true  way  of 

*  appreciating  and  gaining  a  thorough  knowledge 

*  of  mankind  is  by  trying  and  associating  with 

*  them.     After  ail,  we  meet  with  countenances 

*  so  hideous,   it  must  be  allowed,"  (and  as  an 
instance   he  described  one  ;  it  was  that  of  the 


TO  MY    RESIDENCE    WITH  [July, 

governor),  "that  the  most  powerful  understanding 
**  is  confounded,  and  condemns  them  in  spite  of 
*'  itself." 

S'mgular  Accummidatk>n  of  ContrarietieSj  ^x.  ^c. 

23d. — The  Emperor  called  upon  me  about  three 
o'clock.  He  wished  to  take  a  walk.  He  had  a 
gloomy  look,  and  had  sufFered  miich  since  yester- 
day.  He  was  seriously  afFected  by  the  intense 
heat  during  his  ride  in  the  calash.  He  had  ob- 
served  a  new  door  which  was  making  without, 
and  which  would  hâve  altered  the  whole  interior 
of  the  topographical  cabinet,  and  of  Madame 
Montholon's  former  apartment.  He  had  not  been 
consulted  on  the  occasion,  and  was  sensibly  af- 
fected  at  it.  He  sent  instantly  for  the  person  who 
had  given  the  directions,  and  the  bad  reasons  he 
assigned  served  only  to  vex  him  still  more.  We 
were  désirons  of  taking  a  walk,  but  it  seem- 
ed  decided  that  every  thing  was  to  irritate 
and  put  him  in  ill  humour  that  evening.  He  saw 
some  English  officers  on  his  way,  and  turned  aside 
îrom  them  almost  in  anger,  observing,  that  shortly 
it  would  be  impossible  for  him  to  put  his  foot  out 
of  doors.  A  few  paces  ofF  he  was  joined  by  the 
Doctor,  who  came  to  tell  him,  unseasonably 
enough,  of  some  arrangements  that  were  making 
for  him,  the  Emperor,  and  to  ask  his  opinion  on 
the  subject.    It  was  one  of  the  topics,  which,  per- 


1S16.]  THE    EMPEROll    NAPOLEON.  71 

haps,  hurt  his  feelings  most.  He  made  no  answer, 
his  ordinary  resoiirce  against  disappointment,  but 
this  time  lie  keot  silent  witli  a  fretfulness  he  could 
not  conceal.  He  came  iip  with  tlie  carriag-e,  and 
got  in  ;  but  on  our  way  we  met  with  some  more 
English  officers,  and  then  he  suddenly  ordered 
the  coachman  to  drive  off,  at  a  gallop,  in  another 
direction. 

The  new  opening,  however,  which  had  been 
made  in  the  house  without  his  knowledge,  and 
which  he  found  so  inconvénient,  still  sat  heavy  on 
his  heart.  He  was  about  to  lighten  the  load  by  a 
lively  playfuhiess  with  the  wife  of  the  person  wdio 
had  ordered  it,  an  d  who  happened  to  be  in 
the  calash.  "Ah,"'  said  hc,  "  are  you  there? 
"  You  are  in  my  power;  you  shall  pay  the  pe 
"  nalty.  The  husband  is  the  guilty  person;  it  is 
"  the  wife  that  shall  answer  for  him."  But  instead 
of  accommodating  herself  to  the  sensé  in  which 
the  words  w^ere  uttered,  which  she  might  hâve 
donc  without  the  least  inconvenience,  and  with 
the  certainty  of  a  satisfactory  resuit,  she  persisted 
in  making  lame  excuses  for  her  husband,  and  re- 
peating  reasons,  which  served  but  to  revive  his 
dissatisfaction.  Finally,  to  fill  up  the  chapter  of 
cross  purposes,  one  of  us,  on  discoveringthe  tents 
of  the  camp,  informed  him  that  the  évolutions  and 
manœuvres  of  the  preceding  day  were  in  célébra- 
tion of  one  of  the  great  victories  gained  by  the 
English  in  Spain,  and  that  the  régiment  which 


72  MV    RESIDENCE    WITH  [JuW, 

executed  them,  had  been  very  nearly  destroyed  in 
battle.     "  A  régiment.  Sir,  is  never  destroyed  by 
**  the  enemy  ;  it  is  immortalized,"  was  his  only  an- 
swer.  It  is  true,  that  it  was  delivered  very  dryly. 
For  myself,  I  meditated  m  silence  on  this  ac- 
cumulation of  contrarieties,  wliich  struck   with 
redoubled  blows  in  so  short  a  time.      It  was  a 
precions  moment  for  an  observer.      I   estimated 
the  torments  they  were   calculated  to   produce, 
and  I  remarked,  with  admiration,  the  few  he  suf- 
fered  to  escape.     I  said  to  myself,  this  is  the  i?i- 
tractable  mon,  this  the  tyrant  !  It  might  hâve  been 
said,  that  he  knew  what  was  passing  in  my  mind, 
for,  when  we  left  the  calash,  and  were  a  few  paces 
l)efore  the  others,   he  said  to  me  in  a  low  tone, 
*'  If  you  like  to  study  mankind,  learn   how  far 
**  patience  can  go,  and  ail  that  one  can   put  up 
-"  with,"  &c.  &c. 

On  his  return,  he  called  for  tea;  I  had  never 
seen  him  take  any.  Madame  de  Montholon  was, 
for  the  first  time,  in  possession  of  lier  new  saloon. 
He  wished  to  see  it,  and  observed  that  she  would 
be  much  better  accommodated  than  us  ail.  He 
called  for  fire,  and  played  at  chess  with  several 
of  us  successively.  He  gradually  resumed  his 
natural  state,  and  ate  a  little  at  dinner,  which 
completely  restored  him.  He  indulged  in  con- 
versation, and  again  revertcd  to  his  early  years, 
which  always  possessed  fresh  charms  for  him.  He 
spoke  a  great  deal  of  his  early  acquaintances,  and 


ISIG.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON. 


73 


of  the  difficulties  some  of  them  had  in  chtainino- 
admission  to  him  after  his  élévation,  and  observ- 
ed,  "  that  if  the  threshold  ofhis  palace  wasimpas- 
*' sable,  it  was  in  spite  of  himself.  What  then," 
said  he,  "  must  be  the  situation  of  other  sovereigns 
*'  in  that  respect?"  &c.  &c. 

We  continued  the  conversation  until  eleven, 
without  noticing  the  lateness  of  the  hour. 

Madame  de  B — Détails,  S^c. — Anecdotes 

respectingthe  Emigrants, 

24th. — To-day  the  Emperor  tried  the  billiard- 
table  which  had  been  just  laid  down,  and  went 
ont,  but  the  weather  being  very  damp,  he  return- 
ed  almost  immediateîy. 

He  conversed  with  me  in  his  apartment,  before 
dinner,  on  the  emigrants,  and  the  name  of  Ma- 
dame de  B  .  .  .  .,  who  had  been  dame  d'a- 
tours to  Madame,  and  was  very  conspicuous  in 
the  commencement  of  our  affairs,  was  mentioned. 
The  Emperor  observed,  **  But  is  not  this  Madame 
**  de  B  .  .  .  .  a  very  dangerous  woman?" — 
**  Certainly  not,"  I  replied  ;  '*  she  is,  on  the  con- 
**  trary,  one  ofthe  bestwomenin  the  world,  with 
**  a  great  deal  of  wit,  and  an  excellent  judgment." 
*'  If  that  is  the  case,"  said  the  Emperor,  *'  she 
**  must  hâve  much  cause  to  complain  of  me.  This 
"  is  the  painful  conséquence  of  false  representa- 
**  tions  ;  she  was  pointed  oui  as  a  very  dangerous 


74  MY    RESIDENCE    AVITH  [Julv, 

**  cliaracter." — "  Yes,  Sire,  you  made  lier  very 
**  unhappy.  Madame  de  B  .  .  .  .  placed  ail 
*'  her  happiness  in  the  charms  of  society,  and 
**  you  banished  her  from  Paris.  I  met  with  her 
**  in  one  of  my  missions,  contined  within  her  pro- 
**  vince,  and  pining  away  with  vexation,  yet  she 
'*  expressed  no  resentment  against  yoiir  Ma- 
'*  jesty,  and  spoke  of  you  with  great  modération." 
"  Well,  then  !  why  did  you  not  corne  to  me,  and 
"  set  me  right  ?"' — "  Ah,  Sire,  your  character  was 
"  then  so  little  known  to  us,  compared  with  what 
**  I  know  it  to  be  at  présent,  that  I  should  not 
**  hâve  dared  to  take  it  upon  myself.  But  I  will 
"  mention  an  anecdote  of  Madame  de  B  .  .  .  . 
*'  when  at  London,  during  the  high  tide  of  our 
*'  émigration,  which  v>'ill  make  you  better  ac- 
"  quainted  with  her  than  any  thing  I  could  saj^ 
*'  At  the  time  when  you  were  declared  Consul,  a 
**  person,  just  arrived  from  Paris,  was  invited  to 
**  a  small  party  at  her  house.  He  engrossed  the 
**  attention  of  the  company,  in  conséquence  of  ail 
**  the  particulars  he  had  to  communicate  respect- 
"  ing  a  place,  which  interested  us  so  very  mate- 
**  rially.  He  was  asked  several  questions  re- 
**  specting  the  Consul.  He  can  not,  said  he, 
'*  live  long,  he  is  so  ydlow  as  to  inspire  delight. 
**  Thcse  were  his  words.  He  grew  more  ani- 
"  mated  by  degrees,  and  gave  as  a  toast — the 
"  death  of  the  First  Consul  !  Oh,  horrible!  was 
**  the    instantaneous    exclamation    of    Madame 


1616.]  THE    EMPEROR    XAPOLEOX.  T5 

de  B  .  .  .  .  What,  drink  to  the  death  of  a 
hiiman  being  !  For  shame  !  I  will  give  a  niuch 
better  one  ;  the  King's  hcaltli  !" 
*'  Well,"  said  the  Emperor,  '*  I  repeat,  that  she 
was  very  ill  used  by  me,  in  conséquence  of  the 
représentations,  which  were  made  to  me.  She 
had  been  described  to  me  as  a  person  fond  of 
political  intrigues,  and  remarkable  for  the 
bitterness  of  her  sarcasms.  And  this  puts  me 
in  mind  of  an  expression  which  is  perhaps 
wrongly  attributed  to  her,  butwhich  struckme, 
however,  solely  on  account  of  its  wit.  I  was 
assured,  that  a  distinguished  personage,  wlio 
was  very  much  attached  to  her,  was  seized 
with  a  fit  of  jealousy,  for  which  she  clearly 
proved  she  had  given  no  cause.  He  persisted, 
however,  and  observed,  that  she  ought  to  know 
that  the  wifeof  Cœsarshould  be  free  from  sus- 
picion. Madame  de  B  .  .  .  .  replied,  that  the 
remark  contained  two  important  mistakes  ;  for 
it  was  knowato.all  the  world  that  she  was  not 
his  wife,  and  thathe  was  notCsesar." 
After  dinner,  the  Emperor  read  to  us  parts  of 
the  comédies  of  the  Dissipateur  and  the  Glorieux, 
but  he  was  so  little  pleased  with  them,  that  he 
left  off;  they  did  not  possess  a  sufficient  degree  of 
interest.  He  suffered  severely  in  his  right  side. 
It  was  the  effect  of  the  dampness  with  which  he 
had  been  afFected  during  his  morning  walk,  and 


76  MY    RESIDENCE    WITH  [July, 

we  were  not  \vithout  appréhensions  of  its  being 
a  symptom  of  the  common  malady  in  thèse  scorch- 
ing  climates. 

On  my  retiirn  home,  I  foiind  a  letter  from 
England,  with  a  parcel,  containing  some  articles 
for  my  toilet.  The  Griffin  ship  of  war  had  jiist 
arrived  from  England. 

The  JSmperor  receives  Letters  from  his  Fainily. — Con- 
versation iviik  the  Admirai. —  The  Commissioners  of  the 
Allied  Povoers. 

2oth. — Abolit  nine  o'clock,  I  received  from  the 
Grand  Marshalthree  letters  for  the  Emperor.  They 
were  from  Madame  Mère,  the  Princess  Pauline, 
and  Prince  Lucien.  The  latter  was  enclosed  in 
one,  addressed  to  me  from  Rome,  by  Prince 
Lucien,  dated  the  6th  of  March.  I  also  received 
two  from  my  agent  in  London. 

The  Emperor  passed  the  whole  of  the  morning 
in  reading  the  papers  from  the  25tli  of  April  to  the 
13th  of  May.  They  containcd  accounts  of  the 
death  of  the  Empress  of  Austria,  of  the  proroga- 
tion of  the  French  Chambers,  of  Cambrone's  ac- 
quittai, and  the  sentence  passed  upon  General 
Bertrand,  kc.  kc.  He  made  many  remarks  upon 
ail  thèse  subjects. 

About  three,  Admirai  Malcolm  requested  to  be 
presented  to  the  Emperor.  He  brought  him  a 
séries  of  the  Journal  des  Débats  to  the   13th  of 


181G.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON.  77 

May.  The  Emperor  desired  me  to  introduce  him, 
and  lie  conversed  with  him  nearly  three  hours. 
He  gave  great  pleasure  to  the  Emperor,  who 
treated  him,  from  the  first  moment,  with  a  great 
deal  of  freedom  and  good  nature,  as  if  he  had 
been  an  old  acquaintance.  The  Admirai  was  en- 
tirely  of  his  opinion  with  respect  to  a  great  num- 
ber  of  subjects.  He  admitted,  that  it  was  ex- 
tremely  difficult  to  escape  from  Saint  Helena,  and 
he  could  see  no  inconvenience  in  allowing  him  to 
be  at  large  in  the  island.  He  considered  it  ab- 
surd,  that  Plantation-househad  not  been  given  up 
to  the  Emperor,  and  felt,  but  only  since  his  ar- 
rivai, he  confessed,  that  the  title  of  gênerai  might 
be  oÔ'ensive.  It  struck  him,  that  Lady  Loudon's 
conduct  had  been  ridiculous  hère,  and  would  be 
laughed  at  in  London.  He  thought,  that  the  go- 
vernor  had  good  intentions,  but  did  not  know  how 
to  act.  Ministers  had,  in  his  opinion,  been  em- 
barassed  with  respect  to  the  Emperor,  but  enter- 
tained  no  hatred  against  him  ;  they  did  not  know 
how  to  dispose  of  him.  Had  he  remained  in  Eng- 
land,  he  would  hâve  been,  and  was  still  a  terror 
to  the  Continent  ;  he  would  hâve  been  too  dan- 
gerous  and  efficient  an  instrument  in  the  hands  of 
Opposition,  &c.  &c.  He  was  apprehensive,  how- 
ever,  that  ail  thèse  circumstances  put  together 
would  detain  us  hère  a  long  time  ;  and  he  ex- 
pressed  his  confidence,  thatit  was  the  intention  of 
Ministers,  with  the  exception  of  the  necessary 


78  M  Y    RESIDENCE    WITH  [Julyt 

précautions  to  prevent  his  escape,  that  Napoléon 
should  be  treated  with  every  possible  indulgence 
at  Saint  Helena,  Sec.  Sec.  He  delivered  himself 
upon  ail  thèse  points,  in  so  satisfactory  a  manner, 
thatthe  Emperor  discussedthe  business  withliim, 
with  as  little  warmth,  as  if  it  was  perfectly  indif- 
fèrent tohim. 

At  one  moment,  the  Emperor  produced  a  sen- 
sible efFect  upon  him  ;  it  was,  when,  alluding  to 
the  commissioners,  he  pointed  out  the  impossi- 
bility  of  receiving  them.  '*  After  ail,  Sir,"  said 
he,  *'  you  and  I  are  men.  I  appeal  to  you,  Is 
'  it  possible,  that  the  Emperor  of  Austria,  whose 

*  daughter  I  married,  who  implored  that  union 
'  on  his  knees,  who  retains  my  wife  and  my  son, 

*  should  send  me  his  commissioner,  without  a 
'  Une  for  myself,  without  the  smallest  scrap  of 
'  a  bulletin  with  respect  to  my  son's  health  ? 
'  Can  I  receive  him  with  consistency?    Can  I 

*  hâve  any  thing  to  communicate  to  him  ?  I  may 

*  say  the  same  thing  of  the  commissioner  sent 
'  by  Alexander,  who  gloried  in  calling  himself 
'  my  friend,  with  whom,   indeed,   I  carried  on 

*  political    wars,  but  had  no    personal   quarrel. 

*  It  is  a  fine  thing  to  be  a  sovereign,  but  we  are 

*  not  on  that  account  the  less  entitled   to   be 

*  treated  as  men  ;  I  lay  claim  to  no  other  cha- 
'  racter  at  présent  !  Can  they  ail  be  destitute  of 
'  feeling  ?   Be  assured.  Sir,  that  when  I  object 

*  to  the  title  of  General,  I  am  not  offended.     l 


1S16.}  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON.  79 

"  décline  it  merely,  because  it  would  be  an  ac- 
*'  knowledgment,  that  I  hâve  not  been  Emperor; 
**  and,  in  this  respect,  I  advocate  the  honour  of 
"  others  more  than  my  own.  I  advocate  the 
*'  honour  of  those  with  whom,  I  hâve  been,  in 
"  that  rank,  connected  by  treaties,  by  family  and 
**  political  alliances.  The  only  one  of  thèse 
"  commissioners,  whom  I  might,  perhaps,  re- 
"  ceive,  would  be  that  of  Louis  XVIII.,  who 
'*  owes  me  nothing.  That  commissioner  was  a 
"  long  time  my  subject,  he  acts  merely  in  con- 
"  formity  to  circumstances,  independent  of  his 
"  option  ;  and  I  should  accordingly  receive  him. 
"  to-morrow,  were  I  not  apprehensive  of  themis- 
*'  représentations,  that  would  take  place,  and  of 
*'  the  false  colouring,  that  would  be  given  to  the 
**  circumstance,"  &c.  &c. 

After  dinner,  the  Emperor  again  alluded  to  the 
time  of  his  consulate,  to  the  numerous  conspira- 
cies  which  had  been  formed  against  him,  to  the 
celebrated  persons  of  that  period,  &c.  I  hâve 
already  noticed  thèse  topics  at  considérable 
length.  The  conversation  lasted  until  one  o'clock 
in  the  morning,  a  very  extraordinary  hour  for  us. 

Tlie  Emperor's    Court  —  Exjpenses,  savbigs,   hnnting  and 
sfiooting  estabUsli)nent,  mews,  pages,  service  of  honour,  S^c, 

26th — 28th.  Our  usual  mode  of  living, — an 
airing  in  the  carriage  in  the  middle  of  the  day  ; 
conversation  at  night. 


SO  UY    RESIDENCE    WITH  [July» 

On  the  27th  the  Emperor  received  for  a  mo- 
ment, a  colonel,  a  relation  of  the  family  of  Walsh 
Serrent,  wlio  was  on  his  return  from  the  Cape 
in  the  Haycomb,  and  was  to  sail  next  day  for 
Europe.  He  had  been  governor  of  Bourbon, 
and  entertained  us  with  many  agreeable  particu- 
lars  respecting  that  island. 

After  dinner,  the  conversation  turned  on  the 
old  and  new  court,  with  their  arrangements,  ex- 
penses,  étiquette,  &c.  &c.  I  hâve  already  men- 
tioned  most  of  thèse  points  in  another  place,  and 
many  of  them  were  repeated  on  the  présent  occa- 
sion. I  pass  over  what  would  seem  but  a  literal 
répétition. 

The  Emperor's  court  was,  in  every  relation, 
much  more  magnificent  than  any  thing  seen  up 
to  that  period,  and  yet,  said  he,  the  expense  was 
infinitely  less.  That  vast  différence  was  caused 
by  the  suppression  of  abuses,  and  by  the  introduc- 
tion of  order  and  regularity  into  the  accounts. 
His  hunting  and  shooting  establishment,  with  the 
exception  of  some  useless  and  ridiculous  particu- 
lars,  he  observed,  as  that  of  falconry  and  some 
others,  was  as  splendid,  as  numerous,  and  as 
striking,  as  that  of  Louis  XVI.,  and  the  annual 
disbursement,  he  assured  us,  was  but  400,000 
franks,  while  the  King's  amounted  to  seven  mil- 
lions. His  table  was  regulated  according  to  the 
same  system,  Duroc  had,  by  his  regularity  and 
strictness,  donc  wonders  in  that  respect.    Under 


1616.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEOX.  SI 

the  kings,  tlie  palaces  clid  not  continue  furnislied, 
and  the  same  articles  were  transferred  from  one 
palace  to  another;  the  people  belonging  to  the 
court  had  no  furniture  allowed  them,  and  every 
one  was  obliged  to  look  out  for  himself.  Under 
him,  on  the  contrary,  there  was  not  a  person  in 
attendance,  who  did  not  find  himself  provided  as 
comfortably,  or  even  more  so,  with  every  thing" 
that  was  necessary  or  suitable  in  the  apartment 
assio-ned  to  him,  than  in  his  own  house. 

The  Emperor's  mews  cost  three  millions,  the.  'lîI  0 
expense  of  the  horses  was  averaged  at  3,00à"'-  if^ 
francs  a  horse  yearly.  A  page  cost  from  G  to 
8,000  francs.  That  establishment,  he  observed, 
was  perhaps  the  most  expensive  belonging  to  the 
palace,  and  accordingly  the  éducation  of  the  pages 
and  the  care  taken  of  them,  were  tlie  subject  of 
just  encomium.  The  first  families  of  the  empire 
were  solicitons  to  place  their  children  on  it,  and 
the  inducemcnts  were  irrésistible. 

With  respect  to  the  étiquette  of  the  court,  the 
Emperor  said,  lie  was  the  first  who  had  separated 
the  service  of  honoiir  (an  expression  invented 
under  him)  from  that  which  was  absolutely  ne- 
cessary. He  had  dismissed  every  thing  that  wai=ï 
laborious  and  substantial,  and  substituted  what 
was  nominal  and  ornamental  only.  "  A  king,"  he 
said,  "  is  not  to  be  found  in  nature,  he  is  the 
"  mère  créature  of  civilization.  There  are  no 
*'  naked  kings  ;  they  must  ail  be  dressed,"  &e. 

Vol.  III.  Part  V.  g 


82  M  Y    RESIDENCE    VIT  H  [July» 

The  Emperor  remarked,  that  it  was  impossible 
for  any  one  to  be  better  informed  of  tlie  nature 
and  relation  of  ail  thèse  niatters  than  himself; 
because  they  had  been  ail  regulated  by  him,  ac- 
cording  to  the  précédents  of  past  times,  from 
which  lie  had  lopped  off  whatever  was  ridiculous, 
and  preserved  every  thing  that  seemed  suit- 
able,  &c. 

The  conversation  lasted  until  after  eleven  o'clock. 
It  had  been  kept  up  witli  tolerable  spirit;  and  the 
Emperor  again  observed  on  leaving  us,  that,  after 
ail,  we  must  be  a  good-natured  kind  of  people 
to  be  able  to  lead  so  contented  a  life  at  Saint 
Helena. 

Fresh  Instance  of  the  Governor's  Maliguity,  ^'c. — Desiperafe 
Project  of  Santini,  the  Corskan. 

29th. — The  weather  had  been  badfor  some  days; 
the  Emperor  took  advantage  of  a  fine  moment  to 
examine  a  tent,  which  the  admirai  had,  in  a  very 
handsome  manner,  ordered  to  be  raised  for  his 
accommodation  by  his  ship's  crew,  having  heard 
him  complain,  in  the  course  of  conversation,  of 
the  want  of  shade  and  of  the  impossibility  of  en- 
joying  himself  in  the  air  ont  of  his  apartment. 
The  Emperor  conversed  with  the  officer  and  mcn 
who  were  putting  the  last  hand  to  the  work,  and 
ordered  a  napoléon  to  be  given  to  each  of  the 
seamen. 


1S16.]  TIIE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON.  83 

Welearnt  to-day,  that  the  lastvessel  had  brought 
a  book  on  the  state  of  public  afFairs  for  the  Em- 
peror,  written,  as  it  was  said,  by  a  member  of 
parliament.  It  had  been  sent  by  the  author  him- 
self,  and  the  followmg  words  were  mscribed  in 
letters  of  gold  on  the  outside, — To  Napoléon  the 
Great.  This  circumstance  induced  the  Governor 
to  retain  the  work,  a  rigour,  on  his  part,  which 
formed  a  singular  contrast  with  his  eagerness  to 
supply  us  with  libels,  that  spoke  so  disrespect- 
fully  of  the  Emperor. 

During  dinner  the  Emperor,  turning,  with  a 
stern  look,  to  one  of  the  servants  in  waiting, 
exclaimed,  to  our  utter  consternation  ;  ''  So 
"  then,  assassin,  y  ou  resolved  to  kill  the  Gover- 
"  nor! — Wretch! — If  such  a  thought  ever  again 
*'  enters  y  our  head,  you  will  hâve  to  do  with 
**  me;  you  will  see  how  I  shall  behave  to  you." 
And  then  addressing  himself  to  us,  lie  said, 
**  Gentlemen,  it  is  Santini,  there,  who  deter- 
*'  mined  to  kill  the  Governor.  That  rascal  was 
"  about  to  involve  us  in  a  sad  embarassment.  I 
"  found  it  necessary  to  exert  ail  my  authority, 
**  ail  my  indignation  to  restrain  him." 

With  the  view  of  explaining  this  extraordinary 
transaction,  it  is  necessary  for  me  to  observe, 
that  Santini,  who  was  formerly  usher  of  the  Em- 
peror's  cabinet,  and  whose  extrême  dévotion  had 
prompted  him  to  foUow  his  master  and  serve  him, 
no  matter,  he  said,  in  what  capacity,  was  a  Cor- 

G   2 


84  MY    RESIDEXCK    WITII  [Julv, 

sican  of  deep  feeling  and  a  warm  imagination. 
Enraged  at  the  Governor's  bad  usage,  no  longer 
able  to  bear  with  patience  the  affronts  he  saw 
heaped  upon  the  Emperor,  exasperated  at  the 
décline  of  his  health,  and  affected  himself  with 
a  distracting  melancholy,  he  had,  for  some  time, 
donc  no  work  in  ihe  hoiise,  and  under  pretence  of 
procuring  some  game  for  the  Emperor's  table, 
his  employment  seemed  to  be  that  of  shooting  in 
the  neighbourhood.  In  a  moment  of  confidence, 
he  told  his  countryman  Cypriani,  that  he  had 
formed  the  project,  by  the  means  of  his  double 
barrelled  pièce,  of  killing  the  Governor,  and  then 
putting  an  end  to  himself.  And  al],  said  he,  to  rid 
the  world  of  a  monster. 

Cypriani,  who  knew  his  countryman's  charac- 
ter,  was  shocked  at  his  détermination,  and  com- 
municated  it  to  several  other  servants.  They  ail 
united  in  entreating  him  to  lay  aside  his  design, 
but  their  efforts,  instead  of  mitigating,  seemed 
but  to  inflame  his  irritation.  They  resolved  then 
to  discover  the  project  to  the  Emperor,  who  had 
him  instantly  brought  before  him  :  "  And  it  was 
**  only,"  he  told  me  some  time  afterwards,  "  by 
**  impérial,  by  pontifical  authority,  that  I  finally 
**  succeeded  in  making  the  scoundrel  desist  alto- 
**  gether  from  his  project.  Observe  for  a  moment 
**  the  fatal  conséquences  he  was  about  to  pro- 
"  duce.  I  should  hâve  also  passed  for  the  mur- 
*'  derer,  the  assassin  of  the  Governor,  and  in  reality 


181G.]  THE    EMPEROn    XAPOLF-OX.  85 

"  it  would  liave  been  vcry  difficult  to  destroy 
"  such  an  impression  in  the  mind  of  a  greatnum- 
"  ber  of  people/' 

The  Emperor  read  to  iis  La  IMort  de  Pompée, 
M'hicli  was  stated  in  the  journals  to  be  the  subject 
of  gênerai  interest  at  Paris,  on  accoiint  of  its 
political  allusions.  And  this  gave  rise  to  the 
remark,  that  government  had  been  obliged  to 
forbid  the  représentation  of  Richard,  and  that, 
certain] y  on  the  fiftli  and  sixth  of  October,  Louis 
XVL  little  thought  of  its  ever  being  prohibited 
for  its  allusions  to  another.  "  The  fact  is, 
"  that  times  are  wonderfully  changed,"  said  the 
Emperor. 

30th. — The  Emperor,  after  a  few  turns  in  the 
garden,  went  to  General  Gourgaud's  apartment, 
where  he  was  a  long  time  employed,  with  his 
compassés  and  crayon,  in  ascertaining  the  dimen- 
sions of  the  coast  of  Syria,  and  the  plan  of  Saint 
Jean  d'Acre,  which  the  gênerai  was  to  exécute. 
Li  marking  some  points  about  Saint  Jean  d'Acre, 
he  said  ; — "  I  passed  many  unpleasant  moments 
"  tliere." 

In  the  evening  we  had  Le  Mariage  de  Figaro, 
which  entertained  and  interested  us  much  more 
than  we  had  been  led  to  expect.  "  It  was,"  ob- 
served  the  Emperor,  in  shutting  the  book,  "  the 
"  revolutipn  already  put  into  action." 


èlt  MY    RESIDENCE    WITII  [July, 

La  Harpe's    Mélonie. — Nuns. — C'onvents. — Monhs  of  La 
Trappe. — The  French  Clergy, 

31. — The  weather  was  horrible,  and  the  Em- 
peror  found  great  difficulty  in  going  to  Madame 
de  iMontholon's  saloon.  He  amused  himself  for 
some  time  in  reading  the  Thousand  and  One 
Nights,  and  afterwards  perceiving  a  volume  of 
the  Moniteur,  on  which  M.  de  Montholon  was 
then  employed,  and  which  kiy  open  in  the  part 
relative  to  the  négociations  for  a  maritime  armis- 
tice in  1800,  his  whole  attention  was  absorbed  by 
them  for  upwards  of  an  hour. 

After  dinner  the  Emperor  read  first  La  Mère 
Coupable,  in  which  we  felt  interested  and  next, 
the  Mélanie  of  La  Harpe,  which  he  thought 
wretchedly  conceived  and  very  badly  executed. 
**  It  was,"  he  said,  *'  a  turgid  déclamation,  in 
**  perfect  conformity  with  the  taste  of  the  times, 
*'  founded  in  fashionable  calumnies  and  absurd 
*'  falsehoods.  When  La  Harpe  wrote  that  pièce, 
**  a  father  certainly  had  not  the  power  of  forcing 
"  his  daughter  to  take  the  veil  ;  the  laws  would 
**  never  hâve  allowed  it.  This  play,  which  was 
"  performed  at  the  beginning  of  the  révolution, 
*'  was  solely  indebted  for  its  success  to  the  mo- 
**  mentary  caprice  of  public  opinion.  Now,  that 
"  the  inducement  is  over,  it  would  Idc  a  wretched 
**  performance!     La  Harpe's   characiôrs   ara  ail 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEOK.  8? 

"  iinnatural.     He  should  not  hâve  attacked  de- 
"  fective  institutions  with  defective  weapons." 

The  Emperor  said,  that  La  Harpe  had  so  com- 
pletely  failed  in  his  object  with  regard  to  his  own 
impressions,  that  ail  his  feelings  were  in  favour 
of  the  father,  while  he  was  shocked  at  the  daugh- 
ter's  condiict.  He  had  never  seen  the  perform- 
ance, withoiit  being  tempted  to  start  from  his 
seat  and  call  ont  to  the  daughter;  "  You  hâve 
"  but  to  say,  No,  and  \ve  will  ail  take  your  part; 
"  you  w^ill  find  a  protector  in  every  citizen." 

He  observed,  that  when  he  was  on  service  with 
his  régiment,  he  had  often  witnessed  the  cere- 
mony  of  taking  the  veil.  "  It  was  a  ceremony 
"  very  much  attended  by  the  officers,  and  which 
"  raised  our  indignation,  particularly,  when  the 
"  victims  were  handsome.  We  ran  in  crowds  to 
"  it,  and  our  attention  was  alive  to  the  slightest 
**  incident.  Had  they  but  said,  i\V?,  we  should 
*'  hâve  carried  them  ofF  sword  in  hand.  It  is 
**  consequently  false,  that  violence  was  employed: 
"  the  only  means  used  were  the  acts  of  seduc- 
*'  tion.  Those,  uponwhom  they  were  practised, 
"  were  kept,  not  unlike  recruits.  They  were 
**  exposed  to  the  blandishments  and  exhortations 
*'  of  the  nuns,  the  abbess,  the  spiritual  director, 
"  and  the  bishop,  to  the  examination  of  the  civil 
"  officer,  and  finally  to  public  view.  Thus  every 
"  thing  seemed  to  concur  in  prevailing  upou  them 
"  to  make  the  sacrifice." 


88  MV    RESIDENCE    WITII  [July, 

The  Emperor  dcclared  that  he  was  an  enemy 
to  couvents  in  gênerai,  as  useless,  and  productive 
of  degrading-  inactivity.  He  allowed,  however, 
in  another  point  of  view,  that  certain  reasons 
might  be  pleaded  in  their  favoiir.  The  l^est  mezzo 
tc}'})iim%  and  he  had  adopted  it,  was,  in  his  opi- 
nion, that  of  tolerating  them,  of  obliging  the 
members  to  beconie  useful,  and  of  recognizing 
annual  vows  alone. 

The  Emperor  complained,  that  he  had  not  becn 
allowed  time  enougli  to  complète  his  institutions. 
It  had  been  his  intention  to  enlarge  the  establish- 
ments of  Saint  Denis  and  Ecouen,  for  the  pur- 
pose  of  giving  an  asylnm  to  the  widows  of  sol- 
diers,  or  womcn  advanced  in  years,  8cc.  Sic. 
"  And  then,"  he  added,  "  it  must  also  be  allowed, 
"  that  there  v/ere  characters  and  imaginations  of 
**  ail  kinds  ;  that  compulsion  ought  not  to  be  nsed 
*'  with  regard  to  persons  of  an  eccentric  turn, 
*'  provided  their  oddities  were  liarmless,  and  that 
"  an  empire,  like  France,  might  and  had  a  right 
*'  to  hâve  liouses  for  madmen,  called  trappistes. 
"  With  respect  to  the  latter,"  he  observed,  "  that 
*'  if  any  one  ever  thought  of  inflicting  upon  others 
"  the  discipline  which  they  practised,  it  would  be 
"  justly  considered  a  most  abominable  tyranny, 
"  and  that  it  might,  notwithstanding,  constitute 
**  the  delight  of  him  vv'ho  voluntarily  exercised 

"  it  on  himseli". This  is  man,  thèse 

"  his  fantastical  pursuits,  or  his  foliy!  .  .  .     He 


IS16.]  THi:    EMPF.nOR    X  A  l'OLEON".  89 

"  had  toierated  the  monks  of  Mount  Cenis,  but 
"  thèse,  at  least,"  he  added,  "  were  iiseful,  very 
**  usefiil,  and  miglit  be  even  called  heroical." 

The  Eniperor  expressed  himself  in  his  council 
o'i  state  in  the  following  words,  whcn  the  organiz- 
ation  of  the  university  was  about  to  take  place  : 
"  It  is  my  opinion,  that  the  monks  would  be  far 
*'  the  best  body  for  communicating  instruction, 
**  were  it  possible  to  keep  them  under  proper 
"  control,  and  to  shake  off  their  dependencc 
"  upon  a  foreign  master.  I  am  disposed  to  be 
"  favourable  to  them.  I  should,  perhaps,  hâve 
"  had  ,  the  power  to  reinstate  them  in  their 
**  establishments,  but  they  hâve  made  the  thing 
"  impossible.  The  moment  I  do  any  thing  for 
'*  the  clergy,  they  give  me  cause  to  repent  it.  I 
'*  do  not  complain  of  the  old  established  clergy, 
"  for  with  them  ï  am  sufficiently  satisfied  ;  but 
"  the  young  priests  are  brought  up  in  a  gloomy 
*'  fanatical  doctrine  ;  there  is  nothing  Gallican  in 
"  the  young  clergy. 

"  I  hâve  nothing  to  say  against  the  ancient, 
*'  the  old  bishops.  They  hâve  shewn  themselves 
*'  gratefnl  for  what  I  did  for  religion  ;  they  hâve 
*'  realized  my  expectations. 

"  Cardinal  de  Boisgelin  was  amanofsense,  a 
"  virtuous  character,  who  had  faithfully  adopted 
*'  me. 

"  The  Archbishop  of  Tours,  Earral,  a  man  of 
*'  great  acquirements,  and  who  was  of  essential 


90  MY    RESIDENCE    WITII  [July, 

*'  service  to  us  in  our  différences  with  the  Pope, 
**  was  always  very  much  attaclied  to  me. 

"  The  worthy  cardinal  du  Belloy,  and  tlie  vir- 
**  tuous  Bishop  Roquelaure,  had  a  sincère  affec- 
*'  tionforme. 

"  I  made  no  difficulty  whatever  in  placing 
**  Bishop  Beausset  among  the  dignitaries  of  the 
*'  university,  and  I  am  corivinced,  that  he  was 
'*  one  of  those,  who,  in  that  capacity,  most  siu- 
*'  cerely  conducted  themselves  in  conformity 
•*  with  my  views. 

*'  Ail  thèse  ancient  bishops  possessed  my  con- 
"  fidence,  and  none  of  them  deceived  me.  It  is 
*'  not  a  little  singular,  that  those  I  had  the  great- 
*'  est  cause  to  complain  of,  were  precisely  those 
**  whom  I  had  chosen  myself  ;  so  very  true  is  it, 
*'  that  the  holy  unction,  in  approximating  us  to 
*'  Heaven,  does  not  deliver  us  from  the  infirmi- 
*'  ties  of  theearth,  from  its  irregularities,  its  ob- 
"  scenities,  its  turpitudes,"  &c.  &c. 

The  conversation  next  turned  upon  the  want  of 
priests  in  France,  on  the  obligation  of  employing 
them  at  the  âge  of  16,  and  the  difficulty,  even  the 
impossibility  of  findingany  at  21,  &c.  &c. 

It  was  the  Emperor's  wish  that  they  should  be 
ordained  at  a  more  advanced  âge.  The  answer  of 
the  bishops  and  the  Pope  himself  was,  "  It  is  very 
**  well  :  your  reasons  are  very  just  ;  but  if  you  wait 
**  for  that  period,  you  will  find  none  to  ordain, 
*'  and  yet  you  admit  that  you  are  in  want  of  them." 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON.  91 

'*  I  have,  no  doiibt,"  observée!  the  Eniperor, 
**  that,  afterme,  other  principleswill  be  adopted. 
'*  A  conscription  of  priests  and  nuns  will,  per- 
'*  haps,  be  seen  in  France,  as  amilitary  conscrip- 
*'  tion  was  seen  in  my  time.  My  barracks  will, 
*'  perhaps,  be  turned  into  convents  and  semi- 
"  naries.  Thus  the  world  runs  on.  Poor  peo- 
"  pie!  In  spite  of  ail  your  knowledge,  ail  your 
"  wisdom,  you  continue  like  simple  individuals, 
**  the  slaves  of  fashionable  caprice." 

It  was  nearly  one  o'clock  in  the  morning  before 
the  Emperor  retired.  It  was,  he  said,  a  real  vie- 
tory  over  tediousness,  and  a  great  relief  for  the 
want  of  sleep. 

Marie  Antoinette. — The  Manners  of  Versailles. — Jnecdote» 
— Beverley. — Diderot's  Père  de  Famille. 

AuGusT  1. — The  weather  was  dreadful.  About 
three  o'clock,  the  Grand  Marshal  came  to  look  for 
me  ;  but  as  I  liad  at  that  moment  ventured  ont,  I 
was  not  to  be  found.  It  was  on  account  of  some 
English,  whom  he  had  to  présent  to  the  Emperor. 

The  Emperor  sent  for  me  at  five  ;  he  was  in  a 
bad  humour,  and  not  a  little  so,  he  said,  on  my 
account.  The  visit  of  the  English,  the  bad 
weather,  the  want  of  the  saloonand  an  interpréter, 
had  ail  combined  to  vex  him. 

He  was  reading  the  Veillées  du  Château, 
which,  he  observed,  were  tiresome,  and  he  left 
them  for  the  taies  of  Margaret,  Queen  of  Navarre. 


9C  MV    RESIDENCE    WIIU  [Aug. 

He  afterwards  adverted  to  Versailles  ;  the  court, 
the  Qiieen,  IMadame  Campan,  and  the  King,  were 
the  principal  subjects  of  his  remarks,  and  he  said 
many  things,  someof  which  I  hâve  already  noticed. 
He  concluded  with  observing,  that  Louis  XVI. 
would  hâve  been  a  perfect  pattern  in  private  life, 
but  that  he  had  been  a  wretched  King  ;  and  that 
the  Queen  would  no  doubt  hâve  been,  at  ail  times, 
the  ornament  of  every  circle,  but  that  her  levity, 
her  inconsistencies,  and  want  of  capacity,  had  not 
a  little  contributed  to  promote  and  accelerate  the 
catastrophe.  She  had,  he  remarked,  deranged  the 
manners  of  Versailles  ;  its  ancient  gravity  and  strict 
étiquette  were  transformed  into  the  free  and  easy 
prettinesses  and  absolute  tittle-tattle  of  a  private 
party.  No  man  of  sensé  and  importance  cc«uld 
avoid  the  jests  of  the  young  courtiers,  Mdiose 
natural  disposition  for  raillery  was  sharpened  by 
the  applauses  of  a  young  and  beautiful  sovereign. 

One  of  the  most  characteristic  anecdotes  of  that 
day  was  told.  A  gallant  and  worthy  German 
gênerai  arrived  atParis,  with  a  spécial  recommend- 
ation  to  the  Queen,  on  the  part  of  the  Emperor 
Joseph,  her  brother.  The  Queen  thought  she 
could  not  do  him  a  greater  favour,  than  that  of 
inviting  him  to  one  of  her  private  parties.  He 
found  himself,  it  may  be  easily  imagined,  a  little 
ont  of  his  élément  in  such  company,  but  it  was 
every  one's  wish  to  treat  him  with  marked  respect, 
and  he  was  obliged  to  take  a  leading  part  in  the 


161G.]  TIIË    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON'.  93 

conversation.  He  was  iinfortiinate  in  tlie  sélec- 
tion of  his  topics,  and  in  liis  manner  of  intro- 
ducing  tliem.  He  talked  a  great  deal  about  his 
u'h'itc  mare,  and  his  grcif  marc,  upon  whicli  he 
set  the  higliest  value.  The  siibject  gave  rise  to  a 
number  of  arch  inquiries  on  the  part  of  the  young 
courtiers,  respecting  a  thousand  frivolous  points, 
whicli  he  had  the  good  nature  to  answer,  as  if 
they  were  matters  of  importance.  In  conclusion, 
one  of  theni  asked  which  of  the  two  he  preferred  : 
**  Really,"answered  the  gênerai  with  peculiar  sig- 
nificance,  "  I  must  confess,  that,  if  I  were  in  the 
"  day  of  battle  on  my  white  mare,  I  do  not  be- 
"  lieve  I  should  dismount  to  get  on  my  grey  one." 
At  length  he  made  his  bow,  and  the  bursts  of 
laughter,  that  followed,  may  be  easily  conceived. 
The  conversation  took  another  turn  after  his  de- 
parture  ;  the  attractions  of  white  and  brown  beau- 
ties  were  long  and  ingenioiisly  canvassed,  and  the 
Queen  having  asked  one  of  the  party  which  he 
preferred,  he  instantly  assumed  a  grave  air,  and 
imitating  the  solemn  tone  of  the  Austrian,  an- 
swered,   **  Really,  Madame,  I  must  confess,  that 

'*  if  I  were  in  the   day  of  battle  on " 

"  Enough,"  observed  the  Queen,  "  spare  us  the 
'*  remainder." 

After  dinner  he  read  Beverley  and  the  Père  de 
Famille  to  us.  The  latter,  in  particular,  excited 
his  animad version.  To  us  it  seemed  a  paltrjqoro- 
duction.     What  most  amused  the  Emperor,  as  he 


94  MY    RESIDENCE    WITH  [Aug. 

said,  was  that  it  belonged  to  Diderot,  that  Cory- 
phœus  of  the  philosophers,  andthe  Encyclopedia. 
Ail  it  contained  was,  lie  said,  false  and  ridicu' 
lous.  The  Emperor  entered  into  a  long  examin- 
ation  of  the  détails,  and  concluded  with  saying, 
Why  reason  with  a  madman  in  the  height  of  a 
raging  fever?  It  is  remédies,  and  a  décisive 
mode  of  treatment,  of  which  lie  stands  in  need. 
Who  does  not  know,  that  the  only  safeguard 
against  love  is  fliglit  ?  When  Mentor  wishes  to 
secure  Telemachus,  lie  plunges  liim  into  the 
sea.  When  Ulysses  endeavours  to  préserve 
himself  from  the  Syrens,  he  gets  himself  tied 
fast,  after  having  stopped  the  ears  of  his  com- 
panions  withwax,"  ^c.  &c. 

Historical   Sketch  of  the  Emigration  to  Cohlentz.^--' 
Anecdotes,  ^c. 

2d. — Uninterrupted  bad  weather,  with  heavy 
rains.  The  Emperor  was  not  well  ;  lie  felt  his 
nerves  very  much  irritated. 

He  sent  for  me  to  breakfast  with  him.  During 
the  whole  of  breakfast,  and  a  long  time  afterwards, 
the  conversation  agaiii  turned  on  the  émigration. 
I  hâve  already  remarked,  that  he  often  brought 
me  back  to  the  subject.  His  enquiries  to  day 
were  directed  to  the  particulars  of  what  had 
passed  at  Coblentz,  to  our  situation,  our  disposi- 
tion, our  organization,  our  views,  and  our  re- 
sources,  and  at  the  end  of  ail  my  answers,  he  con- 


1S16.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON.  95 

cluded,  observing;  "  you  hâve  already  several 
"  times  acquainted  me  with  a  considérable  part 
"  of  tliose  tliings,  and  yet  I  do  not  retain  them, 
"  because  you  communicate  them  without  regu- 
**  larity.  Reduce  them  to  a  consistent  historical 
*'  summary.  How  could  you  be  better  employed 
*'  in  this  place  ?  And  then,  my  dear  Las  Cases, 
"  you  will  hâve  a  pièce  ready  at  hand  for  your 
"  journal."  It  was  Dido's  demand  of  J^neas,  and 
I  too  might  hâve  exclaimed,   lufandum,    regina, 

jiihes I    executed,    hov^^ever,    the 

sketch  as  completely  as  my  memory  and  judg- 
ment  enabled  me,  for  the  subject  began  to  grow 
stale,  and  I  vv^as,  at  that  time,  very  young.  I 
give  it  as  I  read  it,  a  short  time  afterwards,  to 
Napoléon. 

"  Sire,  after  the  famous  events,  which  over- 
**  threw  the  Bastile,  and  set  ail  France  in  agita- 
*'  tion,  most  of  our  princes,  vsdio  found  themselves 
"  implicated  in  the  conséquences,  fled  from  the 
"  country  with  the  sole  view,  at  that  period,  of 
"  securing  tlieir  personal  safety.  Theywere  soon 
*'  after  joined  by  persons  of  considérable  rank, 
*'  and  by  a  number  of  young  men  ;  the  former, 
*'  induced  by  the  relations  which  they  had  with 
"  them,  and  the  latter  by  a  persuasion,  that  the 
"  measure  of  itself  indicated,  in  some  degree,  a 
*'  striking,  gênerons,  and  decided  devotedness. 
**  When  a  certain  number  were  collected,  the 
**  idea  suggested  itself  of  converting  to  a  political 


96  M  Y    RKSTDF.XCE    M'ITFf  [Atig-. 

end,  that,  which  luitil  tlien,  liad  been  produced 
by  zeal  and  chance  alone.  It  was  thought,  that 
if,  with  the  assistance  of  thèse  junctions,  a  kind 
of  small  power  conld  be  created,  it  might  be 
enabled  to  react,  with  advantage,  on  the  inte- 
rior,  beconie  a  lever  there  to  insurrection,  make 
an  impression  on  the  public  mind,  and  restrain 
popnlar  commotion  ;  while  it  wonld  be,  with- 
out,  a  title  or  pretext  for  appîying-  to  foreign 
powers,  and  claiming  their  attention.  This  was 
the  origin  of  the  émigration  ;  and  it  is  confi- 
dently  stated,  that  this  grand  idea  was  con- 
ceived  by  M.  de  Calonne,  as  he  passed  throngh 
Switzerland,  in  the  suite  of  one  of  our  princes, 
who  was  on  his  way  from  Turin  to  Germany. 
"  The  first  meeting  was  held  at  Worms,  under 
the  Prince  de  Condé.  The  most  celebrated 
was  that  at  Coblentz,  nnder  the  King's  two 
brothers,  one  of  whom  came  from  Italy,  where 
he  had  at  first  found  an  asylum  in  the  court  of 
the  King  of  Sardinia,  his  father-in-law,  and  the 
other  arrived  by  the  way  of  Brussels,  after 
escaping  the  arrests,  which  had  made  a  captive 
of  Louis  XVI.  at  Varennes. 
"  I  was  one  of  tlie  first  who  assembled  at 
Worms.  The  niimber  about  the  prince  was 
scarcely  fifty  when  I  arrived.  In  the  entire 
effervescence  of  youth  and  with  the  first  in- 
spiration of  what  was  noble,  I  hastened  to 
Worms  with  the   most  innocent  simplicity  of 


ISIG.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON'.  97 

"  heart.  My  reading  and  my  prayer  eacli  morn- 
"  ing  consisted  of  a  chapter  of  Bayard.  I  ex- 
**  pected,  on  reaching  Worms,  to  be,  at  the  very 
"  least,  seized  and  embraced  by  so  many  brothers 
**  in  arms  ;  but  to  my  great  surprise,  (and  it  was 
**  my  first  lesson  on  mankind),  instead  of  this  af- 
"  fectionate  réception,  I  and  a  companion  were, 
'*  ail  at  once,  examined  and  observed,  for  the 
"  purpose  of  having  it  ascertained,  that  we  were 
**  notspies.  Wewereafterwardscarefully  sounded 
**  with  regard  to  our  interest,  our  views,  and  the 
"  pretensions  by  which  we  might  hâve  been 
*'  actuated,  and  finally  great  pains  were  taken 
"  to  prove  to  us,  and  to  make  the  prince  perceive, 
**  (and  this  plan  was  renewed  on  every  fresh  ar- 
**  rival),  that  our  numbers  increased  greatly,  and 
"  exceeded,  no  doubt,  already,  the  places  and 
*'  favours  he  had  to  confer.  My  companion  was 
"  so  shocked,  that  he  proposed  to  me  to  return 
"  instantly  to  Paris. 

'•'  We,  who  composed  the  assemblage,  in  ordei* 
*'  to  make  ourselves  useful  or  to  acquire  impor- 
"  tance,  undertook,  three  or  four  of  us  by  turns, 
*'  to  form  a  kind  of  regular  guard  about  the 
"  Prince's  person  night  and  day  ;  for  we  dreamt 
*'  already  but  of  conspiracies  and  assassination, 
**  so  very  powerful  and  redoubtable  did  we  think 
"  ourselves,  and  when  relieved  on  this  kind  of 
**  voluntary  guard,  we  had  the  honour  of  being 
**  admitted  to  the  Prince's  table.     Three  gênera- 

Vol.  m.  Part  V.  u 


98  MY    RESIDENCE    WITII  [Aug. 

tions  of  Coudé  constituted  tlie  glory  of  tlie 
family,  a  singular  circumstance,  whicli  was  re- 
newed  with  a  more  striking  effect  in  tlie  army 
of  Condé,  in  whicli  the  grandfather  fought  in 
the  centre,  while  the  son  and  grandson  com- 
manded  the  right  and  left,  where  they  were,  I 
believe,  both  woimded,  and  on  the  same  day. 
"  The  Princess  of  Monaco  had  followed  the 
Prince  of  Condé;  he  married  her  afterwards, 
but  she  then  governed  and  did  the  honoiirs 
of  his  establishment.  We  had  the  opportunity 
of  hearing  at  that  table,  some  of  the  guests 
assert  and  re-assert  to  the  Prince,  that  we 
were  already  more  than  enough  to  enter  France  ; 
that  his  name  and  a  white  handkerchief  were 
sufficient  ;  that  the  star  of  Condé  was  about  to 
sliine  forth  once  more;  that  the  occasion  was  sin- 
gularly  happy,  and  that  it  was  necessary  to  seize 
iipon  it  ;  and  I  would  not  pledge  myself,  that 
adulation  was  not  pushed  so  far  as  to  suggest 
very  interested  personal  views  to  the  Prince, 
*'  Worms,  from  the  nature  of  its  meeting,  and 
the  character  of  its  chief,  always  evinced  more 
regularity,  more  austerity  of  discipline  than 
Coblentz,  where  there  was  a  display  of  more 
agitation,  luxury,  and  pleasure.  Worms  was 
accordingly  called  the  camp,  and  Coblentz  the 
touii  or  the  court. 

**  The  importance  of  the  leader  was  in  propor- 
tion to  the  force  under  his  command,  and  of 
this  the  Prince  of  Condc  was  so  sensible,  that 


1816.]  T1I«    EMPEROR    XAPOLEON.  99 

"  lie  never  saw  any  one  leave  him  without  re- 
"  gret,  and  remembered  it  a  long  time.  I  was 
"  not,  on  that  account,  the  less  eager  to  go  to 
"  Coblentz,  the  moment  it  acquired  a  certain 
"  degree  of  splendour.  I  liad  relations  and  friends 
"  there,  and  it  was,  besides,  more  attractive  by 
"  greater  magnificence,  activity,  and  grandeur. 
"  Coblentz  became  in  a  short  time  afocus  of  foreign 
"  and  domestic  intrigues.  Two  distinct  parties 
"  might  be  observed  there  ;  MM.  d'Avaray,  de 
"  Jaucourt,  and  some  others,  were  the  confiden- 
"  tial  friends,  the  advisers  or  the  ministers  of 
"  Monsieur,  now  Louis  XVIII.  The  Bishop  of 
"  Arras,  the  Countde  Vaudreuil,  and  others,  were 
"  those  of  Monseigneur,  the  Count  d'Artois  ;  and 
'*  it  was  confidently  stated,  that,  even  then,  thèse 
"  princes  manifested  distinctly  enough  the  same 
"  political  différences  which,  it  is  pretended, 
**  hâve  since  characterized  them.  M,  de  Breteuil-, 
"  résident  at  Brussels,  and  charged,  according 
"  to  his  own  déclaration,  with  unlimited  powers 
*'  by  Louis  XVI.,  had  formed  a  third  party,  and 
"  added  to  the  complication  of  our  affairs. 

"  M.  de  Calonne  was  relied  on  for  our  financial 
"  department,  and  the  old  Marshal  de  Broglie 
*'  and  the  Marshal  de  Castries  were  at  the  head  of 
*'  our  military  establishment.  The  brave  and  able 
"  M.  de  Bouilly,  who  had  left  France  after  the 
"  affair  of  Varennes,  found  it  impossible  to  l'e- 

H  '2 


100  MY    RESIDENCE    WITII  [Aug. 

main  with  us,  and  followed  King  Gustavus  III. 
to  Sweden. 

'*  The  emig-ration  had,  however,  assumed  a 
grand  character,  thanks  to  the  care  employed 
for  its  propagation.  Agents  had  traversed  the 
provinces,  circulars  had  been  distributed  in  the 
mansions  and  coiintry-seats,  siunmoning  every 
gentleman  to  join  the  princes,  and  act  in  co- 
opération with  them  for  the  security  of  the  altar 
and  the  throne,  the  revenge  of  their  honour, 
and  the  recovery  of  their  rights.  An  absolute 
crusadehad  been  preached,  and  with  so  much 
more  effect,  as  it  made  an  impression  on  minds 
disposed  to  attend  to  it.  Among  the  whole  of 
the  nobility  and  privileged  classes  there  was 
not  a  single  person,  who  did  not  feel  himself 
dit  to  the  qnick  by  the  decrees  of  the  assembly. 
Ail,  from  him  who  filled  the  highest  rank  to 
the  lowest  country  squire,  had  been  deprived 
of  what  they  held  most  dear  ;  for  the  former 
had  lost  his  title  and  his  vassals,  and  the  latter 
had  seen  his  turret  and  his  pigeon-house  in- 
sulted,  and  his  hares  shot.  Accordingly,  the 
movement  to  begin  the  journey  was  immédiate 
and  universal  ;  it  could  not  be  abandoned  iinder 
the  penalty  of  dishonour,  and  the  women  were 
directed  to  send  spindles  to  those  who  hesitated, 
or  were  too  tardy.  Whether  then  from  passion, 
pusillanimity,  or  a  point  of  honour,  the  emi- 


1816.]  THE    EMPEIIOK    NAPOLEON.  lOl 

"  gration  became  a  real  infection;  multitudes 
*'  rushed  furiousiy  beyond  the  frontiers  ;  andwhat 
**  contributed  notalittle  to  increase  the  evil,  was 
*'  the  means  employed  by  the  leaders  of'the  revo- 
"  lutiontopromote  it  in  secret,  while  theyaffected 
**  to  oppose  it  in  public.  Tliey  declaimed,  in 
**  vague  terms,  against  it  from  the  tribune,  it  is 
**  true,  but  they  took  great  care  that  ail  the  pas- 
'*  sages  should  be  left  o}>en.  Did  the  zeal  of  the 
"  emigrants  slacken  ?  The  declaimers  became 
**  more  violent,  and  it  was  deeided  that  the  bar- 
**  riers  should  be  strictly  guarded.  Then  those 
'•  who  had  bcen  left  behind  were  reduced  to 
"  despair,  because  they  had  not  taken  advantage 
**  of  the  favourable  moment.  But,  accidentally,' 
**  or  from  inattention,  the  barriers  w^ere  again 
"  opened,  and  they  v/ere  passed  with  eagerness 
**  by  those  who  were  determined  not  to  expose 
*'  themselves  to  another  disappointment.  It  was 
"  by  this  dextrous  management  that  the  assembly 
**  assisted  its  enemies  in  plunging  themselves  into 
"  the  abyss. 

"  The  able  men  of  the  faction  had,  from  the 
"  beginning,  conceived  that  sucli  a  measure 
**  would  deliver  them  from  the  heterogeneous 
"  parties  that  checked  their  progress,  and  that 
"  the  property  of  ail  thèse  voluntary  exiles  would 
**  secure  to  them  incalculable  resources.  The 
*'  officers  thought  they  did  wonders  in  stealing 
"  away  from  their  régiments,  whilç  the  leaders' 


102  MY    RESIDENCE    VITTI  [Ang. 

**  of  the  révolution,  on  their  part,  excited  the 
"  soldiers  to  revolt,  in  order  to  force  them  to  it. 
"  They  got  rid  by  thèse  means,  of  enemies  who 
**  were  liighly  dangerous,  and  obtained,  on  the 
**  contrary,  in  the  non-commissioned  otficers, 
**  zealoiis  co-operators,  who  became  heroes  in  the 
*'  national  cause  ;  it  was  they  who  furnished  great 
**  captains,  and  who  beat  ail  the  vétéran  troops 
**  of  foreign  powers.  . 

"  The  conséquence  was,  thatCoblentz  collected 
*'  ail  that  was  illustrions  belonging  to  the  Court  in 
"  France,  and  ail  that  was  opulent  and  distin- 
'*  guished  belonging  to  the  provinces.  We  were 
"  thousands,  consisting  of  every  branch,  uniform, 
**  and  rank  of  the  army;  we  peopled  the  town 
"  and  overran  the  palace.  Our  daily  assemblages 
*'  about  the  persons  of  the  princes,  seemed  like 
"  so  many  splefldid  festivals.  The  Court  was 
"  most  brilliant,  and  our  princes  were  so  effec- 
*'  tually  its  sovereigns  that  the  poor  Elector  was 
*■'  eclipsed  and  lost  in  the  midst  of  us,  which  in- 
"  duced  a  person  to  observe  to  him,  very  plea- 
"  santly,  one  day,  whether  from  perfect  simpli- 
**  city  or  keen  raillery,  that,  among  ail  those 
"  who  thronged  his  palace,  he  was  the  only 
**  stranger. 

**  During  the  grand  solemnlties,  we  occasionally 
**  had  public  galas  ;  and  the  respectable  inhabit- 
**  ants  were  permitted  to  take  a  view  of  the  tables. 
"  We  then  cxulted  at  witnessing  the  admiration 


181(5.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEONT.  103 

"  expressed  by  the  people  of  the  country  for  the 
**  pleasiiig- countenance  and  chivalroiis  appeai'ance 
"  of  Monseigneur  the  Count  d'Artois,  and  we  were 
"  proud  of  the  homage  paid  by  them  to  the  ac- 
"  quirements  raid  talents  of  Monsieur.  It  was 
'*  worth  while  to  see  with  what  arrogance  we 
"  paraded  with  us,  as  it  were,  the  wdiole  dig- 
"  nity,  the  lustre  of  ourmonarchy,  and,  above  ail, 
"  the  superiority  of  our  sovereign  and  the  ele- 
"  vation  of  our  princes.  His  Alajcsti/  the  King, 
"■  was  the  expression  which  we  pompously  used 
"  in  the  German  circles  to  designate  the  King  of 
*'  France  ;  forthatwas,  or  ought  to  be,  in  our  opi- 
"  nion,  his  title  in  point  of  pre-eminence  with 
*'  respect  to  ail  Europe.  The  Abbé  Maury,  whom 
*'  we  had  at  first  received  with  acclamation,  but 
**  who,  by  the  by,  lost  much  of  our  esteem  in  a 
*'  very  short  time,  had  discovered,  he  assured  us, 
*'  that  such  w-as  his  right  and  his  prérogative. 
"  Shall  I  give  another  instance  of  overweening 
**  pride  and  conceit  ?  ^ 

"  At  a  later  period,  during  our  greatest  disas- 
'*  ters,  and  when  our  cause  was  completely  ruined, 
**  an  Austrian  officer,  of  superior  rank,  charged 
*'  wdthdespatches  for  the  Court  of  London,  invited 
"  to  dinner  several  of  our  officers,  with  whom  he 
**  had  formerly  been  connected  on  the  Continent. 
"  After  dinner,  and  very  near  the  time  when  every 
"  truth  cornes  out,  the  company  began  to  talk  poli- 
*'  tics,  and hehappenedtosay  that,  onhisdeparture 


loi  MV    RESIDENCE    WITH  [Aug. 

fromVienna,  one  of  the  principal  subjects  of  con- 
versation was  the  marriage  of  Madame  Royale 
(now  Duchessd'Angoiileme)  with  the  Archdiike 
Charles,  who  at  that  moment  enjoyed  great 
celebrity.  '  But  it  is  impossible  !'  observed  one 
of  his  French  guests.  *  And  why  V  *  Because 
it  is  not  a  siiitable  marriage  for  Madame.' — 
'How!"  exclaimed  the  Austrian,  serioiisly  of- 
fended,  and  almost  breathless,  '  His  Royal  High- 
ness  ^Monseigneur,  the  Archduke  Charles  !  not 
a  snitable  marriage  for  your  Princess  V  *  Oh  ! 
no,  Sir,  it  wonld  be  but  a  garrison  marriage 
for  her  !' 

"  Besides,  thèse  lofty  pretensions  were  instilled 
into  us  with  our  éducation  ;  they  belonged  to 
us  as  national  sentiments,  and  our  princes  were 
not  exempt  from  them.  AVitli  us  the  King's 
brothers  disdained  the  title  of  Royal  Highness, 
they  had  the  pretension  of  addressing  ail  the 
sovereigns  by  the  title  of  brother  ;  the  rest  of 
the  sysiem  was  carried  on  in  a  proportionate 
way,  and  there  was  accordingly  but  one  feeling 
in  Europe,  against  our  Versailles  manners,  and 
the  presumptiou  of  our  princes. 
"  Gustavus  III.  said,  at  Aix-la-Chapelle — 
*  Your  Court  of  Versailles  was  not  accessible  ;  it 
indulged  too  much  in  haughtiness  and  ridicule. 
When  I  was  there,  there  was  scarcely  any 
attention  paid  to  me,  and,  when  I  left  it,  I 
broiight  away  the  titles  of  boobt/  and  blockhcad.'' 


1816.3  THE    EMPEROR    XAPOLEON'.  105 

'*  The  Duchess  of  Ciimberland,  wlio  was  mar- 
ried  to  the  King  of  England's  brother,  had  to 
complain,  at  the  same  time  and  in  the  sanie  city, 
that  thePnncess  de  Lamballe  did  not  grant  her 
the  honours  of  the  fokiing  doors. 
'*  The  old  Duke  of  Gloiicester  com})lamed,  on 
his  own  account,  at  a  later  period  in  London,  of 
one  of  our  princes  of  the  blood,  and  added, 
that  the  Prince  of  Wales  laughed  heartily,  be- 
cause  he,  the  Prince  of  Wales,  addressing  the 
same  Prince  by  the  title  of  Monseigneur,  the 
latter  studiously  endeavoured  to  model  his  lan- 
guage  so  as  not  to  return  the  compliment. 
"  At  Coblentz,  however,  when  our  circum- 
stances  were  altered,  our  princes  condescended 
to  change  their  manners  in  that  respect,  and  to 
let  themselves  down  to  the  level  of  the  foreign 
princes.  They  were  then  with  the  Elector  of 
Trêves,  a  Prince  of  Saxony,  their  mother's 
brother,  whom,  by  way  of  parenthesis,  we  were 
at  that  time  eating  up,  and  who  was  afterwards 
deprived  of  his  possessions  on  our  account. 
They  condescended  to  call  him  their  inicic,  and 
he  was  allowed  to  call  them  his  nepheics.  It  is 
confidently  stated  that  he  said  to  them  one  day, 
'  It  is  to  your  misfortunes  that  I  am  indebted  for 
such  atiectionate  expressions  ;  at  Versailles  you 
would  hâve  treated  me  as  plain  M.  TAbbc,  and 
it  is  not  certain  that  you  would  hâve  received 
my  visits  every  day.'     It  was  added,   that  he 


106  MY    RESTDEXCi:    -WITII  [Aug. 

*'  spoke  the  truth,  and  that  they  had  given  me- 
**  lancholy  proofs  of  it  to  his  brother,  the  Count 
"  de  Liizace,  who  was  présent. 

**  The  princes  generally  passed  thcir  evcnings 
"  in  the  company  of  their  intimate  friends.  One 
"  of  them  was,  most  of  the  time,  at  the  house  of 
"  Madame  de  Polastron,  to  whom  he  paid  at- 
'<*  tentions  that  were  justified  by  her  constancy 
'*  and  her  behaviour.  Fréquent  attempts  were 
"  made  to  destroy  the  intimacy,  but  in  vain,  for 
*'  Madame  de  Polastron  was  above  ail  the  cabals 
"  employed  for  the  purpose  ;  and,  in  addition  to 
"  her  amiable  manners  and  excellent  conduct, 
*'  was  completely  disinterested,  and  carefully 
**  avoided  ail  interférence  in  political  affairs.  She 
**  saw  but  very  little  company.  I  was  indebted 
**  to  a  female  relative  for  the  pleasure  of  being- 
**  admittcd  to  it  ;  but,  as  it  was  necessary  to  with- 
"  draw  before  the  prince's  arrivai,  Ineverhad  the 
**  honour  of  seeing-  him  there. 

"  Monsieur  passed  his  evenings  at  Madame  de 
**  Balby's,  dame  d'atours  to  IMadame.  Madame 
'*  de  Balby,  who  was  lively,  witty,  a  warm  friend 
**  and  a  determined  enemy,  attracted  ail  the  most 
**  distinguished  characters.  It  was  an  honour  to 
**  be  admitted  to  her  house,  which  was  the  centre 
**  of  taste  and  fashion.  Monsieur  sometimes  re- 
**  mained  thcre  until  a  latehour;  and  when,  after 
*'  the  crowd  had  slipped  away  and  the  circle  was 
"  contracted,  he  happened  to  be  communicative, 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON.  lOT 

;*  it  must  be  cQufessed  that  he  was  as  superior  to 
us  by  the  charms  of  his  conversation  as  by  his 
rank  and  dignity. 
*'  So  miicli  for  oiir  manner  of  living   and   our 

*  ontward  appearance  at  Coblentz  ;  this  was  the 
'  fair  side  of  our  situation  ;  but  we  Avere  less 
'  happy  in  a  political  point  of  view — that  was  the 

*  degrading  side." 

**  Good  !"  said  the  Emperor,  *' I  accordingly 
'  begin  to  find  your  drawing-room  détails  too 
'  long.      This   is,    however,    excusable  in   you. 

*  The  subject  is  a  pleasing  one  to  you.  You  were 

*  then  young  ;  but  go  on." 

*'  Sire,  the  whole  of  our  number  was  but  a 
'  noble  and  brilliant  mob,  and  presented  the 
'  image  of  complète  confusion.     It  was  anarchy 

*  striving  without,  to  establish,  it  was  said,  order 
'  within — a  real  democracy  struggling  for  the  re- 
'  establishment  of  its  aristocracy.  We  presented, 

*  on  a  small  scale,  and  merely  with  a  few  shades 

*  of  différence,    a    copy   of   every    thing    that 

*  was  passing  in  France.  We  had  among  us 
'  zealous  adhérents  to  our  ancient  forms,  and 
'  ardent  admirers  of  novelty  ;  we  had  our  con- 

*  stitutionalists,  our  intolérants,  and  our  mode- 
'  rates.      We  had  our  empirics,  who  sincerely 

*  regretted  that  they  had  not  made  themselves 
'  masters  of  the  King's  person,  for  the  purpose  of 

*  acting  with  violence  in  his  name,  or  who  frankly 

*  avowed  that  they   entertained   the   design   of 


108  M  y    RESIDEXCE    AVITH  [Aug, 

declaring  his  incapability.  Finally,  we  had  also 
our  jacobins,  who  Avished,  on  their  return,  to 
kill,  to  burn,  to  destroy  every  thing-,  &c.  kc. 
"  No  direct  aiithority  was  exercised  over  the 
multitude  by  our  princes. — They  were  our  so- 
vereigns,  it  was  true,  but  we  were  very  unruly 
subjects,  and  very  easily  irritated.  We  mur- 
mured  on  every  occasion,  and  it  was  particu- 
larly  against  tliose  who  joined  us  last  that  our 
comnion  fury  was  directed.  It  was,  we  de- 
clared,  so  much  glory  and  good  fortune  of 
which  they  deprived  our  exploits  and  our 
hopes.  Those  who  were  once  admitted  con- 
sidered  every  subséquent  arrivai  too  late.  It 
was  maintained,  that  ail  nierit  on  that  score  was 
at  an  end.  If  ail  were  continued  to  be  received 
in  the  same  way,  the  whole  of  France  would 
soon  be  on  our  side,  and  there  would  no  longer 
be  any  person  to  punish,  c^'c.  «Sec. 
"  Denunciations  of  every  kind,  and  from  every 
quarter,  were  then  showered  down  upon  those 
who  joined  us.  AFrificc  de  Sai/it-J laurier,  son 
of  the  Prince  de  Montbarey,  found  it  impossible 
to  resist  the  storm,  although  he  had  the  formai 
support  of  every  distinguished  character,  and 
that  of  the  prince  himself,  who  deigned  to 
employ  supplication  in  his  favour,  and  said, 
'Alas!  gentlemen,  who  is  there  that  has  not 
faults  to  reproach  himself  with  in  the  révolu- 
tion?   1  hâve  been  guilty  of  several,  and  by 


1816.]  THE    EMPEnOR    XAPOLEOX.  109 

**  your  oblivion  of  them,  you  hâve  given  me  the 
**  right  of  interceding  for  others.'  Tins  did  not 
*'  spare  M.  de  Saint-Maurice  the  necessity  of  mak- 
*'  ing  his  escape  as  soon  as  possible.  His  crime 
"  was  that  of  havingbelonged  to  the  society  of  the 
*'  friends  of  the  negroes,  and  of  having  been  vio- 
"  lently  attacked  in  the  midst  of  us  by  a  gentle- 
**  man  of  Franche  Comté,  who  denounced  M.  de 
*'  Saint-Maurice  for  having  caused  his  mansions 
*'  to  be  burnt.  Itwas,  how^ever,  discovered,  afew 
*'  days  afterwards,  that  the  brawling  assailanthad 
**  no  mansion,  and  was  neitherfrom  Franche  Comté, 
**  nor  a  oentleman  :  he  vt'as  a  mère  adventurer. 

*'  M.  de  Ca.zalès,  who  had  filled  France  and 
"  Europe  with  the  celebrity  of  his  éloquence  and 
**  courage  in  the  national  assembly,  had,  notwith- 
'*  standing,  lost  the  popular  favour  at  Coblentz. 
*'  When  he  arrived  at  Paris,  a  report  was  spread 
*'  among  us,  that  the  princes  would  not  see  him, 
"  or  would  give  him  an  ungracious  réception. 
*'  We  collected  eighty  natives  of  Languedoc  to 
"  be,  in  opposition  to  his  own  wislies,  a  kind  of 
**  escort  to  him.  M.  de  Cazalès  was  the  honour 
"  of  our  province  ;  we  conducted  him  to  the 
*'  princes,  by  whom  he  was  well  received. 

"  A  deputy  of  the  third  estate  who  had  highly 
**  distinguished  himself  in  the  constituent  assem- 
"  bly  by  his  attachment  to  royalty,  was  among 
*'  us.  One  of  our  princes,  addressing  him  one 
*•  day  in  the  crowd,  said,   '  But,  Sir,  explain  to 


110  M  Y    RESIDENCE    WITII  [Aug'. 

me  then.  — Yoii  are  so  wortliy  a  man,  liow  coiild 
you,  at  the  time,  take  the  oath  of  t\\e  Jeu  de 
paume?'  The  deputy,  struck  clumb  by  the 
attack,  at  first  stammered  ont,  that  he  had  been 
taken  unawares  ....  that  he  did  not  foresee 
the  fatal  conséquences  ....  :  But  promptly 
recovering  himself,  he  repliedwith  vivacity  :  'I 
shall,  however,  observe  to  Monseigneur,  that 
it  was  not  that  which  led  to  the  ruin  of  the 
French  monarchy,  but  in  fact  the  union  of 
the  nobility,  which  joined  us  in  conséquence 
of  the  very  persuasive  letter  written  by  Mon- 
seigneur.'— *  Stop  there,'  exclaimed  the  prince, 
touching  him  gently  on  the  stomach,  '  be  cool, 
my  dear  Sir  ;  I  did  not  intend  to  vex  you  by 
that  question.' 

"  Something  like  a  System  of  regularity,  whe- 
ther  good  or  bad  was,  however,  adopted  in  the 
course  of  time.  We  were  classed  by  corps 
and  by  provinces;  we  had  cantonments  as- 
signed  to  us,  and  were  supplied  with  arms. 
The  king's  body-guards  were  again  formed, 
clothed,  equipped,  and  paid,  and  soon  became 
a  superb  corps  in  appearance  and  discipline. 
The  coalition  of  Auvergne  and  the  marine  corps, 
part  on  foot  and  part  on  horseback,  attracted 
peculiar  notice  by  its  discipline,  knowledge, 
and  union.  Our  résignation  and  self-denial 
could  not  be  too  much  admired.  Each  officer 
was  henceforth  but  aprivate  soldier,  subject  to 


181G.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEOX.  111 

exercises  and  fatigues,  very  contrary  to  liis 
former  maiiner  of  life,  and  exposed  to  tlie 
greatest  privations,  for  tliere  was  no  pay,  and 
many  of  tliat  number  had  shortly  no  resource 
to  dépend  on,  but  the  contributions  of  their 
more  fortunate  comrades.  \Ve  deserved  a  bet- 
ter  fate,  or  to  speak  more  correctly,  \ve  were 
worthy  of  a  better  enterprize.  Ail  the  officers 
belonging  to  the  same  régiments  had  been  col- 
lected  together  in  separate  bodies,  in  order  that 
they  might  be  ready  to  take  the  command  of 
their  soldiers,  who  would  not  fail  to  join  them, 
as  we  thought,  on  their  first  seeing  them.  Such 
was  our  delusion  !  It  was  from  a  similar  motive, 
that  the  gentlemen  were  classed  according  to 
their  respective  provinces,  no  doubt  being  en- 
tertained  of  their  efficient  influence  over  the 
mass  of  the  population.  Our  weakness  con- 
sisted  in  the  conviction  that  we  continued  to 
be  desired,  respected,  and  adored. 
"  AU  thèse  bodies  were  publicly  exercised  and 
manœuvred,  and  the  diplomatie  remonstrances 
wliich  were  made  on  the  subject  were  an- 
swered  with  a  confident  assurance,  that  no 
such  thing  existed,  or  that  it  certainly  should 
be  prevented.  We  had  gênerais  nominated, 
a  staff  formed,  and  every  thing,  which  dis- 
•  tinguishes  head  quarters,  even  to  the  office 
'  of  grand  provost,  arranged.  Our  princes 
'  were  gradually  surrounded  with  ail   that  cou- 


IH  MV    RESIDENCE    M'ITII  [Aug. 

"  stitutes  a  real  government.  They  had  minis- 
"  ters  for  tlie  affairs  of  the  moment,  and  even 
**  for  France,  when  we  should  return,  so  certain 
*'  and  near  at  hand  did  that  time  appear. 

"  M.  de  Lavilleurnois,  who  was  afterwards  so 
"  much  talked  of,  witli  respect  to  the  share  lie  liad 
"  in  a  royalist  conspiracy,  and  who  died  atSinna- 
*'  mary,  in  conséquence  of  the  events  of  Fructidor, 
*'  was  intrusted  with  the  administration  of  the 
"  police.  He  set  off  at  an  early  period  to  perform 
"  its  duties  clandestinely  at  Paris.  He  had  con- 
*'  ceived  a  sincère  affection  forme,  and  was  deter- 
"  minedto  make  me  his  son-in-law.  He  made  use 
**  of  the  most  urgent  arguments  to  induce  me  to 
*'  foUowhim;  but  I  refused:  I  disliked  the  nature 
"  of  his  office.  Otherwise,  what  différent  com- 
**  binations  in  my  destiny  ! 

"  We  had  also  direct  relations  with  almost  every 
*'  court.  The  princes  had  envoys  at  them,  and 
"  received  theirs  at  Coblentz.  Monseigneur,  the 
**  Count  d'Artois,  visited,  I  think,  Vienna,  but  I 
"  can  state  with  certainty  that  he  was  at  Pilnitz. 
*' The  nobility,  in  abody,  addressed  a  letter  to 
"  Catherine,  from  whom  we  received  M.  de 
*'  Romansoff  as  ambassador.  That  Empress  saw, 
"  with  pleasure,  the  storm  that  was  rising  in 
*'  the  south  of  Europe  ;  she  dieerfully  augmented 
"  a  conflagration,  which  might  prove  very  favour- 
*' able  to  her  views,  without  putting  her  to  any 
*'  expense,  and  she  accordingly  shewcd  herself 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON.  113 

"  zealous  in  her  sentiments,  and  ardent  in  her 
"  promises.  She  did  not  despair,  in  that  crisis, 
"  of  making  a  dupe  of  Gustavus  III.,  wliose  con- 
**  tiguous  activity  was  troublesome  to  her  ;  she 
**  had  prevailed  upon  him,  it  is  said,  to  undertake 
"  the  crusade,  by  flattering  him  with  the  rank 
"  of  generalissimo.  I  do  not  know  if  this 
"  prince,  who  certainly  was  a  very  superior  cha- 
*'  racter  for  his  time,  and  possessed  a  great  share 
"  of  understanding  and  talent,  suftered  himself  to 
"  be  deluded  by  her.  It  is,  however,  undeniable, 
"  that  he  displayed  great  attachmentto  our  cause, 
"  and  announced  his  wish  to  take  the  field  in 
"  person.  When  he  left  Aix  la  Chapelle  to  ar- 
"  range  his  ultimate  measures  for  that  purpose  in 
*'  Sweden,  I  heard  him  say,  on  taking  leave  of 
"  the  Princess  de  Lamballe,  '  Y  ou  will  see  me 
"  again  shortly,  but  I  am,  notwithstanding, 
**  obliged,  on  my  own  account,  to  adhère  to  cer- 
*'  tainproceedings,  to  certain  measures  of  caution  ; 
**  for  the  part  Ihave  to  play  is  of  a  very  délicate 
"  nature.  Know,  that  I  who  am  désirons  of  re- 
*'  turning  to  fight  at  the  head  of  your  aristocrats 
"  in  France,  am,  at  home,  the  first  democrat  of 
*'  thecountry.' 

**  We  also  received  envoys  from  Louis  XVI., 
**  who  presented  public  messages  in  réprobation 
*'  of  our  conduct,  andwere  admitted  to  confiden- 
"  tial  conférences,  on  subjects,  perhaps,  essen- 
**  tially  différent.     At  least  we  acted  as  if  that 

Vol.  III.  Part  V.  i 


114  MY    RESIDENCE    WITII  [Aug. 

"  had  been  the  case;  openly  declaring  that  lie 
*'  was  a  captive,  and  tliat  we  oiight  to  take  no 
**  notice  of  any  of  his  orders  ;  that  we  were  bound 
*'  to  take  every  thing  lie  was  compelled  to  say  in 
*'  a  contrary  sensé,  and  that,  when  he  exhorted 
**  us  to  peace,  he  was,  in  reality,  calling  upon  us 
'*  to  go  to  war.  It  is  accordingly  my  opinion, 
*'  that  we  were  very  fatal  to  the  tranquillity  of  the 
**  unfortunate  monarch,  and  that  we  had  our 
**  spécial  share  in  the  pardon,  which  he  be- 
"  queathed  by  his  will  in  favour  of  his  friends, 
**  who,  by  an  indiscreet  zeal,  as  he  observes,  did 
*'  him  so  much  injury. 

*'  Our  émigration,  however,  was  prolonged  in 
**  spite  of  ail  the  promises  which  were  made  to 
**  us,  and  of  ail  the  hopes  with  which  our  fancy 
'*  was  flattered.  AVith  wliat  illusions,  what  idle 
**  taies,  what  absurdities  was  our  impatience 
*'  mocked  !  whether  those  who  invented  them 
**  anticipated  our  disappointment,  or  were  them- 

selves  deceived.  It  was  pleasantly  calculated 
*'  that,  according  to  our  letters  and  gazettes,  we 
**  had,  in  lessthan  eighteen  months,  raised  nearly 
"  two  millions  of  men,  who  were  on  their  mardi, 
*'  although  we  ourselves  had  seen  none  of  them. 
"  But  those  initiated  in  the  mystery,  assured  us, 
**  in  spécial  confidence  that  thèse  troops  marche d 
"  only  by  night,  for  the  purpose  of  more  effectually 
**  surprising  the  democrats,  or  that  they  passed 
'*  in  the  day-time  only  by  platoons  and  without 


1816]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON.  115 

"  uniform  ;  or  told  us  some  otlier  story  of  a 
"  similar  kind.  On  the  other  hand,  we  sliewed 
"  each  other  aheap  of  letters  from  ail  countries 
"  and  the  best  sources,  written  in  an  enigmatical 
"  style,  and  which  were  thought  to  be  intel- 
"  ligible  to  us  alone.  One  was  acquainted  that 
"50,000  Bohemian  crystals  had  beenjust  sent 
"  off  for  his  country  ;  another  was  informed  of  an 
"  approaching  consig-nment  of  10,000  pièces  of 
"  Saxon  porcelain;  and  a  third  received  intelli- 
"  gence,  that  25,000  baies  of  cocoa  would  be  ad- 
"  dressedto  him,  with  other  fooleries  of  the  same 
*'  kind. 

"  How  was  it  possible,  I  now  enquire,  that 
"  men  of  understanding,  for  there  certainly  were 
"  a  great  many  among  the  number,  that  ancient 
"  ministers,  who  had  governed  us,  and  others, 
"  who  were  destined  to  succeed  them,  should  be 
"  gulled  by  such  wretched  stuff,  or  that  the  plain 
*'  good  sensé,  which  we  possessed  as  a  multitude, 
"  did  not  make  us  laugh  in  their  faces?  But  no; 
"  we  were  not  the  less  convinced,  that  we  were 
"  near  the  accomplishment  of  our  hopes;  that  the 
*'  moment  was  at  hand,  that  it  would  infallibly 
''happen;  that  we  had  only  to  show  ourselves  ; 
**  that  we  were  eagerly  expected,  and  that  ali 
■'  would  fall  prostrate  atour  feet." 

Hère  the  Emperor,  who  had  often  interrupted  me 
with  laughter  and  raillery,  said,  in  a  very  serions 
tone,  **How  very  faithful  is  the  picture  you  Iiave 

12 


116  MY    RESIDENCE    W'ITU  [Aug. 

**  drawn?  I  recognise  a  crowd  of  your  friends  in 
"  it  :  Tnily,  my  dear  Las  Cases,  and  I  say  it 
**  without  meaning-  any  ofFence  to  you,  vapoiir- 
"  ing,  credulity,  inconsistency,  stupidity  itself, 
**  might  be  said,  in  spite  of  ail  their  wit,  to 
*'  be  their  spécial  lot.  When  I  occasionally 
"  wished  to  be  amused,  and  divested  myselfof 
**  ail  reserve,  for  the  purpose  of  giving  them  full 
*'  scope,  and  encouraging  their  confidence  in  me, 
**  I  hâve  heard,  in  the  Tuileries,  under  the  Con- 
"  sulate  and  the  Empire,  things  no  less  ridicii- 
**  lous  than  those  which  you  now  notice.  None 
"  of  them  ever  entertained  a  doubt  of  any  thing. 
"  The  love  of  the  French  for  their  kings  was  cen- 
*'  tered,  they  assuredme,  in  my  person.  I  could 
"  henceforth  do  what  I  pleased  ;  I  had  a  right  to 
**  use  my  power  ;  I  should  never  meet  with  any 
"  other  obstacle  but  a  handful  of  incorrigible  per- 
**  sons  who  were  the  detestation  of  ail.  That 
**  counter-revolution  so  much  dreaded,  observed 
*'  another,  was  but  child's  play  to  me  ;  I  had 
**  effected  it  with  the  utmost  ease.  And  (will 
**  this  be  believed?)  '  the  only  thing  wanting  to 
**  it,'  said  he,  in  an  insinuating  tone,  '  is  the  sub- 
**  stitution  of  the  ancient  white  colour,  for  those 
*'  which  hâve  donc  us  so  much  injury  in  ail 
*'  countries.'  The  ideot!  That  was  the  only 
•*  blot,  which  he  could  find  in  our  escutcheon. 
**  I  laughed  our  of  sheerpity,  although  I  felt  some 
'*  difficulty  in  restraining  my  feelings,  but  for  his 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR    XAPOLEON'.  117 

**  part,  his  sincerity  was  iinquestionable  ;  he  was 
**  fully  persuaded,  that  he  spoke  as  I  thought; 
**  and  still  more  so,  that  the  generality  thought 
**  as  he  did.*     But  go  on." 

"  The  appearance  of  the  Duke  of  Brunswick  at 

*  It  is  certainly  un  inhérent  weakness  in  our  nature  to  deceive 
ourselves  with  respect  to  the  sentiments  that  are  entertained  of 
us  by  othcrs.       At  Coblentz,   where  we   threw  away  so  much 
money,  •where  so  many  anniable  and  brilliant  young  men,  more  to 
be  dreaded,  no  doubt,  from  an  excess  than  a  want  of  éducation, 
tilled  every   house,  and  visited   e\  ery   family,  it  was  natural  to 
belleve  that  we  should  be  bcloved,  and  accordingly  we  thought 
ourselves  adored.     Well  !  at  the  time  of  my  exile  at  the  Cape 
of  Good  Hope,  I  was  placed  by  a  singular  chance  under  the 
guard  of  an    inhabitant  of  Coblentz,   who  had  Tvitnessed  the 
brilliant  moments  of  our  émigration.      1  felt  great  pleasure  in 
renewing  the  subject  with  liim.     We  could  not  hâve  any  secrets 
on  that  head  to  couceal  from  one  another  ;  twenty-iive  years 
h,id   elapsed.      Well,  then,   "  you  were  not  absolutely  hated," 
said  he,  ''  but  our  real  affection  was  reserved  for  your  adver- 
''  saries,   for  their  cause   was   ours.       Liberty  had    slipped    in 
"  amongus  through  you.     Tliere  in  the  midst  of  you,  even  un- 
"  der  your  eyes,  we  had  formed  clubs,  and  God  knows  how  ofteii 
"  we  laughed  in  them  at  your  expense,  &c,  &c."     And  it  hap- 
pened  to  hini   u)ore  than   once,  he  assuied  me,  when  mngled 
with    the    crowd,  which  resounded  with   acclamations  ai  we 
passed,  to  shout  with  a  considérable  number  of  his  comrades, 
"  Long  live  the  French  princes,  and  may  they  drink  a  little  in 
"  the  Rhine  !  You  spoke  of  the  réception  we  gave  you,"  said  he, 
"  it  was  that  which  we  gave  to  Cu^tine  which  you  should  hâve 
"  seen  !    There  yon  would   hâve  had  an  opportunity  of  appre- 
"  ciating  our  real  sentiment?.    We  ra  i  with  enthusiasm  to  meet 
"  him  ;  we  crowne.l  his  soldiersj  a  great  number  of  us  enlisted 
"  in  his   army,  and  several  of  them  became  gênerais.     As  for 
"  me,  I  n:issed  tha  opportur  i!y  of  making  my  fortune." 


118  MY    RESIDENCE    WITII  l-^Ug. 

*'  Coblentz,  and  the  arrivai  oftheKing  of  Prussia 
"atthe  head  of  his  troops,  were  great  subjects 
**  of  joy  and  expectation  for  the  wliole  of  the  emi- 
*' gration.  Heaven  opens  at  length  before  us! 
*'  Avas  our  exclamation,  and  \ve  are  aboiit  to  re- 
*'  tiirn  to  the  land  of  promise.  Itwas,  however, 
**  the  opinion  of  persons  of  judgment  and  expe- 
"  rience  from  the  beginning,  that  our  struggle 
**  would  hâve  the  same  resuit  as  ail  those  that 
*'  resembled  it  in  history,  and  that  we  should  be 
**  but  instruments  and  pretexts  for  foreigners,  who 
*'  only  pursued  their  private  interest,  and  enter- 
*'  tained  no  feeling  for  us. 

"  M.  de  Cazales,  who  had,  in  a  short  time, 
"  been  much  improved,  expressed  himself  to 
*'  that  effect  with  much  energy.  We  beheld, 
**  with  delight,  the  Prussians,  as  they  filed  ofF 
**  through  the  streets  of  Coblentz,  on  their  march 
**  to  our  frontiers.  '  Foolish  boys,'  lie  exclaimed, 
"  you  admire,  with  enthusiasm,  those  troops  and 
"  ail  their  train.  You  rejoice  at  their  march  ;  you 
*'  ought  rather  to  shudder  at  it.  For  my  own 
*'  part,  I  should  M'ish  to  see  thèse  soldiers,  to  the 
**  last  man  of  them,  plunged  in  the  Rhine.  Un- 
"  happy  are  they  who  incite  foreigners  to  in- 
*' vade  their  country!  O  my  friends,  the  French 
*'  nobiiity  will  not  survive  this  atrocity  !  They 
*'  will  hâve  the  affliction  of  expiring  far  frora  the 
•*  places  of  their  birth.  1  am  more  guilty  than  any 
*'  other,  for  I  see  it,  and  vet  I  act  like  ail  the  rest; 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON.  119 

but  my  only  excuse  is,  that  I  cannot  prevent 
the  catastrophe.  I  repeat,  unhappy  they  who 
call  in  foreigners,  and  trust  in  them  against  their 
country.' 

"  How  wise  and  oracular  thèse  last  words! 
Facts  would  hâve  speedily  convinced  us  of 
their  truth,  had  we  been  less  infatuated,  or  had 
the  multitude  been  capable  of  reasoning  and 
acting  with  propriety  ;  but  we  were  destined 
to  enrich  history  with  one  of  those  lessons, 
that  are  most  entitled  to  the  méditation  of 
mankind.  We  might  be  estimated  at  20  or 
25,000  men  under  arms;  and  certainly,  such 
a  force  filled  with  ardour  and  dévotion,  fiditins: 
for  its  own  interests,  maintaining  an  under- 
standing  with  the  sympathetic  éléments  of  the 
interior,  acting  against  a  nation,  shaken  to  its 
foundation,  and  convulsed  by  the  agitation  of 
new  rights,  not  yet  established,  and  but  imper- 
fectly  understood,  might  be  capable  of  striking 
décisive  blows.  But  it  was  not  upon  our 
strength,  our  success,  our  activity,  that  the 
foreigners  relied  for  the  attainment  of  their 
views.  Accordingly,  under  the  pretence  of 
employing  that  influence  and  of  directing  its 
opération,  as  they  said,  against  several  points 
at  once,  they  annihilated  us  by  parcelling  ont  our 
numbers,  and  by  making,  as  it  were,  prisoners  of 
us  in  the  middle  of  their  différent  corps.  In  this 
way,  6,000  of  us,  under  the  Prince  of  Condé, 


120  MY    RESIDENCE    WITII  [Aug. 

"  were  marched  against  Alsace  ;  4,000  under  the 
"  Duke  de  Bourbon  were  to  act  in  Flanders,  and 
**  from  12  to  15,000  continued  in  the  centre  under 
"  command  of  the  King's  two  brothers,  to  co- 
*'  operate  in  the  invasion  of  Champagne. 

**  It  had  been  the  plan  and  wish  of  our  princes, 
•*  that  Monsieur,  as  heir  to  the  crown  and  the 
"  natural  représentative  of  Louis  XVI.,  con- 
"  sidering  his  captivity,  should  proclaim  himself 
**  régent  of  the  kingdom,  the  moment  he  set  foot 
"  on  the  French  territory;  that  he  should  mardi 
•*  with  his  emigrants  at  the  head  of  the  expe- 
'*  dition,  and  that  the  allies,  in  his  rear,  should 
"  be  considered  only  as  our  auxiliaries.  But  the 
"  allies  treated  the  plan  with  dérision,  and  con- 
**  fined  us  to  a  station  at  their  tail,  under  the 
"  orders  and  at  the  will  and  pleasure  of  the 
**  generalissimo,  Brunswick,  who  caused  us  to 
''  be  precededby  the  most  absurd  of  manifestoes; 
"  from  the  ridicule  and  odium  of  which,  how- 
'*  ever,  he  at  least  preserved  us. 

*'  It  is  but  just,  however,  to  acknowledge,  that 
**  this  treatment  had  not  escaped  the  foresight  of 
**  some  experienced  and  better  advised  heads 
**  among  us.  They  had  accordingly  suggested, 
*'  it  was  said,  in  the  council  of  the  princes,  that 
**  we  should  throw  ourselves,  before  the  arrivai 
*'  of  the  allies,  on  some  point  of  France  and 
*'  maintain  a  civil  war  there  by  ourselves.  Others 
"  more  desperate,  or  more  ardent,  were  of  opi- 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEOX.  121 

**  nion,  that  we  shoiild  nobly  seize  upon  the 
**  States  of  the  Elector  of  Trêves,  oiir  bene- 
**factor;  occupy  the  town  and  fortress  of 
"  Coblentz,  and  establish  there  a  central  point 
**  of  rallying-,  or  of  support,  independent  of  the 
**  Germanie  body;  and  when  we  exclaimed 
**  against  such  perfidy  and  ingratitude,  their 
**  answer  was; — '  Desperate  evils  called  for  des- 
**  perate  remédies.'  It  is  impossible  to  say,  what 
**  might  hâve  been  the  resuit  of  such  reso- 
**  lutions,  which  were,  however,  more  consistent 
"  with  the  bold  spirit  of  enterprize  that  cha- 
"  racterizes  the  présent  times,  than  with  the 
"  state  of  manners  as  they  then  existed.  They 
"  were,  therefore,  unattended  to,  and  besides  the 
"  opportunity  had  slipped  by,  we  were  too 
*'  closely  involved  in  the  midst  of  foreigners  ;  we 
'*  were  already  in  their  power,  and  our  destiny 
*'  was  to  be  fulfilled  !  .   .   . 

"  The  multitude  of  us  was  far  from  foresee- 
*'  ing  the  calamities,  that  were  to  attend  us. 
**  We  began  our  march  in  high  spirits.  There 
"  was  not  one  of  us,  who  did  not  expect  to  be, 
*'  within  fifteen  days  from  that  moment,  at 
"  home,  triumphant  in  the  midst  of  his  sub- 
"  missive,  humiliated  and  increased  vassals.  Our 
*'  confidence  would  not  hâve  endured  a  single  ob- 
**  servation  or  doubt  upon  that  head.  Of  this 
*'  I  am  about  to  o-ive  an  instance,  which  though 
**  Personal   with   respect    to   myself,    and   very 


122  MY    RESIDENCE    WITII  [Aug. 

trifling  in  itself,  will  not  be  the  less  characte- 
ristic  with  respect  to  us  ail.  We  were  marching 
through  the  city  of  Trêves  ;  one  of  my  grand 
uncles  had,  during  the  war  of  the  succession, 
been  the  governor  for  Louis  XIV.  while  we  re- 
tained  possession  of  it.  I  went  to  see  his  tomb, 
which  is  in  a  chapel,  belonging  to  the  Carthu- 
sians  of  that  town.  The  ardour  of  my  youth 
and  the  émotion  of  the  moment,  determined 
me  to  erect  a  small  monument  to  his  memory 
with  a  superb  inscription,  suitable  to  the  cir- 
cumstances.  I  entertained  no  doubt  of  exe- 
cuting  my  wish.  The  good  friars  were  of  a 
différent  way  of  thinking  ;  the  prior  wished  me 
to  arrange  the  matter  with  the  abbé,  a  kind 
of  bishop,  and  of  German  bishop.,  His  reserve 
and  coldness,  in  spite  of  his  numerous  coats  of 
arms,  prepossessed  me  very  much  against  him, 
when  I  communicated  my  chivalrous  project  ; 
but  when,  after  some  circumlocution,  he  de- 
clared,  that  under  the  présent  circumstances  .  .  . 
prudence  .  .  .  discrétion  ...  if  the  French 
were  to  enter  the  place.  ...  At  thèse  last 
words,  my  indignation  was  extrême  ;  it  was 
such,  that  I  did  not  wait  to  utter  a  single 
Word  in  reply.  I  instantly  hurried  away, 
with  a  mingled  laugh  of  contempt  and  anger, 
convinced  that  I  had  left  the  most  horrible 
jacobin  in  existence  behind  me  ;  and  nothing, 
but   my  natural  generosity    and   respect    for 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEOX.  123 

"  my  oM^i  character,  could  hâve  prevented  me 
*'  calling  in  my  comrades,  who  would  hâve  cer- 
**  taiiily  pulled  down  the  chapel.  But  alas! 
**  the  abbot  saw  farther  than  I  did  !  Three 
"  weeks  had  not  elapsed,  before  the  republicans 
*'  were  in  Trêves,  the  poor  abbé  put  to  flight, 
"  and  the  ashes  of  my  good  uncle  profaned  by 
"  the  inlidels. 

"  But  we  had  scarcely  engaged  in  full  oper- 
*'  ations;  we  had  hardly  set  foot  on  French 
**  ground  ;  before  it  became  no  diliicult  matter, 
"  except  in  cases  of  stupidity  ajid  blindness,  to 
*'  comprehend,  that  it  actually  might  be  just 
"  possible,  that  we  had  been  the  dupes  of  our 
*'  own  folly.  We  found  ourselves  in  the  midst 
*'  of  the  Prussians,  who  fettered  ail  our  move- 
**  ments  ;  we  could  not  take  a  step  in  advance, 
*'  to  the  right  or  left,  without  their  permission, 
*'  and  they  never  granted  it.  Our  subsistence, 
'•  ail  our  resources,  depended  solely  upon  their 
"will;  we  had  the  shame  of  presenting  our- 
'*  selves  as  slaves  on  the  soil,  where  we  aspired 
**  to  reign. 

■'  As  to  our  countrymen,  instead  of  receiv- 
*'  ing  us  as  their  deliverers,  as  we  had  been 
**  convinced  they  would,  they  only  gave  us  proofs 
*'  of  dislike  and  aversion.  With  the  exception 
"  of  a  few  country  gentlemen  or  others  who 
"  joined  us,  the  whole  mass  of  the  population 
**  fled  at  our  approach  ;   we  were  treated  as  ene- 


124  MY    RESIDENCE    M'ITII  [Aug. 

mies,  with  the  look  of  reproach  and  the  stern 
silence  of  réprobation.  They  seemed  to  say  to 
us,  *  Do  yoii  not  shiidder  then  at  thus  staining 
yoiir  country's  soil  ?  Are  you  not  Frenchmen 
by  birth  ?  Do  your  hearts  then  make  no  appeal 
to  you  in  favour  of  your  native  land  ?  You  say 
you  are  wronged  ;  but  what  wrong,  what  in- 
jury  ever  gave  to  a  son  the  right  or  the  feeling 
to  tear  open  the  bosom  of  a  mother  ?  .  .  .  We 
are  told,  that  in  ancient  times  a  fiery  patrician, 
Coriolanus,  was  infamous  enough  to  fight 
against  his  country,  but  he  had  at  least  the 
merit  of  uniting  elevated  sentiments  with  his 
furious  passion  ;  he  came  forward  with  a  vic- 
torious  arm  ;  he  imposed  his  own  conditions  ; 
he  was  not  dragged  along  at  the  tail  of  bar- 
barous  foreigners  ;  he  commanded  them,  and 
he  also  suftered  himself  to  be  moved  to  com- 
passion. Can  you  be  unsusceptible  of  that 
tenderness,  and  do  you  not  tremble  at  our 
malédictions,  which  will  be  perpetuated  on 
you  by  our  children  ?  And,  even  in  that  case, 
whatever  may  be  your  success,  it  will  not  equal 
your  sorrow  !  You  prétend  to  come  for  the 
purpose  of  governing,  and  you  will  hâve  brought 
your  masters  with  you.' 

"  We  were  quartered  in  town  at  Verdun  and 
at  Estain.  Some  of  my  comrades  and  myself 
were  lodged  in  a  handsome  house,  but  ail  the 
furniture  and   ail    the  proprietors  had  disap- 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEOX.  125 

"  peared,  with  the  exception  of  two  very  pretty 
"  young  ladies,  who  put  us  in  possession  of  it. 
*'  This  last  circumstance  seemed  a  favourable 
*'  omen,  we  took  the  opportunity  of  remarking 
*'  it  to  them,  and  were  désirons  of  ingratiating 
"  ourselves  by  our  politeness  and  attentions. 
"  '  Gentlemen,'  said  one  of  the  two  amazons  in 
"  rather  a  sharp  tone,  *  we  hâve  remained,  be- 
"  cause  we  hâve  felt  we  had  the  courage  to  tell 
"  you  face  to  face,  that  our  lovers  are  in  arms 
"  against  you,  and  that  they  hâve  our  prayers 
"  at  least  as  much  as  our  hearts.'  This  was  in- 
"  telligible  language,  we  wished  for  no  more  of 
"  it,  and  even  shifted  our  quarters  to  another 
"  house. 

"  Be  it  as  it  may,  we  were  at  length  in  France, 
"  and  in  the  rear  of  that  Prussian  army,  which 
"  pushed  forward  its  brilliant  successes,  leaving 
*'  us  three  or  four  marches  behind.  And  whether 
*'  their  object  was  to  turn  us  into  ridicule,  be- 
'^  cause  we  had  assured  them,  that  ail  the  towns 
"  would  throw  open  their  gâtes  on  our  appear- 
"  ance,  or  to  free  themselves  from  our  importu- 
*'  nities,  they  charged  us  with  the  siège  of  Thion- 
"  ville.  We  made  our  approaches,  and  by  a  fan- 
"  tastical  singularity,  the  marine  corps  found 
"  itself  precisely  opposed  to  the  national  volun- 
"  teers  of  Brest.  When  they  recognised  each 
"  other,  it  is  impossible  to  describe  the  volley  of 


126  MY    RESIDENCE    WITII  [Aug. 

invectives  and  insults  that  was  instantly  ex- 
changed. 

*'  Thionville  is,  however,  as  it  is  known,  one  of 
the  strongest  places,  and  we  found  tlie  réduc- 
tion of  it  impossible  by  our  limited  means, 
for  we  were  in  want  of  every  thing  ;  and  it 
absolutely  required  an  important  négocia- 
tion to  obtain  two  24-pounders  from  the 
Anstrians  at  Luxembourg.  After  a  great 
deal  of  solicitation  and  hésitation,  the  two 
pièces  were  at  length  brought  in  triumph,  and 
it  was  with  that  formidable  train,  that  we  sum- 
moned  the  place,  and  fired  at  night,  in  pure 
waste  of  powder,  some  hundreds  of  camion 
shot.  On  my  return  from  émigration,  having 
fallen  by  chance  into  company  with  General  de 
Wimphen  who  commanded  the  fortress,  lie 
asked  me,  *  what  could  hâve  been  our  intention, 
or  the  meaning  of  the  jest  we  had  thus  attempted 
to  play  oif.'  '  It  was  donc,  I  believe,'  said  I, 
because  reliance  was  placed  upon  you.'  *  But 
even  had  that  been  the  case,'  said  he,  *  you 
still  ought  to  bave  furnished  me  with  an  ex- 
cuse for  surrendering  ;  you  could  not  expect, 
that  I  should  solicit  you  to  attack  me/  '  Every 
thing  was  on  a  proportionate  scale,  the  slightest 
sally  spread  confusion  through  ail  our  forces,  the 
most  trifling  circumstance  was  an  event  with  us  ; 
the  cause  was  obvious  ;  we  were  unacquainted 


1810'.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON.  157 

'^  with  every  thing,  and  accordingly,  putting 
"  courage  aside,  I  do  not  scruple  to  believe,  that 
"  a  hundred  picked  men  of  the  impérial  guard 
"  would  liave  roiited  the  whole  of  our  army. 
"  Happily,  our  adversaries  were  as  ignorant  as 
"  ourselves,  ail  were  pigmies  then,  although  in  a 
"  very  short  time  giants  were  found  every  where. 

*'  We  remained  very  discontented  with  ail  this, 
"  under  our  tents  and  on  our  bad  straw  ;  but  à 
"  la  Française,  we  found  relief  in  our  gaiety;  our 
'*  ill  humour  evaporated  in  puns  and  jests.  AU 
*'  our  principal  officers  had  nicknames,  there  was 
"  not  one,  to  our  commander  in  chief,  the 
*'  vénérable  Marshal  de  Broglie,  who  escaped 
"  us,  and  this  puts  me  in  mind  of  a  circumstance, 
"  which  gave  rise  to  a  nickname  for  one  of  his 
*'  lieutenants,  of  which  he  never  got  rid."  (Should 
any  of  my  comrades  in  the  field  ever  read  this,  it 
may  even  now  excite  a  laugh.) 

"  At  the  moment  of  a  sally,  which,  as  usual, 
**  made  us  very  uneasy,  every  one  pressed  for- 
*'  ward.  We  had  two  small  pièces  of  cannon, 
*'  which  we  had  bought,  and  which,  for  want  of 
**  horses,  were  drawn  by  the  officers  of  artillery 
**  themselves;"  '*  Well!"  observed  the  Emperor, 
*'  I  might  myself  hâve  been  attached  to  thèse 
*'  very  pièces,  and  yet  what  différent  combina- 
*'  tions  in  our  destinies  and  in  those  of  the  world! 
*'  For  it  is  incontestable  that  I  hâve  given  an  im- 


128  MY    RESIDEXCE    WITH  [Aug. 

*'  puise  and  direction  to  it,  emanating  solely  froni 
*'  myself.     But  go  on." 

"  Sire,  our  two  small  pièces  were  in  progress 
"  along  the  highway,  Avhen  the  gênerai  officer  of 
**  the  day  arrived  at  full  gallop,  and  stopped  with 
*'  indignation  at  the  sight  of  our  little  cannon,  as 
*'  they  were  drawn  towards  the  fortress,  with  the 
'*  breech  in  advance. — *  How,'  exclaimed  he,  *  are 
**  thèse  really  gentlemen,  who  draw  their  cannon 
"  in  this  manner  against  the  enemy  ?  And,  if  he 
*'  were  actually  to  présent  himself,  how  could 
**  you  contrive  to  fire  upon  him  V  He  persisted 
**  in  his  blunder,  refusing  to  comprehend  what 
**  the  officers  of  artillery  strove  by  every  pos- 
"  sible  means  to  explain  ;  that  such  was  the  man- 
**  ner  of  acting  every  where,  and  that  unless  he 
*'  had  some  new  invention  to  communicate,  there 
"  was  no  other  mode  to  be  adopted.  From  that 
*'  moment  we  dubbed  him  by  a  nickname,  by 
**  which  he  soon  became  universally  known. 

**  But  ail  this  burlesque  was  soon  exchanged 
**  for  what  was  serions  in  the  extrême  ;  the  scène 
**  shifted,  as  it  were,  by  magie,  and  our  misfor- 
'*  tunes  burst  upon  us  in  an  instant.  Whether 
"  from  treachery,  weakness,  political  interest,  or 
**  sickness  in  his  army,  from  the  real  superiority 
•*  of  force,  or  the  mère  dexterity  of  the  French 
"  gênerai,  the  King  of  Prussia  entered  into  secret 
**  négociation  with  him,  suddenly  faced  about. 


ISIC]  THE    E.MPEROR    XAPOLEON.  J29 

*'  and  marching  to  the  frontier,  evacuated  the 
*'  French  territory.  A  most  dreadful  storm  now 
**  burst  over  oiir  heads  ;  words  are  inadéquate 
"  to  express  the  scandalous  treatment  we  expe- 
"  rienced,  as  well  as  the  just  indignation,  which 
*'  coiild  not  fail  to  animate  every  gênerons  heart 
*'  against  our  allies,  the  Prussians.  Our  princes 
*'  degradcd,  disavowed,  insulted  by  tliem;  our 
"  équipages,  our  most  necessary  effects,  even 
"  our  linen,  plundered;  our  persons  ill-used:  and 
*'  thus  we  were  baselydriven  and  thrust  beyond 
"  the  frontiers  by  our  friends,  our  allies!  !  ! 

"  For  my  part,   sinking  under  the  fatigue  of 
*'  too  long  marches  in  the  mud,  and  under  tor- 
*'  rents  of  rain  ;  bending  under  a  musquet  and 
"  a  load  of  accoutrements,  hurtful  only  to  my-. 
*'  self,    I  took  advantage  of  my  privelege  as  a. 
"  volunteer,  to  leave  the  ranks,  and  effect  my  re- 
"  treat    as   well   as    I    could.     I   proceeded,  as, 
*'  occasion  served  ;  I  never  sought  the   common, 
"  halting  place;    I    took  refuge  in  the  nearest, 
"■  farm-yard,  and  wdiether  it  was  my  own  peculiar 
"  good  fortune,  or  because  the  peasants  were  in, 
"  reality  kind,  and  not  exasperated  against  us,  I 
"  passed  the  frontier  without  any  unlucky  acci- 
"  dent.     It  was  not  until  some  time  afterwards, 
"  that  I  was  enabled  to  form  a  correct  estimate 
"  of  the  whole  extent  of  the  danger  to  which  I 
"  had  exposed  myself,  when  I  read  in  the  papers, 
"  that  from  fifteen  to  eighteen  of  us,  stragglers 

Vol.  III.  Pan  V.  k 


130  MY    RESIDENCE    WITH  [Aug. 

^'  like  myself,  and  some  of  whom  stood  near  me 
*'  in  the  ranks,  Iiad  been  seized,  dragged  to  Paris, 
"  and  exeeuted  in  public,  in  a  kind  of  auto-da-fé, 
"  and  as  it  were,  by  way  of  expiation. 

"  As  soon  as  we  were  ont  of  France,  we 
"^^  received  notice  to  disband,  but  the  intimation 
"  was  superfluous,  for  that  measure  was  rendered 
"  absolutely  indispensable  by  our  wants,  and  the 
*'  deprivation  of  every  necessary  article.  We 
*'  dispersed  ourselves,  trusting  our  way  to  chance, 
"  with  despair  and  rage  for  our  companions. 
"  We  travelled  as  fugitives,  the  greater  part  of 
^'  the  time  on  foot,  and  some  almost  naked,  over 
"  the  scènes  of  our  past  splendour  and  luxury  ; 
"  happy  when  the  doors  were  not  shut  in  our 
*'  faces  ;  when  we  did  not  receive  a  brutal  repuise  ! 
"  For  one  instant,  we  were  officially  driven  from 
^^  every  quarter  ;  we  were  prohibited  from  re- 
"  siding  in,  or  from  entering  ail  the  neigh- 
**  bouring  states  ;  we  were  compelled  to  take 
*'  refuge  in  distant  countries,  and  to  exhibit, 
*'  throughout  Europe,  the  spectacle  of  our  mise- 
"  ries,  which  ought  to  hâve  been  a  grand  moral 
*'  and  political  lesson  to  the  people,  to  the  great, 
"  and  to  Kings." 

"  The  exploits  of  the  French  exacted,  however, 
"  from  foreigners,  a  cruel  expiation  of  the  in- 
"  dignities  with  which  they  overwhelmed  us  ; 
"  whilst,  on  our  part,  we  experienced  a  kind 
*'  of  consolation  in   seeing    the    honour    of  the 


1S16.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON.  131 

*'  émigration  take  refuge  in  the  army  of  Condé, 
*'  which  displayed  itself  to  public  view,  and  in- 
*'  scribed  itself  in  history,  as  a  model  of  loyalty, 
"  valour,  and  constancy. 

*'  Such,  Sire,  is  that  too  celebrated  era,  that 
**  fatal  détermination,  which,  with  respect  to  a 
*'  great  number,  can  be  considered  only  as  the 
**  delusion  of  youth  and  inexpérience.  None, 
**  however,  but  themselves,  possess  the  right  of 
*'  reproaching  them  with  the  error.  The  senti- 
*'  ments,  by  which  they  were  actuated,  were  so 
*'  pure,  so  natural,  so  generous,  that  they  might 
"  even,  were  it  necessary,  dérive  honour  from 
**  them  ;  and  thèse  dispositions,  I  must  say,  be- 
"  longed  to  the  mass  of  which  we  consisted,  and 
*'  more  particularly  to  that  crowd  of  country 
**  gentlemen,  who,  sacrificing  ail  and  expecting 
*'  nothing,  without  fortune  as  well  as  without 
"  hope,  displayed  a  dévotion  truly  heroic,  be- 
"  cause  its  only  aim  was  the  performance  of 
**  duties,  which  they  held  to  be  sacred.  In 
*'  other  respects,  our  defect  lay  in  our  political 
"  éducation,  which  did  not  teach  us  to  distin- 
*'  guish  our  duties,  and  made  us  dedicate  to  the 
*'  prince  alone  what  belonged  to  the  country  at 
**  large.  Accordingly,  in  future  times,  when 
*'  hostile  passions  shall  be  extinct,  when  no  traces 
**  shall  be  left  of  jarring  interests  or  of  party 
"  infatuation  and  fury,  what  was  doubtful  with  us, 
**  will  be  positive  and  clear  to  others  ;  what  was 

K   2 


132  MY    RESIDENCE    WITII  [Aug. 

"  excusable  or  even  allowable  in  us,  who  were 
*'  situated  between  an  ancient  order  of  things,  that 
"  was  on  the  point  of  tcrminating,  and  a  new  one 
**  that  was  about  to  commence,  will  be  considered 
*'  highly  culpable  in  those  in  possession  of  esta- 
**  blished  doctrines.  Among  them,  the  following 
"  will  be  held  as  articles  of  faith: — Ist.  That  the 
*'  greatest  of  ail  crimes  is  the  introduction  of  a 
**  foreign  power  into  the  heart  of  one's  country. 
*'  2dly.  That  the  sovereignty  cannot  be  erratic, 
**  but  that  it  is  inséparable  from  the  territory, 
"  and  remains  attached  to  the  mass  of  citizens. 
*'  3dly.  That  the  country  cannot  be  transported 
**  abroad  ;  but  that  it  is  immutable  and  entire  on 
**  the  settled  soil,  whicli  lias  given  us  birth,  and 
**  which  contains  the  bones  of  our  ancestors. 
*'  Such  are  the  grand  maxims,  and  many  others 
"  besides,  which  will  remain  the  offspring  of  our 
"  émigration.  Such  the  great  truths,  which  will 
**  be  collected  from  our  calamities!" 

**  Very  well  !  "  exclaimed  the  Emperor,  *'  very 
**  well  !  This  is  what  is  called  being  free  from 
**  préjudices!  Thèse  are  real philosophical  views! 
**  And  it  will  be  said  of  y  ou,  that  you  were 
'*  enabled  to  couvert  to  your  advantage  the  les- 
"  sons  of  time  and  adversity." 

**  Sire,  during  our  stay  on  board  of  the  Nor- 
"  thumberland,  and  the  leisure  hours  of  our 
**  passage,  the  English  alluded  more  than  once 
**  to   this   délicate  topic.     Misled  by  the  war. 


ISIG.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON.  133 

which  they  had  carried  on  with  fury  against 
us,  as  well  as  by  the  maxims,  with  which  the 
interest  of  the  moment  filled  their  journals, 
even  in  opposition  to  their  national  doctrines, 
they  conversed  about  the  merits  of  the  émigra- 
tion, and  the  virtues  they  had  witnessed  ;  and 
condemned  the  nation  for  having  resisted  it. 
But  when  the  arguments  became  too  compli- 
cated,  or  we  were  désirons  of  putting  a  sudden 
stop  to  them,  we  gained  our  point  with  a  single 
word.  We  merely  said  to  them  : — '  Go  back 
to  the  period  of  your  own  révolution  ;  imagine 
James  II.  threatening  you  from  the  opposite 
shore,  and  under  French  banners  ;  although 
surrounded  by  faithful  subjects,  what  would 
you  hâve  done  ?  And  if  Louis  XIV.  had  brought 
him  back  to  London  at  the  head  of  50,000 
French,  who  should  hâve  afterwards  main- 
tained  garrisons  in  your  country,  v/hat  would 
hâve  been  your  feelings  ?  ' — '  Ah  ! ....  But ....  - 

Ah  ! '    they  exclaimed,    endeavouring  to 

find  out  some  différence,  but  not  being  able  to 
discover  it,  they  laughed,  and  were  silent." 
And,  in  fact,"  said  the  Emperor,  '*  there  was 
not  a  word  to  be  said  in  reply."  He  then 
occupied  himself,  with  his  accustomed  rapidity 
and  talent,  in  taking  a  review  of  the  différent 
objects  I  had  noticed,  and  stopped  to  reflect 
on   the   absurdity,  the  inconsistency,    the  great 


134  MY    RESIDENCE    WITH  [Aug. 

mistake  of  our  émigration,  and  the  real  injuries 
it  had  done  to  France,  to  the  King,  and  to  our- 
selves.  "  You  hâve  established,  and  consecrated 
**  in  political  France,"  he  observed,  **  a  separa- 
"  tion  similar  to  that  which  the  Catholics  and 
**  Protestants  introdiiced  into  religions  Europe; 
**  and  to  what  calamities  has  it  not  given  rise  ? 
"  I  had  succeeded  in  destroying  its  results,  but 
*'  are  they  not  on  the  point  of  being  revived?" 
He  next  developed  the  means  he  had  taken  to 
annihilate  that  plague,  the  précautions  he  had 
been  forced  to  adopt,  and  the  efFects  which  he 
had  in  view.  How  every  thing  that  fell  froni  his 
longue  was  changed  in  its  appearance  ; — how 
every  thing  seemed  magnified  in  my  eyes  in  pro- 
portion as  he  discussed  the  subject  !  "'  And 
"  what,"  he  remarked,  **  a  peculiar  singularity 
**  in  my  situation,  was,  that  in  the  whole  of  those 
**  transactions  I  held  the  helm  myself  constantly 
**  in  the  midst  of  rocks.  Every  one,  judging 
*•  according  to  his  own  standard,  attributed  to 
"  passion,  to  simple  préjudice,  or  to  littleness, 
**  what  in  me,  however,  was  but  the  conséquence 
"  of  profound  views,  of  grand  conceptions,  and 
"  the  most  elevated  state  maxiras.  It  might 
"  hâve  been  said,  that  I  reigned  only  over  pig- 
**  mies  with  respect  to  intellectual  talent.  I  was 
**  comprehended  by  none.  The  national  party 
**  felt  only  jealousy  and  resentment  at  what  they 


1S16.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON.  135 

**  saw  me  do  in  favour  of  the  emigrants,  and  the 
*'  latter,  on  their  part,  were  persuaded  that  I 
"  sought  only  to  gain  fresli  lustre  by  their  assist- 
**  ance.     Poor  people  ! . .  . 

*'  I  obtained,  however,  my  object,  in  spite  of 
"  reciprocal  infatuation  and  préjudice,  and  I  had 
"  the  satisfaction  of  leaving  every  thing  quiet  in 
"  port,  when  I  lanched  out  to  sea  in  pursuit  of 
**  my  grand  enterprises." 

N.  B. — Having  mentioned,  since  my  return  ta 
Europe,  thèse  expressions  of  Napoléon,  to  a  great 
officer  of  the  crown,  who  had  often  the  honour  of 
conversingwithhiminprivate(LeComtedeS ....), 
he  related  to  me,  in  his  turn,  a  conversation  pre- 
cisely  on  the  same  subject.  Its  coincidence  with 
what  has  been  just  read,  is  so  very  striking  as  to 
induce  me  to  insert  it  hère.  The  Emperor  said 
to  him  one  day  :  **  What,  think  you,  is  my  reason 
"  for  endeavouring  to  hâve  about  me  the  great 
*'  names  of  the  ancient  monarchy  ?" — "  Perhaps. 
*'  Sire,  for  the  splendor  of  your  throne,  and  for 
"  the  purpose  of  keeping  up  certain  appearances 
*'  in  the  eyes  of  Europe." — "  Ah  !  That  is  just 
*'  like  you,  with  your  pride  and  your  préjudices 
"  of  rank  !  Well  then  !  learn,  that  my  victories 
**  and  my  power  are  much  better  recommend- 
**  ations  for  me  in  Europe  than  ail  your  great 
'*  names,  and  that  my  apparent  prédilection  for 
**  them  does  me  a  great  deal  of  injury,  and 
"  renders   me  very   unpopular    at  home.     You 


136  MY    RESIDENCE    WITII  [Aug. 

*'  attribute  to  narrow  views  what  relates  to  those 
"  of  a  very  extensive  scope.  I  am  engaged  in 
*'  renovating  a  society,  a  nation,  and  the  éléments 
**  I  am  obliged  to  employ  are  altogether  re- 
**  pugnant  in  their  nature.  The  nobility  and  the 
*'  emigrants  are  but  a  point  on  the  mass,  and 
"  that  mass  is  hostile  to  them,  and  continues 
**  very  much  exasperated  against  them  ;  it  hardly 
"  forgives  me  for  having  recalled  them.  For  my 
**  own  part,  I  considered  it  as  a  duty  ;  but  if  I 
**  suffer  them  to  continue  as  a  body,  they  may 
*'  one  day  be  serviceable  to  foreign  powers, 
"  prove  injurions  to  us,  and  subject  themselves 
**  to  great  dangers.  My  object  then,  is  to  dis- 
'•  solve  their  union,  and  to  render  them  inde- 
*'  pendent  of  each  other.  If  I  place  some  of 
"  them  about  my  person,  in  the  différent  branches 
"  of  administration,  and  in  the  army,  it  is  for  the 
"  purpose  of  consolidating  them  witli  the  mass, 
"and  of  managing  so  as  to  reduce  ail  classes 
*'  into  a  whole  ;  for  I  am  mortal,  and  if  I  should 
"  happen  to  leave  you  before  that  fusion  was 
"  accomplished,  you  would  soon  see  what  dis- 
"  asters  would  arise  from  thèse  heterogeneous 
"  parts,  and  the  dreadful  périls  of  which  certain 
"  persons  miglit  become  the  victims  !  Thus,  then, 
*'  Sir,  my  views  are  ail  connected  with  humanity 
"  and  elevated  political  considérations,  and,  in  no 
"  respect,  with  vain  and  silly  préjudices." 

When  I  observed  to  the  person  who  related 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON.  137 

this  anecdote,  how  little  we  were  acquainted  at 
the  Tuileries  with  Napoleon's  real  character,  and 
the  grand  and  excellent  qualities  of  his  soûl  and 
heart,  he  answered,  that,  for  his  own  part,  lie 
had  been  personally  more  fortunate,  and  that  he 
would  give  me  a  proof  of  it,  which  he  selected 
out  of  ten:  "  The  Emperor  shewed  himself^  one 
*'  day,  in  his  privy  council,  very  much  incensed 

*'  against  General  La  F ,  whom  he  attacked 

"  with  great  severity,  and  whose  opinions  and 
"  principles,  he  said,  were  capable  of  effecting 
"  the  complète  dissolution  of  a  state  ;  becoming 
*'  animated  by  degrees,  he,  at  length,  put  him- 
"  self  into  a  real  passion.  I  was  présent  as  a 
*'  member  of  the  council  ;  I  had  been  recently 
"  admitted,  and  was  little  fashioned  to  the 
"  Emperor's  manners,  and  although  stopped  by 
"  the  two  members  placed  next  to  me,  I  under- 
"  took  to  speak  in  defence  of  the  accused, 
"  asserting,  that  he  had  been  calumniated  with 
"  the  Sovereign,  and  that  he  lived  quietly  on 
*'  his  estate,  with  personal  opinions  which  were 
"  productive  of  no  ill  effect  whatever.  The 
"  Emperor,  still  in  a  passion,  resumed  the  charge 
"  for  the  purpose  of  pressing  it  with  véhémence  ; 
"  but  at  the  end  of  five  or  six  words,  he  stopped 
"■  short,  and  addressing  himself  to  me,  said  : 
"  '  But  he  is   your    friend,    Sir,    and    you    are 

"  right. ...  I  had  forgotten  it Let  us  speak 

"  of  something  else.'     *  And  why,'  I  asked,  '  did 


13S  M  Y    RESIDENCE    WITH  [Aug. 

*'  you  not  make  us  acquainted  with  ail  this  at 
"  the  time  ?  ' — By  a  fatality  which  would  seem 
"  to  belong  to  Napoleon's  atmosphère,  whether 
*'  from  préjudice  or  otherwise,  the  impression  on 
"  our  minds  was,  that  it  could  only  be  told  to 
**  his  intimate  friends  ;  for  whoever  had  said 
**  much  about  it,  would  only  hâve  passed  for  a 
**  clumsy  romancer  of  a  courtier,  who  told  not 
*'  wliat  he  believed  to  be  true,  but  what  he  con- 
**  ceived  best  suited  to  obtain  favour  and  re- 
**  wards." 

Since  I  hâve  mentioned  this  great  officer  of 
the  crown,  who  is  no  less  distinguished  by  the 
grâces  of  his  mind  and  the  amenity  of  his  man- 
ners,  than  by  his  exalted  character,  I  shall 
notice  one  of  his  answers  to  Napoléon,  re- 
markable  for  its  ingénions  and  délicate  flattery. 
The  Emperor,  at  one  of  his  levées,  having  been 
obliged  to  wait  some  time  for  his  appearance, 
attacked  him  on  his  arrivai,  openly,  in  the  pré- 
sence of  ail.  It  happened  to  be  precisely  at  the 
time,  when  five  or  six  kings  (and  among  others, 
those  of  Bavaria,  Saxony,  and  Wurtemberg,)  were 
at  Paris.  "  Sire,"  replied  the  guilty  courtier, 
"  I  hâve,  no  doubt,  a  million  of  excuses  to  make 
"  to  your  Majesty,  but  at  this  time,  one  is  not 
**  at  perfect  liberty  to  go  through  the  streets  as 
**  one  pleases.  I  just  now  had  the  misfortune 
**  to  get  into  a  croivd  of  ki/ig.s,  from  which  I 
**  found  it  impossible  to  extricate  myself  sooner. 


181G.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEOX.  139 

**  This,  Sire,  was  the  cause  of  my  delay." 
Every  one  smiled,  and  the  Emperor  contented 
himself  with  saying,  in  a  very  softened  tone  of 
voice  :  *'  Wliatever,  Sir,  may  be  the  cause,  take 
*'  proper  précautions  for  the  future,  and  above 
**  ail,  never  make  me  wait  again." 

Napoleon's    Sentimental    Journey. — Public    Sjjîrit  of  the 
Time. — Events  of  the  lOth  of  Aiigiist, 

3d. — The  weather  is  somewhat  improved  ; 
the  Emperor  attempted  to  take  a  walk  in  the 
garden.  General  Bingham  and  the  Colonel  of 
.the  53d  requested  to  see  the  Emperor,  who 
kept  them  rather  long.  The  appearance  of  the 
Governor  put  us  ail  to  flight.  General  Bingham 
disappeared,  and,  for  our  part,  we  went  to  the 
wood,  for  the  purpose  of  keeping  away  from  the 
spot. 

The  Emperor,  during  his  walk,  conversed  a 
great  deal  about  a  journey  which  he  took  to 
Burgundy  in  the  beginning  of  the  révolution. 
This  he  calls  his  Sentimental  Journey  to  Nuitz. 
He  supped  there  with  his  comrade  Gassendi,  at 
that  time  captain  in  the  same  régiment,  and 
who  was  advantageously  married  to  the  daughter 
■of  a  physician  of  the  place.  The  young  tra- 
veller  soon  remarked  the  différence  of  political 
opinion  between  the  father  and  son-in-law; 
the    gentleman,    Gassendi,   was,    of    course,    an 


.40  MV    RESIDENCE    WITII  [Aug. 

aristocrat,  and  the  physician  a  flaming  patriot. 
The  latter  foiind  in  the  strange  guest  a  powerful 
auxiliary,  and  was  so  delighted  with  him,  that 
the  foUowing  day  at  dawn  he  paid  him  a  visit 
of  acknowledgment  and  sympathy.  The  appear- 
ance  of  a  young  officer  of  artillery,  with  good  lo- 
gical  reasoning  and  a  ready  tongue,  was,  observed 
the  Emperor,  a  precious  and  rare  accession  to  the 
place.  It  was  easy  for  the  traveller  to  perceive, 
that  he  made  an  impression  in  his  favour.  It  was 
Sunday,  and  hats  Avere  taken  off  to  him  from  the 
bottom  of  the  street,  His  triumph,  however,  was 
not  without  a  check.  He  went  to  siip  at  the 
hoiise  of  a  Madame  Maret  or  Muret,  where  an- 

other  of  his  comrades,  Y ,  seemed  to  be 

comfortably  establishcd.  Hère  the  aristocracy 
of  the  canton  were  accustomed  to  meet,  although 
the  mistress  was  but  the  w4fe  of  a  wine  merchant, 
but  she  had  great  property  and  the  most  polish- 
ed  manners  ;  she  was,  said  the  Emperor,  the 
duchess  of  the  place.  Ail  the  gentlefolks  of  the 
vicinity  were  to  be  found  there.  The  young 
officer  was  caught,  as  he  remarked,  in  a  real 
wasp-hole,  and  it  was  necessary  for  him  to  fight 
his  way  out  again,  The  contest  was  unequal. 
In  the  very  beat  of  the  action,  the  mayor  was 
announced.  "  I  believed  him  to  be  an  assistance 
*'  sent  to  me  by  Heaven  in  the  critical  moment, 
*'  but  he  was  the  worst  of  ail  my  opponents.  I 
"  see  this  villainous  fellow  now  before  me  in  his 


1S16.]  THE    EMPEROR    XAPOLEOX.  141 

**  fine  Sunday  clothes,  fat  and  bloated,  in  a  large 
"  crimson  coat;  lie  was  a  misérable  animal.  I 
**  was  happily  preserved  by  the  generosity  of  the 
"  mistress  of  the  house,  perhaps  by  a  secret  sym- 
"  pathy  of  opinion.  She  unceasingiy  parried 
"  with  lier  wit  the  blows  which  were  dealt  at 
"  me  ;  and  was  a  protecting  shield  on  which  the 
*'  enemy's  weapons  struck  in  vain.  She  gnard- 
*'  ed  me  from  every  kind  of  wound,  and  I  hâve 
"  always  retained  a  pleasing  recollection  of  the 
*'  services  I  received  from  lier  in  tliat  species 
*'  of  skirmish. 

*'  The  same  diversity  of  opinions,"  said  the 
Emperor,  "  was  then  to  be  met  with  in  every 
"  part  of  France.  In  the  saloons,  in  the  streets, 
*'  on  the  highways,  in  the  taverns,  every  one 
*'  was  ready  to  take  part  in  the  contest,  and  no- 
"  thing  was  easier  than  for  a  person  to  form  an 
"  erroneous  estimate  of  the  influence  of  parties 
*'  and  opinion,  according  to  the  local  situation  in 
*'  which  he  was  placed.  Thus  a  patriot  might 
*'  easily  be  deceived,  wlien  in  the  saloons,  or 
*'  among  an  assembly  of  officers,  wliere  the  ma- 
*'  jority  was  decidedly  against  him  ;  but  the  in- 
*'  stant  he  was  in  the  street,  or  among  the  sol- 
*'  diers,  he  found  himself  in  the  midst  of  the  en- 
*'  tire  nation.  The  sentiments  of  the  day  suc- 
"  ceeded  even  in  making  prosélytes  among  the 
*'  officers  themselves,  particularly  after  the  cele- 
*'  brated  oath  to  the  Nation  y  the  Law,  amlthe  Kiug. 


142  MY    RESIDENCE    WITH  [Aug. 

**  Until  that  time,"  continued  the  Emperor,  "had 
**  I  received  an  order  to  point  my  cannon  against 
'*  the  people,  I  hâve  no  doubt,  that  custom,  pre- 
"  judice,  éducation,  and  the  name  of  the  King, 
"  woiild  hâve  induced  me  to  obey;  but  the 
"  national  oath  once  taken,  this  would  hâve 
**  ceased,  and  I  should  hâve  acknowledged  the 
"  nation  only.  My  natural  propensities  thence- 
**  forth  harmonized  with  my  duties,  and  hap- 
**  pily  accorded  with  ail  the  metaphysics  of  the 
*'  assembly.  The  patriotic  officers,  however, 
**  it  must  be  allowed,  constituted  but  the  smaller 
**  number;  but  with  the  soldiers,  as  a  lever,  they 
*'  led  the  régiment  and  imposed  the  law.  The 
**  comrades  of  the  opposite  party,  and  the  prin- 
**  cipals  themselves,  had  recourse  to  us  in  every 
"  moment  of  the  crisis.  I  remember,  for  instance, 
"  having  rescued  from  thefury  of  the  populace  a 
"  brother  officer,  whose  crime  consisted  in  singing 
"  from  the  Windows  of  our  dining  saloon  the  cele- 
"  brated  romance  of  O  Richard.'  O  mon  Roi!  I 
"  had  little  notion  then,  that  that  air  would  one 
"  day  be  also  proscribed  in  the  same  manner  on 
*'  my  account.  Just  so,  on  the  lOth  of  August, 
"  when  I  saw  the  palace  of  the  Tuileries  carried 
"  by  force  and  the  person  of  the  King  seized 
"  upon,  I  was  certainly  very  far  from  thinking 
"  that  I  should  replace  him,  and  that  that  palace 
**  would  be  my  place  of  résidence." 

In   dwelling  upon  the  e vents  of  the  lOtli  of 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON.  143 

August,  lie  said;  **  I  was,  during  that  horrible 
epoch,  at  Paris,  in  lodgings  in  the  Rue  du  Mail, 
Place  des  Victoires.  On  hearing  the  sound  of 
the  tocsin,  and  the  news  which  were  circulated 
of  the  assault  upon  the  Tuileries,  I  ran  to  the 
Carousel,  to  the  house  of  Faiwekt,  the  brother 
of  Bourienne,  who  kept  a  furniture  warehouse. 
He  had  been  my  comrade  at  the  military  school 
of  Brienne.  It  was  from  that  house,  which, 
by  the  by,  I  was  never  afterwards  able  to 
find  in  conséquence  of  the  great  altérations 
efFected  tliere,  that  I  saw  ail  the  particulars 
of  the  attack.  Before  I  reached  the  Carou- 
sel, I  had  been  met  by  a  group  of  hideous  look- 
ing  men,  carrying  a  head  at  the  end  of  a  pike. 
Seeing  me  tolerably  well  dressed,  with  the  ap- 
pearance  of  a  gentleman,  they  called  upon  me  to 
shout  Vive  la  Nation  !  which,  as  it  may  be  easily 
believed,  I  did  without  hésitation. 
*'  The  palace  was  attacked  by  the  vilest  rabble. 
The  King  had  unquestionably  for  his  defence  as 
many  troops  as  the  convention  afterwards  had 
on  the  13th  Vendémiaire,  and  the  enemies  of 
the  latter  were  much  more  disciplined  and 
formidable.  The  greater  part  of  the  national 
guard  shewed  themselves  favourable  to  the 
King;  this  justice  is  due  to  them." 
Hère  the  grand  marshal  observed,  "  that  he  ac- 
tually  belonged  to  one  of  the  battalions  that 
evinced   the  most   determined   dévotion.     He 


144  MY    RESIDENCE    WITII  [Aug. 

*'  was  several  times  on  tlie  point  of  bcing  massa- 
'*  cred  as  he  returned  alone  to  his  résidence."  We 
remarked,  on  our  part,  that  in  gênerai  tlie  na- 
tional guard  of  Paris  liad  constantly  displayed 
tlie  virtues  of  its  class  ;  the  love  of  order,  de- 
votedness  to  authority,  the  dread  of  plunder, 
and  the  detestation  of  anarchy  ;  and  that  also 
was  the  Emperor's  opinion. 

*'  The  palace  being-forced,  andthe  King  receiv- 
**  ed  within  the  bosom  of  the  assembly,"  continu- 
ed  he,  "Iventuredto  penetrate  into  the  garden. 
*'  Never  since  has  any  of  my  fields  of  battle  given 
"  me  the  idea  of  so  many  dead  bodies,  as  I  was 
"  impressed  with  by  the  heaps  of  the  Swiss; 
*'  whether  the  smallness  of  the  place  seemed  to 
**  increase  the  number,  or  that  it  was  the  resuit  of 
*'  the  iirst  impression  I  experienced  of  that  na- 
**  ture.  I  saw  well  dressed  women  commit  the 
"  «irossest  indecencies  on  the  dead  bodies  of  the 
"  Swiss.  I  went  throiigh  ail  the  coffee-houses 
"  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  assembly;  the  irri- 
*'  tation  was  every  where  extrême;  fury  was  in 
**  every  heart  and  shewed  itself  in  every  coun- 
"  tenance,  although  the  persons  thus  inflamed 
*'  were  far  from  belonging  to  the  class  of  the  po- 
**  pulace  ;  and  aîl  thèse  places  miist  necessarily 
*'  hâve  been  freqiiented  daily  by  the  same  visitors, 
*'  for  although  I  had  nothing  particular  in  my 
"  dress,  or  perhaps  it  was  because  my  face  was 
"  more  calm,  it  was  easy  for  me  to  perceive,  that 


1S16".]  THE    EMPEROR    XAPOLEON'.  145 

**  I  excited  many  hostile  and  distrustfiil  looks,  as 
"  some  one  unkiiown  or  suspected." 

Masked  balls. — Madame  de  Mégrigny. — Piedmont  and  the 
Piedmontese. — Canals  of  France. — Dreams  on  Paris. — 
Versailles. — Fontainebleau,  ^v;. 

4th. — The  weather  was  much  improved.  The 
Emperor  ordered  his  calash,  and  walked  very  far 
iintil  it  took  him  up. 

The  conversation  turned  iipon  masked  balls,  of 
which  the  Emperor  was  peculiarly  fond  and  fre- 
quently  called  for  them.  He  was  then  always 
sure  of  a  certain  rendezvous  which  never  failed 
to  take  place.  He  was,  he  said,  regularly  ac- 
costed  every  year,  by  the  same  mask,  who  re- 
minded  him  of  old  intimacies,  and  ardently  en- 
treated  to  be  received  and  admitted  at  court. 
The  mask  was  a  most  amiable,  kind,  and 
beautiful  woman,  to  whom  many  persons  were 
certainly  much  indebted.  The  Emperor,  who 
continued  to  love  her,  always  answered; — ''  I  do 
**  not  deny,  that  you  are  charming,  but  reflect  a 
**  little  upon  your  situation  ;  be  your  own  judge 
**  and  décide.  You  hâve  two  or  tliree  husbands, 
*'  and  children  by  several  of  your  lovers.  It 
"  would  hâve  been  thought  a  happiness  to  hâve 
"  shared  in  the  lirst  fault  ;  the  second  would 
"  hâve  caused  pain,  but  still  it  miglit  be  par- 
"  doned  ;  but  the  sequel — and  then,  and  then  !  .  .  . 
"  Be  the  Emperor  and  judge  ;    what  would  you 

Vor.  III.  Part  T.  L 


146  M  Y    RESIDENCE    WITII  [\u*. 

**  do  in  my  place,  I  who  am  boiind  to  revive  and 
"  maintain  a  certain  décorum."  Tlie  beautiful 
suitor  either  did  not  reply,  or  said  ; — "  at  least 
**  do  not  deprive  me  of  hope;"  "  and  deferred  lier 
"  daims  of  happiness  to  the  following  year.  And 
**  eacli  of  us,"  said  the  Emperor,  "  was  punctual 
*'  at  the  new  rendezvous." 

The  Emperor  took  great  pleasure  in  getting 
himself  insalted  at  thèse  balls.  He  laughed 
heartily  at  Cambacérès,  one  day  at  being  told 
by  a  Madame  de  St.  D  .  .  .  ,,  '*  that  there  were 
'*'  people  at  the  bail  who  ought  to  be  turned  ont, 
*'  and  that  they  certainly  could  not  hâve  got  ad- 
*'  mittance  without  stolen  tickets." 

Another  time,  he  forced  the  tender  and  timid 
Madame  de  Mégrigny  to  rise  and  retire  in  anger, 
and  with  tears  in  lier  eyes,  complaining  that  the 
freedom,  allowed  at  a  masked  bail,  had,  in  her 
instance,  been  sadly  abused.  The  Emperor  had 
just  put  her  in  niind  of  a  very  remarkable  fa- 
vour,  which  lie  had  formerly  granted  to  her,  and 
added,  that  everj''  one  thought  she  had  paid  for  it 
by  the  exercise  of  the  lord's  right.  "  But  there 
"  was,"  said  the  Emperor,  "  iiobody  but  niyself 
*'  who  could  say  so,  without  insulting  her;  be- 
"  cause,  although  such  was  the  report,  I  was 
"  certain  of  its  falsehood."  The  following  is  an 
account  of  the  circumstance. 

When   the  Emperor   was  on   his  way  to   be 
crowned  at  Milan,  he  slept  at  Troyes.     The  au- 


1S16.]  TUE    EMPEROIÎ    NÀPOLEOX.  Uf 

thorities  were  presented  to  him  ;  and  with  them 
was  a  yoiing  lady,  on  the  point  of  being  married, 
with  a  pétition,  intreating  his  protection  and  as- 
sistance. As  the  Emperor  was,  besides,  désirons 
of  doing  something,  which  might  produce  a  good 
effect,  and  prove  agreeable  to  the  country;  the 
circumstance  appeared  favonrable,  and  he  took 
advantage  of  it  with  ail  imaginable  grâce.  The 
young  lady  (Madame  de  Mégrigny)  belonged  to 
the  first  families  of  this  province,  but  which  had 
been  completely  ruined  by  the  émigration.  She 
had  scarcely  returned  to  the  misérable  abode  of 
her  parents,  when  a  page  arrived  with  the  Em- 
peror's  decree,  which  put  them  in  possession  of 
30,000  francs  rent  or  more.  The  effect  of  such  a 
proceeding  may  be  well  imagined.  However,  as 
the  young  lady  was  very  charming  and  perfectiy 
handsome,  it  was  decided,  that  her  fascinations 
had  some  share  in  his  gallantry,  although  he  left 
the  town  a  few  hours  afterwards,  and  never 
thought  more  of  the  thing  ;  but  the  gênerai  opinion 
was  not  a  jot  altered  on  that  account.  It  is  well 
known,  how  stories  are  formed  ;  and  as  she  mar- 
ried one  of  his  equerries,  and  had  consequently 
come  to  court,  ail  this  had  been  so  well  mingled 
together,  that  when  she  was  appointed  sub- 
governess  to  the  King  of  Rome,  the  choice  shocked 
for  a  moment,  the  austère  Madame  de  Montes- 
quieu, who  suspected,  said  the  Emperor,  that  it 
was  but  a  mère  arrangement. 


148  MY    RESIDENCE    \\ITH  [Aug. 

The  Emperor  said,  that  lie  renewed  at  Turin, 
in  the  person  of  Madame  de  Lascaris,  the  gra- 
cions gallantry  exercised  at  Troyes  ;  and  that  in 
both  instances  he  had  reason  to  be  gratified  with 
the  fruits  of  his  liberality.  Tlie  two  families 
gave  every  possible  proof  of  attachment  and 
gratitude. 

We  inquired  what  might  hâve  been  the  senti- 
ments of  Piedmont  with  regard  to  himself.  He 
had,  he  said,  a  particular  affection  for  that  pro- 
vince. M.  de  Saint-Marsan,  on  whose  fidelity  he 
relied  to  the  end,  had  assured  him  at  the  period 
of  oiir  reverses,  that  the  coiintry  woiild  shew  it- 
self  one  of  his  best  provinces. 

"  In  fact,"  continiicd  the  Emperor,  **thePied- 
*'  montese  do  not  like  to  be  a  small  state;  their 
"  king  was  a  real  feudal  lord,  whom  it  was  ne- 
**  cessary  to  pay  court  to,  or  to  dread.  He  had 
*'  more  power  and  authority  than  I,  who,  as  Em- 
"  peror  of  the  French,  was  but  a  suprême  ma- 
"  gistrate,  bound  to  see  the  laws  executed,  and 
"  incompétent  to  dispense  with  them.  Had  I  it 
"  m  m  y  power  to  prevent  the  arrest  of  a  courtier 
*  '  for  debt?  Could  I  hâve  put  a  stop  to  the  re- 
"  gular  action  of  the  laws,  no  matter  upon  whom 
**  they  operated  ?"  8cc.  8cc. 

During  the  conversation  at  dinner,  the  Em- 
peror inquired  whether  the  quantity  of  river 
water  which  flowed  into  the  Mediterranean  and 
the  Black  Sea,  had  been  calculated.     This  led 


1816.]  THE    EMPEIlOn     XAl'OLKOX.  l}f) 

him  to  express  a  wish,  that  a  calculation  of  the 
fluvial  water  of  oiir  Europe  sliould  be  made,  and 
that  the  proportion  contributed  by  each  torrent 
and  water-fall,  should  be  ascertained.  He  re- 
gretted  much,  that  he  had  not  presented  that 
séries  of  scientific  questions.  That  was,  he  ob- 
served,  his  grand  System,  did  any  useful,  curious 
or  interesting  question  suggest  itself  to  him  ;  "I 
**  proposed,  at  my  levées,  or  in  my  familiar  com- 
**  munications,  analogous  questions  to  my  mem- 
"  bers  of  the  institute,  with  orders  to  résolve 
**  them.  The  solution  became  the  subject  of 
"  public  inquiry  ;  it  was  analyzed,  contested, 
"  adopted  and  rejected  ;  and  there  is  nothing 
**  wliich  cannot  be  accomplished  in  this  way. 
**  It  is  the  grand  lever  of  improvement  for  a 
**  great  nation,  that  posseses  a  great  deal  of  in- 
*'  telligence,  and  a  great  deal  of  knowledge." 

The  Emperor  also  observed  on  this  subject, 
that  geography  had  never  been  so  successfully 
cultivated  as  at  présent,  and  that  his  expéditions 
had  contributed  somewhat  to  its  improvement. 
He  afterwards  noticed  the  canals,  which  he  had 
caused  to  be  made  in  France,  and  particularly 
mentioned  that  from  Strasburg  to  Lyons,  in 
which,  he  hoped  sufficient  progress  had  been 
made,  to  induce  others  to  complète  it.  He 
thought,  that  ont  of  thirty  millions,  twenty-four 
must  hâve  been  already  expended. 

'■  Communications  are  now  established  in  the 


150  MY    RESIDEXCE    WlTIl  £Aug. 

"  interior  from  Bordeaux  to  Lyons  and   Paris. 
**  1  had  constructed  a  great  number  of  canals, 
*'  and  projected  a  great  many  more."     One  of  us 
having  observed,  that  a  proposai  for  the  construc- 
tion of  a  very  useful  canal  had   been  submitted 
to  the    Emperor  ;  but  that  measures   had   been 
taken  to  deceive  him,  for  the  purpose  of  prevent- 
ing  his  acceptance  of  the  ofFer.    "  Without  doubt," 
said  the  Emperor,  "  the  plan  must  hâve  appeared 
"  advantageous  only  on  paper;  but  I  suppose  it 
*'  would  hâve  been  necessary  to  advance  money, 
"  which  was   drawn  from  me  with  difficulty." — ■ 
*'  No,  Sire,  the  refusai  was  but  the  effect  of  an 
"intrigue.  Your  majesty  wasdeceived."  "  It  was 
*'  impossible  with  respect  to  such  a  subject.  You 
**  speak  without  sufficient  information."    "  But  I 
**  am   confident   of  it.      I  was    acquainted  with 
"  the  plan,  the  offers   and  the  subscribers  ;  my 
*'  relations  had  put  down  their  names  for  con- 
*'  siderable    sums.       The    intended    object  was 
"  the  union  of  the  Meuse  with  the  Marne.     The 
**  extent  of  the  canal  would  hâve  been  less  than 
'*  seven  leagues."    *'  But  you  do  not  tell  us  ail,  it 
"  was,  perhaps,    required,    that   I  should  grant 
*'  away  immense  national  fores ts  in  the  environs, 
*'  which  I  should  not  hâve  agreed  to."    "  No,  Sire, 
**  the  whole  was    an    intrigue  of  your  board  of 
**  bridges  and  roads."    "  But  even  then,  it  was  ne- 
•*  cessary  for  them  to  allège  some  reasons,  some 
"  appearance  of  public  intcrcst.     What  reasons 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEOX.  151 

*'  did  they  assign?"  "Sire,  that  the  profits  woiild 
"  hâve  been  too  considérable."  "  But  in  that 
"  case  the  plan  ought  to  hâve  been  siibmitted  to 
"  me  in  person,  and  I  would  hâve  carried  it  into 
**  exécution.  I  repeat,  that  you  are  not  justified 
"  by  the  facts  ;  you  are  speaking  now  to  a  man 
"  upon  the  very  subject,  which  constantly  en- 
'*  gaged  his  attention.  The  board  of  bridges  and 
"  roads  were,  on  their  part,  never  happier  than 
"  when  they  were  employed.  There  never  was 
"  an  individual,  who  proposed  the  construction 
"  of  a  bridge,  that  v^^as  not  takeu  at  his  word.  If 
"  lie  asked  for  a  toll  for  twenty-five  years,  1  was 
"  disposed  to  grant  him  one  for  thirty.  If 
"  it  cost  me  nothing,  it  was  a  matter  of  indifter- 
**  ence  whether  it  would  prove  useful.  It  was 
"  always  a  capital  with  which  I  enriched  the  soil. 
*'  Instead  of  rejecting  proposais  for  canals,  I 
*'  eagerly  courted  them.  But,  mydear  Sir,  there 
*'  are  no  two  things  that  resemble  each  other  so 
"  little  as  the  conversation  of  a  saloon,  and  the 
**  considération  of  an  administrative  council.  The 
"  projector  is  always  right  in  a  saloon;  his  pro- 
*'  jects  would  be  magnificent  and  infallible,  if  he 
"  were  listened  to,  and  if  lie  can,  by  some  little 
**  contrivance,  but  connect  the  refusai,  under 
"  which  he  suffers,  with  some  bottles  of  wine, 
*'  with  some  intrigue  carried  on  by  a  wife  or  a 
"  mistress,  the  romance  is  complète,  and  that  is 
"  what  you  probably  heard.  But  an  administra- 
.*'  tive  council  is  not  to  be  managed  so,  because  it 


Ib'l  M  Y    RESIDENCE    WITII  [Aug. 

"  cornes  to  no  décision  but  on  facts  and  accurate 
"  measiirement.  What  is  the  canal  you  men- 
**tioned?  I  cannot  be  iinacqiiainted  with  it." — 
**  Sire,  from  the  Meuse  to  the  Marne,  a  distance 
**  of  seven  leagues  only."  "Very  well  !  my  dear 
**  Sir,  it  is  from  the  Meuse  to  the  Aisne  you  mean 
'*  to  say,  and  it  would  hâve  been  less  than  seven 
"leagues.  I  shall  soon  recollect  ail  about  it  ; 
"  there  is,  however,  but  one  little  difficulty  to 
*'  overcome,  and  that  is,  that  at  this  very  instant 
"  it  is  doubtful  whether  the  project  be  practic- 
"  able.  There,  as  in  other  places,  Hippocrates 
"  sa,ys^es,  and  Galen  says  ?w.  Tarbé  maintained, 
**  that  it  was  impossible,  and  denied,  that  there 
**  was  a  suificiency  of  Avater  at  the  points  of  se- 
"  paration.  I  repeat,  that  you  are  speaking  to 
"  him,  who,  of  ail  others  is  the  most  attentive  to 
"  thèse  objeçts,  more  especially  in  the  environs 
"  of  Paris.  It  was  the  subject  of  my  perpétuai 
*'  dreams,  to  render  Paris  the  real  capital  of 
"  Europe.  I  sometimes  wished  it,  for  instance,  to 
"  become  a  city  with  a  population  of  two,  three, 
"  or  four  millions,  in  a  word,  something  fabulons, 
"  colossal,  unexampled  until  our  days,  and  with 
"  public  establishments  suitable  to  its  popula- 
"  tion." 

•  Some  one  having  tlien  observed,  that  if  Heaven 
had  allov/ed  the  Emperor  to  reign  sixty  years, 
as  it  had  Louis  XTV.,  he  would  hâve  left  many 
grand  nu)numents.  "  Had  Heaven  but  granted 
"  me  twenty  years,  and  a  little  more  leisure,"  re- 


1816.]  Tllt:    KMPEROR    XAPOLEOX.  153 

sumed  the  Emperor  with  vivacity,  **  ancient  Paris 
"  woiild  hâve  been  soiight  for  in  vain  ;  not  a  trace 
**  of  it  would  hâve  been  left,  and  I  should  hâve 
'*  chansfed  the  face  of  France.  Archimedes  pro- 
*'  mised  every  thing,  provided  he  was  siipplied 
"  with  a  resting  place  for  his  lever  ;  I  should  hâve 
"  donc  as  much,  wherever  I  coiild  hâve  fonnd  a 
•*  point  of  support  for  my  energy,  my  perse- 
*'  verance,  and  my  budgets  ;  a  world  might  be 
"  created  with  budgets.  I  should  hâve  displayed 
"  the  différence  between  a  constitutional  Em- 
**  peror  and  a  King  of  France.  The  Kings  of 
**  France  hâve  ne  ver  possessed  any  administrative 
**  or  municipal  institution.  They  hâve  merely 
**  shown  theinselves  great  lords  who  ruined  their 
**  men  of  business. 

**  The  nation  itself  has  nothing  in  its  character, 
**  but  what  is  transitory  and  perishable.  Every 
*'  thing  is  done  for  the  gratification  of  the  moment 

**  and  of  caprice,  nothing  for  duration 

*'  That  is  our  motto,  and  it  is  exemplified  by  our 
*'  manners  in  France.  Every  one  passes  his  life 
**  in  doing  and  undoing;  nothing  is  ever  left  be- 
*'  hind.  Is  it  not  unbecoming,  that  Paris  should 
*'  not  possess  even  a  Frencli  théâtre,  or  an  opéra 
"  house,  in  any  respect  worthy  of  its  high  claims? 

"  I  hâve  often  set  myself  against  the  feasts 
"  which  the  city  of  Paris  wished  to  give  me. 
**  They  consisted  of  dinners,  balls,  artificial  fire- 
*'  Works,  at  anexpense  of  4,  G,  and  800,000  francs; 


U4  MY    RESIDENCE    WITII  {Aug. 

**  the  préparations  for  which  obstnicted  the 
*/  public  for  several  days,  and  which  afterwards 
**  cost  as  much  to  take  away  as  they  had  in  their 
"  construction.  I  proved,  that  with  thèse  idle 
*'  expenses,  they  might  hâve  erected  lasting  and 
**  magniiicent  monuments 

*'  One  must  hâve  gone  through  as  much  as  I 
**  hâve,  in  order  to  be  acquainted  with  ail  the 
**  difficulty  of  doing  good.  If  the  business  re- 
**  lated  to  chimneys,  partitions,  and  furniture  for 
"  some  individuals  in  the  impérial  palaces,  the 
"  work  was  quick  and  effectuai  ;  ])ut  if  it  was 
"  necessary  to  lengthen  the  garden  of  the  Tuileries, 
**  to  render  some  quarters  wholesome,  to  clean 
'*  some  sewers,  and  to  accomplish  a  task  bene- 
"  ficial  to  the  public,  in  which  some  particular 
**  person  had  no  direct  interest,  I  found  it  re- 
**  quisite  to  exert  ail  the  energy  of  my  character, 
"  to  Write  six,  ten  letters  a  day,  and  to  get  into 
*'  a  downright  passion.  It  was  in  this  way,  that 
**  I  laid  out  as  much  as  30  millions  in  sewers,  for 
**  which  no  body  will  ever  thank  me.  I  pulled 
**  down  a  property  of  17  millions  in  houses  in 
"  front  of  the  Tuileries,  for  the  purpose  of  form- 
*'  ing  the  Carousel,  and  throwing  open  the  Louvre. 
*'  What  I  did  is  immense;  what  I  had  resolved  to 
*•  do,  and  what  I  projected,  were  still  much  more 
*/  so." 

A  person  then  remarked,  that  the  Emperor's 
labours  had  not  been  limited  either  to  Paris  or  to 


1S16.]  THE    EMPEllOR    NAPOLEOX.  155 

France,  but  that  almost  every  town  in  Italy  sup- 
plied  instances  of  his  créative  powers.  Every 
where  one  travelled,  at  the  foot  as  well  as  on  tlie 
top  of  the  Alps,  on  the  sands  of  Holland,  on  the 
banks  of  the  Rhine,  Napoléon,  always  Napoléon 
was  to  be  seen. 

In  conséquence  of  this  remark,  he  observed, 
that  he  had  determined  on  draining  the  Poutine 
marshes;  "  Cœsar,"  he  said,  "  was  about  to  un- 
"  dertake  it,  when  he  perished."  And  returning 
to  France,  **  The  kings,  he  said,  had  too  many 
"  country  houses  and  useless  objects.  Any  im- 
**  partial  historian  wiil  be  justilied  in  blaming 
*'  Louis  XIV.  for  his  excessive  and  idle  expendi- 
*'  ture  at  Versailles,  involved  as  he  was  in  wars, 
**  taxes,  and  calamities.  He  exhausted  himself 
"  for  the  purpose  of  forming  after  ail  but  a 
**  bastard  town."  The  Emperor  then  analyzed 
the  advantages  of  an  administrative  town,  that  is 
to  say,  calculated  for  the  union  of  the  différent 
branches  of  administration,  and  they  seemed  to 
him  truly  problematical. 

I  hâve  hère  great  cause  to  regret,  that  I  did  not 
note  down  the  séries  of  those  reasons,  they  were 
so  numerous,  so  ingenious  !  At  présent,  I  am 
precluded  by  the  fidelity,  which  is  due  to  my 
narrative,  from  attempting  to  throw  them  into  any 
kind  of  order.  This  is,  however,  a  regret,  which 
I  hâve  unfortunately  but  too  fréquent  occasions 
to  renew.     If  numerous  breaks  are  perceived  in 


156  MY    IlESIDi:\CE    AVITII  [Aug, 

the  Emperor's  reasoning,  and  more  particularly  in 
tlie  connection  of  his  explanations  ;  it  is  because, 
at  Saint  Helena,  I  took  my  notes  in  a  hasty  man- 
ner,  and  trusted  to  my  mem.ory  for  the  proper 
understanding  and  arrangement  of  them  at  a 
seasonable  time,  or  also  because  I  contented  my- 
self  with  abbreviations  and  hieroglypliic  signs. 
I  also  knew,  that  I  was  at  the  source,  but  now  I 
find,  that  the  meaning  has  escaped  my  memory, 
or  that  I  can  no  longer  trace  it  in  my  own  signs. 
This  must  be  my  excuse  for  many  omissions. 

The  Emperor  did  not  conceal  his  opinion,  that 
the  capital  was  not,  at  times,  a  fit  résidence  for 
the  sovereigns;  but  in  another  point  of  view, 
Versailles  Avas  not  suitable  to  the  great,  the  mini- 
sters  and  the  courtiers.  Louis  XIV.  therefore 
committed  a  fault,  if  he  undertook  to  build  Ver- 
sailles solely  for  the  résidence  of  the  kings,  when 
Saint  Germain  was,  in  every  respect,  ready  for  the 
purpose  ;  nature  seemed  to  hâve  made  it  express- 
ly  for  the  real  résidence  of  the  kings  of  France. 
Napoléon  himself  had  committed  faults  in  that 
respect.  He  ought,  for  instance,  to  hâve  given 
up  Compiegne,  and  he  regretted  having  celebrated 
his  marriage  there  instead  of  selecting  Fontaine- 
bleau. "  That,"  said  he,  in  repeating  the  word 
Fontainebleau,  "  is  the  real  abode  of  kings,  the 
"  house  for  centuries  ;  it  is  not,  perhaps,  strictly 
"  speaking,  an  architectural  palace  ;  but  it  is, 
''  unqucstionably,  well  calculated  and  perfectly 


1S16.]  THE    E-MPEIIOR    NAPOLEON".  ]ôT 

"  suitable.  It  was  certaiiily  the  most  com- 
"  modious  and  the  most  happily  situated  iii 
'•  Europe  for  the  sovereign,"  Sec. 

He  then  took  a  review  of  the  capitals  he  had 
visited,  of  the  palaces  he  had  seen,  and  claimed 
a  decided  superiority  in  oiir  favour.  Fontaine- 
bleau, he  further  added,  was  also,  at  the  same 
time,  the  most  suitable  political  and  military 
situation.  The  Emperor  reproached  himself  with 
the  sums  he  had  expended  on  Versailles,  but  yet 
it  was,  he  said,  necessary  to  prevent  it  froni 
falling  into  ruins.  The  destruction  of  a  con- 
sidérable part  of  that  palace  was  a  subject  of 
considération,  during  the  révolution  ;  it  was 
proposed  to  take  away  the  middle,  and  thus  to 
separate  the  two  sides.  "  It  would  hâve  been  of 
"  essential  service  to  me,"  he  observed;  "for 
"  nothing  is  so  expensive  or  so  truly  useless  as 
"  this  multitude  of  palaces  ;  and  if,  notwithstand- 
"  ing,  I  undertook  that  of  the  King  of  Rome,  it 
**  was  because  I  had  views  peculiar  to  myself; 
**  and  besides,  in  reality,  I  never  thought  of  doing 
*'  more  than  preparing  the  ground.  There  I 
"  should  hâve  stopped.* 

*  AU  the  world  knows,  or  ought  to  hâve  known  (if,  by  a  fa- 
tality,  altogether  peculiar  to  Napoléon,  the  greater  part  of  hi3 
most  coramendahle  actions  had  not  been,  at  the  time,  stifled 
under  the  weight  of  malignity  and  libels),  the  history  of  that 
misérable  hut,  wedged  in  within  the  circumference  of  the  palace 
of  the  King  of  Rome;    the  proprietor  of  which  demanded  suc- 


1^8  M  Y    RE^IDEXCE    WITll  [Aug. 

**  My  errors,  in  disbiirsements  of  tins  kind, 
"  coiild  not,  after  ail,  be  very  great.  They  were, 
"  thanks  to  my  budgets,  observed  and'neces- 
**  sarily  corrected  every  year,  and  could  never 
"  exceed  a  small  part  of  the  expense  occasioned 
*'  by  the  original  fault/' 

The  Emperor  assured  us,  that  he  experienced 
every  possible  difficulty  in  making  bis  system  of 
budgets  intelligible,  and  in  carrying  itinto  execu- 
**  tion.  Wlienever  a  plan  to  the  amount  of  thirty 
"millions,  which  suited  me,  was  proposed; 
*'  granted,  was  my  answer,  but  to  be  wound  up 
**  in  twenty  years,  that  is  to  say,  at  1500,000 
"  francs  a-year.  So  far,  ail  went  on  very  smoothly  ; 
"  but  what  am  I  to  get,  I  added,  for  my  tirst  year  ? 
"  For  if  my  expenditure  is  to  be  divided  into 
"  parts,  it  is,  however,  my  détermination  to  hâve 
"  the  resuit,  the  work  entire  and  complète.  In 
**  this  manner,  I  wished  at  first  for  a  recess,  an 
**  apartment,  no  niatter  what,  but  something  per- 
"  fect  for  my  1500,000  francs.  The  architects 
**  seemed  resolved  not  to  comprehend  my  mean- 

cessively  ten,  twenty,  fifty,  and  one  liundrc-d  times  its  roal  value. 
When  lie  rcached  that  ridiculous  price,  the  Emperor,  from  whom 
directions  in  that  respect,  were  taken,  suddenly  commanded  a 
stop  to  be  put  to  ail  fiirther  bargains,  exclaiming,  that  that 
wretched  stall  in  the  midst  of  ail  the  magnificence  of  the  palace 
of  the  King  of  Rome,  should  be,  after  ail,  tlie  Fine  of  Nabulh, 
the  most  décisive  testimony  of  his  justice^  the  noblest  trophy  of 
his  reign.  . 


181G.]  THE    EMPEllOR    NAPOLEON'.  tr>9 

"  ing;  it  narrowed  their  cxpansive  views  and 
"  their  grand  effects.  Tliey  would,  at  once,  hâve 
*'  willingly  erected  a  whole  façade,  which  miist 
*'  hâve  remamed  for  a  long  time  useless,  and 
"  thus  involved  me  in  immease  disbursements, 
**  which,  if  interrupted,  wonld  hâve  swallowed 
*'  np  every  thing. 

"  It  was  in  that  manner,  which  was  peculiar 
"  to  myself,  and  in  spite  of  so  many  political 
"  and  military  obstacles,  that  I  executed  so 
**  many  undertakings.  I  had  added  forty  millions 
*'  to  the  Crown  effects,  of  which  four  millions, 
'*  at  least,  consisted  of  silver  plate.  How  many 
"  palaces  hâve  I  not  repaired  ?  Perhaps,  too 
*'  many  ;  I  return  to  that  subject.  Thanks  to 
**  my  mode  of  acting,  I  was  enabled  to  inhabit 
"  Fontainebleau,  within  one  year  after  the  repairs 
"  were  begun,  and  it  cost  me  no  more  than 
"  5  or  600,000  francs.  If  I  hâve  since  expended 
**  six  millions  on  it,  that  was  merely  the  resiilt 
*'  of  six  years.  It  would  bave  cost  me  much 
'*  more  in  the  course  of  time.  My  principal 
"  object  was  to  make  the  expense  light  and 
*'  imperceptible,  and  to  give  durability  to  the 
"  work. 

"  During  my  visits  to  Fontainebleau,"  said  the 
Emperor,  "  from  12  to  1500  persons  were  in- 
*'  vited  and  lodged,  with  every  convenience, 
"  upwards  of  3,000  might  be  entertained  at  din- 
*'  ner,  and  this  cost  the  Sovereign  very  little,  in 


160  MV    RESIDENCE    WITH  '         [Aug. 

**  conséquence  of  the  admirable  order  and  re- 
"  gularity  established  by  Duroc.  More  than 
**  twenty  or  five-and-twenty  princes,  dignitaries, 
"  or  ministers  were  obliged  to  keep  their  house- 
**  holds  there. 

"  I  disapproved  of  the  building  of  Versailles; 
*'  but  in  my  notions  respecting  Paris,  and  they 
*'  were  occasionally  gigantic,  I  thought  of  making 
"  it  useful  and  of  converting  it,  in  the  course  of 
**  time,  into  a  kind  of  fauxbourg,  an  adjacent  site, 
**  a  point  of  view  froni  the  grand  capital;  and 
"  for  the  purpose  of  more  effectually  appro- 
**  priating  it  to  that  end,  I  had  conceived  a  plan, 
**  of  which  I  had  a  description  sketched  out. 

"  It  was  my  intention  to  expel  from  its  beau- 
**  tiful  thickets  those  nymphs,  the  productions 
'*  of  a  wretched  taste,  and  those  ornaments  à  la 
"  Turcaret,  and  to  replace  them  by  panoramas, 
"  in  masonry,  of  ail  the  capitals,  into  which  we 
*'  had  entered  victorious,  and  of  ail  the  cele- 
"  brated  battlcs,  which  had  rendered  our  arms 
"  illustrions.  It  would  hâve  been  a  collection 
"  of  so  many  eternal  monuments  of  our  triumphs 
*'  and  our  national  glory,  placed  at  the  gâte  of 
"  the  capital  of  Europe,  which  necessarily  could 
*'  not  fail  of  being  visited  by  the  rest  of  the 
"  world."  Hère  lie  suddenly  left  off,  and  began 
reading  le  Distrait,  but  he  almost  instantly  laid 
it  aside,  whether  from  the  agitation  of  liis  own 
thoughts,  or  from  a  nervous  cough,  with  wliich 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEOK.  161 

he  had,  for  a  short  time,  been  often  affected 
after  dinner.  He  certainly  s:ets  considerably 
worse,  and  his  health  is  altogether  declining. 

Plan  of  a  Histovy  of  Europe. — Selim  III. — Forces  of  a 
Turkish  Sultan. — Tlie  Mamelukes. — On  the  Regency. 

5th. — The  Emperor  did  not  go  ont  until  after 
five  o'clock.  He  was  in  pain,  and  had  taken  a 
bath,  where  he  remained  too  long-,  in  conséquence 
of  the  arrivai  of  Sir  H.  Lowe,  as  he  would  not 
leave  it,  until  the  Governor  disappeared. 

The  Emperor  had  read,  while  in  the  bath,  two 
volumes  of  the  Ottoman  History.  He  had  con- 
ceived  the  idea,  and  regretted  that  he  had  been 
unable  to  exécute  it,  of  having  ail  the  historiés 
of  Europe,  since  Louis  XIV.,  composed  on  the 
very  documents,  belonging  to  our  foreign  affairs, 
which  contained  the  officiai  reports  of  ail  the 
ambassadors. 

*'  My  reign,"  he  observed,  *'  would  hâve  been 
"  a  perfect  epoch  for  that  object.  The  supe- 
"  riority  of  Fiance,  its  independence,  and  re- 
'*  génération,  enabled  the  actual  government  to 
**  make  such  a  publication,  without  inconve- 
*'  nience.  It  would  hâve  resembled  the  publica- 
"  tion  of  ancient  history.  Nothing  could  hâve 
"  been  more  valuabie."' 

He  next  adverted  to  Sultan  Selim  III.,  to 
whom,  he  said,  he  once  wrote  ;  *'  Sultan,  corne 

Voh.  lir.  1\t!  } .  M 


l<>'2  MY    RESIDENCE    WITH  [Aug. 

"  forth  from  tliy  seraglio;  place  thyself  at  the 
**  head  of  tliy  troops,  and  renew  the  glorious 
**  days  of  thy  monarchy." 

"  Selim,  the  Louis  XVI.  of  the  Turks/'  said 
the  Emperor,  **  who  was  very  much  attached 
''  and  very  favourable  to  iis,  contented  himself 
"  with  answering,  that  the  advice  was  excellent 
"  for  the  iirst  prmces  of  his  dynasty  ;  but  that 
"  the  manners  of  those  times  were  very  différent  ; 
"  and  that  such  a  conduct  would,  at  présent, 
**  be  unseasonable,  and  altogether  unproduc- 
*'  tive." 

The  Emperor  added,  however,  that  nobody 
knew  how  to  calculate,  with  certainty,  the  energy 
of  the  sudden  burst,  which  miglit  be  produced 
by  a  Sultan  of  Constantinople,  who  was  capable 
of  placing  himself  at  the  head  of  his  people,  of 
infusing  new  spirits  into  them,  and  of  exciting 
that  fanatical  multitude  to  action.  At  a  later 
period,  lie  observed,  that,  for  his  own  part,  if 
he  had  been  able  to  unité  the  Mamelukes  with 
his  French,  he  should  hâve  considered  himself 
the  master  of  the  world.  **  With  that  chosen 
"  handful,  and  the  rabble,''  he  added,  with  a 
smile,  "  recruited  on  the  spot,  to  be  expended 
**  in  the  hour  of  need,  I  know  nothing  that 
''  could  hâve  resisted  me.  Algiers  trembled 
"  at  it. 

*'  'But  should  your  Sultan,'  said,'^one  day,  the 
"  Dey  of  Algiers  to  the  French  Consul,  '  ever  take 


1616*.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON'.  I6:i 

"  it  into  his  head  to  pay  us  a  visit,  what  safety 
*'  could  \ve  hope  for?  For  he  has  defeated  the 
"  Mamelukes.'  The  Mameliikes,"  obsorved  the 
Emperor,  "  were,  in  fact,  objects  of  vénération 
**  and  terror  throiighout  the  east  ;  they  were 
*'  looked  upon  as  invincible  until  our  time.' 

The  Emperor,  while  waiting  for  dinner  in  the 
midst  of  us,  opened  a  book,  which  lay  at  his  side 
on  the  couch  ;  it  was  the  Regency.  He  stigma- 
tized  it  as  one  of  the  most  abominable  eras  of  our 
annals  ;  and  was  vexed,  that  it  had  been  de- 
scribed  with  the  levity  of  the  âge,  and  not  with 
the  severity  of  history.  It  had  been  strewed 
with  the  flowers  of  fashionable  life,  and  set  ofF 
with  the  colouring  of  the  grâces,  instead  of 
having  been  treated  with  exact  justice.  The 
Regency,  he  observed,  had  been,  in  reality,  the 
reign  of  the  depravity  of  the  heart,  of  tlie  liber- 
tinism  of  the  mind,  and  of  the  most  radical  im- 
morality  of  every  species.  It  was  such,  he  said, 
that  he  believed  in  ail  the  horrors  and  abomina- 
tions with  which  the  manners  of  the  régent  were 
reproached  in  the  bosom  of  his  own  family  ; 
while  he  did  not  give  crédit  to  the  stories  told  of 
Louis  XV.,  who,  although  plunged  in  the  foulest 
and  most  frightful  debauchery,  did  not,  however, 
leave  any  grounds  to  justify  his  belief  in  such 
shocking  and  monstrous  indulgencies  ;  and  he 
vindicated  him  very  satisfactorily  from  certain  im- 
putations, which  would   hâve  seriously  affected 

M   2 


164  .MY     RESIDENCE    M'ITH  [Aug. 

the  person  of  one  of  his  (Napoleon's)  former  aides- 
de-camp.  He  considered  the  epoch  of  the  reg-ent 
to  hâve  been  the  overthrow  of  every  kiiid  of  pro- 
perty,  the  destruction  of  piiblic  morals.  Nothing 
had  been  held  sacred  either  in  manners  or  in  prin- 
ciples.  The  reg-ent  was  personally  overwhelmed 
with  infamy.  In  the  affair  of  the  leoitimated 
princes,  he  had  been  guilty  of  the  lowest  base- 
ness,  and  of  great  abuse  of  authority.  The  king 
alone  could  sanction  such  a  décision,  and  he,  the 
régent,  had  felt  pleasure  in  gratuitously  dis- 
honouring  himself  in  the  person  of  his  wife,  the 
natural  daughter  of  Louis  XIV.,  whom  he  had 
fonnd  it  his  interest,  however,  to  marry,  while 
that  king  v/as  on  the  throne,  &c.  ikc. 

6th. — As  we  wished  to  try  the  tent,  which  was 
jiist  linished,  the  table  was  laid  there,  and  we  in- 
vited  the  English  officers,  who  had  superintended 
the  work,  to  breakfast  with  us. 

The  Emperor  sent  for  me  to  his  apartment  ;  he 
dressed  himself,  and  when  he  went  ont,  I  accom- 
panied  him  to  the  bottom  of  the  Mood,  where  we 
walked  for  some  time.  He  entered  into  the  con- 
sidération of  some  important  objects 

itc.  &:c.* 

*  1  hâve  alrcady  ieit  it  necessary  to  observe,  that  in  jirt'pnring 
my  journal  ni  Longwood,  cirouinspection  and  prudence  often 
required  me  to  g'ive  a  inystcrious  turn  of  expression  to  my 
thoughts.  At  présent,  in  conséquence  of  the  lenj^th  of  time 
Ihat  has  ehipsed,  «ince  I  made  my  notes,  and  of  the  <Ji fièrent 


1S16'.]  THE    E3IPEROR    NAPOLli;OX'.  1(55 

The  Emperor  returned  to  the  calash  for  tlie 
purpose  of  ordering  it  to  be  in  readiness,  and  wc 
resumed  our  walk,  until  it  took  us  up.  On  oiir 
return,  the  Emperor  visited  the  tent,  and  said  a 
few  words,  expreîssive  of  his  satisfaction  to  the 
officer  and  seamen,  \vho  were  eniployed  in  putting 
the  last  hand  to  it. 

Canipaigns  of  liait/,  ^r. — Kpoch  of  1815,  cVc — GvMa^ 
VU&  III. — Gmtavuti  It'. — Bernadottc. — Paul  I. 

7th_.—  Aftcr  breakfasting  iu  the  tent,  the  Eni-  .\'"v'^" 
perortook  a  fancy  to  review  sonie  chapters  of  the 
Campaigns  of  Italy  ;  he  sent  for  my  son,  whose  • 
foot  was  at  length  nuieh  better,  and  wliose  eyes 
were  in  an  iniproved  state.  He  tinished  the  chap- 
ters of  Pavia  and  Leghorn.  He  afterwards  walked 
towards  the  bottom  of  the  wood,  having  ordered 
the  carriage  to  follow.  On  the  way,  the  Em- 
peror said,  that  he  considered  the  campaigns  of 
Italy  and  Egypt  as  completely  finished,  and  in  a 
fit  state  to  be  given  to  the  pnbHc,  and  it  wonld, 
no  doubt,  he  remarked,  be  a  very  agreeable  pré- 
sent to  the  French  and  Italians  ;  it  was  the  record 
of  their  glory  and  their  rights,  <i'c.     He  did  not 

situations  in  wliich  1  hâve  been  j)l;ice(l,  I  finil  miiny  things  which 
I  !im  no  longtr  able  to  explain  to  my  satisfaction.  For  instance, 
tliere  v.ere  in  this  place  initiais  and  other  characters,  of  the  true 
meaning  of  which,  I  cannot,  notwithslanding  cvery  possible  effort^ 
form  the  slightest  idea. 


166  '   MY    RESIDEXCE    WlTlI  [Aug. 

think,  however,  that  lie  ought  to  put  his  name  to 
it,  and  he  repeated,  that  the  différent  epochs  of 
his  memoirs  would  consecrate  those  of  his  faithtul 
companions,  Sec. 

On  the  arrivai  of  the  calash,  the  conversation, 
continuing  on  the  same  subject,  he  was  earnestly 
pressed  to  finish  1815;  and  its  importance,  inter- 
est,  and  results,  were  warmly  canvassed.  **  Very 
"  M^ell  !"  said  he,  w'ith  a  smile,  **  I  must  give  my- 
**  self  up  to  it  entirely.  it  is  a  pleasure  to  be  en- 
**  couraged  ;  but  it  is  also  requisite  to  go  to  v^^ork 
"  with  a  proper  temper.  We  arc  surfeited  hère 
*'  with  disgust  and  trickery  ;  we  seeni  to  be 
"  envied  the  air  we  breathe." 

He  returned  to  his  apartment,  and  I  foUowed 
him,  when  a  conversation  peculiarly  interesting 
and  remarkable  took  place.  It  related  to  Gusta- 
vus  lïl.,  to  Sweden,  to  Russia,  to  Gustavus  IV., 
to  Bernadotte,  to  Paul  L,  &c.  kc. 

I  hâve  said,  that,  at  Aix-la-Chapelle,  Gustavus 
III.  lived  among  us  as  a  simple  individual  under 
the  name  of  le  Comte  de  Haga.  He  constituted 
the  charm  of  society,  by  the  vivacity  of  his  wit 
and  the  interest  he  imparted  to  lus  récitals.  I 
had  heard  from  his  own  mouth  his  famous  revo/u- 
iio)i  of  1772,  and  I  was  in  the  happiest  situation 
to  olitain  a  thorough  knowledge  of  that  epoch  of 
the  historyof  Sweden.  I  M^as,  at  the  same  time, 
very  well  acquainted  with  a  Baron  de  Spreng- 
porten,  who,  aftcr  having  displayed  great  zeal  for 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR    XAPOLEOX.  167 

Gustavus,  had  the  misfortune  to  go  to  Russia, 
and  return  at  the  head  oï  foreigners  to  fight 
against  his  country.  The  conséquence  was,  that 
sentence  of  death  had  been  passed  npon  him  in 
Sweden.  He  was  also  at  Aix-la-Chapelle  at  the 
moment,  and  had  banished  himself  from  it,  ont 
of  courtesy,  he  said,  on  the  arrivai  of  Gustavus. 
He  had  not,  however,  removed  farther  off  than 
half  a  league,  so  that  ail  I  heard  the  King  say 
in  the  evening,  was  controverted,  moditied,  or 
conrirmed  for  me  the  next  morning  at  breakfast 
by  the  Baron.  He  had  enjoyed  a  very  considér- 
able share  of  that  Prince's  confidence,  and  he 
communicated  the  most  numerous  and  minute 
particulars,  as  positive  facts,  respecting  the  ro- 
mance of  the  birth  of  Gustavus  IV.,  who  had 
been  represented  as  altogether  unconnected  by 
blood  with  Gustavus  III.,  according  to  his  full 
knowledge  and  his  own  désire. 

The  Emperor  observed,  that  this  same  Spreng- 
porten  had  been  actually  sent  to  him  as  envoy  by 
Paul,  at  the  time  of  his  consulate.  With  respect 
to  Gustavus  IV.,  he  said,  that  that  Prince  had 
on  his  appearance  in  the  world,  announced  him- 
self as  a  hero,  and  had  terminated  his  career 
merely  as  a  madman,  and  that  he  had  distin- 
guished  himself  in  his  early  days  by  some  very 
remarkable  traits.  While,  yet  under  âge,  he  was 
seen  to  insuit  Catharine  by  the  refusai  of  her 
grand-daughter,  at  the  moment  even,  when  that 


I6f<  M  Y    RESIDENCE    M  11  II  [Aug. 

great  Empress,  seated  on  lier  tlirone,  and  siir- 
rounded  by  her  court,  waited  only  for  him  to 
celebrate  the  marriage  ceremony. 

At  a  later  period,  he  had  insnlted  Alexander, 
in  no  less  marked  a  manner,  by  refusing,  after 
Paur.s  catastrophe,  one  of  the  new  Emperor's 
officers  entrance  into  his  territory,  and  by  an- 
svvering  to  the  officiai  complaints  addressed  to 
him  on  this  subject,  that  Alexander  onght  not  to 
be  displeased,  that  he,  Gustavus,  who  still  wept 
for  the  assassination  of  his  father,  shonld  shiit  the 
entrance  of  his  states  against  one  of  those,  ac- 
cused  by  the  public  voice  of  having  immolated 
his  (Alexander's). 

'*  On  niy  accession  to  the  sovereignty,"'  said  the 
Emperor,  "  he  declared  himselfmy  great  antago- 
'*  nist  ;  it  might  hâve  been  supposed,  that  nothing 
*'  short  of  renewing  the  exploits  of  the  great  Gus- 
"  tavus  Adolphns  would  hâve  satisfied  him.  He 
"  ran  over  the  whole  of  Germany,  for  the  pnrpose 
"  of  stirring  up  cnemies  against  me.  At  the  time 
"  of  the  catastro})he  of  the  Duke  d'Enghein,  he 
"  swore  he  would  exact  vengeance  in  person;  and 
"  at  a  later  period,  he  insolently  sent  back  the 
"  black  eagle  to  the  King  of  Prussia,  because  the 
"  latter    had    accepted    my   légion    of  honour, 

"  His  fatal  moment  at  length  arrived;  a  con- 
"  spiracy,  of  no  common  kind,  tore  him  from  the 
**  throne  and  transported  him  ont  of  his  states. 


ISIC]  iiij;    EMPEPvOR    \APOLKO.V.  16!> 

*'  The unanimity  evinced  against  hiniis,  no  doiibt, 
"  a  proof  of  the  wrongs  he  had  committed.  I  am 
*'  ready  to  admit,  that  he  was  inexcusable  and 
"  even  mad,  but  it  is,  notwithstanding-,  extra- 
'*  ordinary  and  unexampled,  that,  in  that  crisis, 
"  a  single  sword  was  not  drawn  in  his  defence, 
*'  whether  froni  aifection,  froni  gratitude,  from 
*'  virtuous  feeling,  or  even  from  niere  simplicity, 
"  if  it  must  be  so  ;  and  truly,  it  is  a  circumstance, 
"  which  does  little  honour  to  the  atmosphère  of 
''  Kings." 

This  prince  tossed  about  and  deceived  by  the 
English,  who  wished  to  make  him  their  instru- 
ment, and  repulsed  by  his  relatives,  seemed  deter- 
n)ined  to  renounce  the  world  ;  and  as  if  he  had 
felt  his  existence  disgraced  by  his  contempt  of 
mankind  and  his  disgust  at  things,  he  voluntarily 
lost  himself  altogether  in  the  crowd. 

The  Emperor  said,  that,  after  the  battle  of 
Leipsic,  he  had  been  informed  on  the  part  of 
Gustavus,  that  he  had  no  doubt  been  his  enemy  a 
long  time  ;  but  that,  for  a  long  time,  he  (Napo- 
léon) was  of  ail  others  the  sovereign  of  whom  he 
had  the  least  to  complain,  and  that,  for  a  long 
time  also,  his  only  sentiments  with  regard  to  him, 
were  those  of  admiration  and  sympathy  ;  that  his 
actual  misfortunes  permitted  him  to  express  his 
feelings  without  restraint  ;  that  he  offered  to  be 
his  aide-de-camp,  and  requested  an  asylum  in 
France.    *'  I  was  afFected,"  observed  the  Emperor  ; 


170  MV    RESIDENCE    WITIi  lAug. 

"  but  I  soon  reHected,  that  if  I  received  him,  my 
"  dignity  woiild  be  pledged  to  make  exertions  in 
*'  his  favour.  Besides,  I  no  longer  ruled  the 
**  world,  and  then  common  niinds  would  not  fail 
'*  to  discover  in  the  interest  I  took  for  him,  an 
"impotent  hatred  against  Bernadette;  finally, 
**  Gustavus  had  been  dethroned  by  the  voice  of 
**  the  people,  and  it  was  the  voice  of  the  people 
**  by  which  I  had  been  elevated.  In  taking  up 
"  his  cause,  I  should  hâve  been  guilty  of  incon- 
**  sistency  in  my  own  conduct,  and  hâve  acted 
•'  upon  discordant  principles.  In  short,  I  dread- 
'*  ed,  lest  I  should  render  affairs  more  compli- 
**  cated  than  they  were,  and  silenced  my  feelings 
*'  of  generosity.  I  caused  him  to  be  answered, 
**  that  I  appreciated  what  he  ofFered  me,  and  that 
**  I  was  sensible  of  it,  but  that  the  political  in- 
*'  terest  of  France  did  not  allow  me  to  indulge  in 
**  my  private  feelings,  and  that  it  even  imposed 
*'  upon  me  the  painful  task  of  refusing,  for  the 
*'  moment,  the  asyhim  which  he  asked.  That  he 
**  would,  however,  greatly  deceive  himself,  if  he 
**  supposed  me  to  entertain  any  other  sentiments 
**  than  those  of  extrême  good  M'ill  and  sincère 
*'  wishes  for  his  happiness,  &c.  cS:c. 

*'  Some  time  after  the  expulsion  of  Gustavus, 
*'  while  the  succession  to  the  crown  was  vacant, 
*'  the  Swedes,  désirons  of  recommending  them- 
**  selves  to  me  and  securing  the  protection  of 
**  France,  asked  me  to  give  them  a  King.     My 


ISlf).]  THE    EMPEROR    XAPÔLÉON'.  ITI 

*'  attention  was,  for  an  instant,  turhed  to  the  vice- 
*^  roy  ;  but  it  woiild  hâve  been  necessary  for  hinï 
**  to  change  his  reliixion,  whicli  T  deemed  beneath 
**  my  dignity  and  that  of  ail  those  who  belonged 
**  to  me.  Besides,  I  did  not  think  the  political 
**  resuit  siifficiently  important  to  excuse  an  ac- 
'*  tion,  so  contrary  to  our  manners.  1  attached, 
*'  however,  too  much  value  to  the  idea  of  seeing 
"  the  throne  of  Sw^eden  in  possession  of  a  French- 
*'  man.  It  was,  in  my  situation,  a  puérile  senti- 
**  ment.  The  real  King,  according  to  my  politi- 
**  cal  System  and  the  true  interests  of  France,  was 
•'  the  King  of  Denmark,  because  I  should  theil 
**  hâve  governed  Sweden  by  the  influence  of  my 
**  simple  contact  with  the  Danish  provinces. 
"  Bernadotte  was  elected,  and  lie  was  indebted 
**  for  his  élévation  to  his  wife,  the  sister-in-law  of 
**  my  brother  Joseph,  who  then  reigned  at  Madrid. 

*'  Bernadotte,  afl'ecting  great  dépendance  on 
"  me,  came  to  ask  for  my  approbation,  protesting, 
*'  with  too  visible  an  anxiety,  that  he  would  not 
"  accept  the  crown,  unless  it  was  agreeable  to 
**  me. 

"  I,  the  elected  monarch  of  the  people,  had  to 
"  answer,  that  I  could  not  set  myself  against  the 
*'  élections  of  other  people.  It  was  what  I  told 
*'  Bernadotte,  whose  whole  attitude  betrayed  the 
"  anxiety,  excited  by  the  expectation  of  my 
"  answer.  I  added,  that  he  had  only  to  take  ad- 
**  vantage  of  the  good  will  of  which  he  had  been 


\7'Z  MV    RLSIDKXCL    WITH  [Aug. 

"  the  object;  that  I  wislied  to  be  considered  as 
"  having  had  no  weiglit  in  his  élection,  br.t  that 
'*  it  had  my  approbation  and  my  best  wishes.  I 
"  felt,  however,  shall  I  say  it,  a  secret  instinct, 
"  M'hich  made  the  thing  disagreeable  and  painful. 
"  Bernadette  was,  in  fact,  the  serpent,  wliich  I 
**  nourished  in  mybosom;  he  had  scarcely  left 
"  us,  when  he  clung*  to  the  system  of  our  enemies, 
'*  and  we  were  obliged  to  watch  and  dread  him. 
**  At  a  later  period,  lie  was  one  of  the  great  ac- 
"  tivc  causes  of  our  cahimities;  it  was  he  who 
*'  gave  to  oLir  enemies  the  key  of  our  political 
"  System  and  communicated  the  tactics  of  our 
"  armies;  it  was  he,  who  pointed  out  to  them  the 
"  way  to  the  sacred  soil  !  In  vain,  would  he  excuse 
"  himself  by  saying,  that  in  accepting  the  crown 
"  of  Sweden,  he  was  thenceforth  bound  to  be  a 
"  Swede  only  ;  pitiful  excuse,  valid  only  with 
"  those  of  the  populace  and  the  vulgar  that  are 
"  ambitions.  In  taking  a  wife,  one  does  not  re- 
"  nounce  l\is  mother,  still  less  is  lie  bound  to 
"  transfix  her  bosom  and  tear  out  her  entrails. 
"  It  is  said,  that  he  afterwards  repented,  that  is 
"  to  say,  v/hen  it  was  no  longer  time,  and  when 
"  the  mischief  was  doue.  The  fact  is,  that  in 
"  finding  himself  once  more  among  us,  he  per- 
"  ceived,  that  opinion  exacted  justice  of  him;  he 
"  felt  himself  struck  with  death.  Then,  the  film 
"  fell  from  his  eyes  ;  for  it  is  not  known  to  what 
"  dreams  his  presumption  and  his  vanity  might 


1816.]  TilK    KMI'KROn     XAl'OLEOX.  1?^ 

"  have  incitée!  him  in  liis  blindness,"  &c.  kc.  And 
at  the  end  of  this  and  many  other  things  besides, 
I  presumed  to  observe  to  him,  as  a  very  fantasti- 
cal  and  extraordinary  matter  of  chance,  that  the 
soldier  Bernadotte,  elevated  to  a  crown,  forwliich 
protestanism  was  a  necessary  qualification,  was 
actually  boni  a  protestant,  and  that  his  son, 
destined,  on  that  account,  to  reig'n  over  the 
Scandinavians,  presented  himself  in  the  midst  of 
them  precisely  with  the  national  name  of  Oscar. 
*'  My  dear  Las  Cases,"  replied  the  Emperor,  **  it 
**  is  becaiise  that  chance,  so  often  cited,  of  which 
"  the  ancients  made  a  deity,  which  astonishes  iis 
"  everv  dav  and  strilces  us  every  instant,  does  not, 
**  after  ail,  appear  so  singular,  so  capricious,  so 
"  extraordinary,  but  in  conséquence  of  our  ig- 
"  norance  of  the  secret  and  altogether  natural 
*'  causes,  by  which  it  is  produced,  and  yet  this 
"  single  combination  is  sufficient  to  create  the 
"  marvellous  and  give  birth  to  mysteries.  Hère, 
"  for  instance,  with  respect  to  the  first  point,  that 
"  of  liaving  been  born  of  a  protestant,  let  not  the 
"  honour  of  that  circumstance  be  assigned  to 
'•  chance  ;  blot  that  out.  With  regard  to  the  se- 
"  cond,  the  name  of  Oscar;  it  was  1,  who  was 
"  his  godfather,  and  when  1  gave  him  the  name,  I 
"  was  raving  mad  with  Ossian  ;  it  presented  itself 
"  of  course  very  naturally,  You  now  see  how 
"  simple  that  is  which  so  greatly  astonished  you," 
kc.  Sec. 


174  MT    RESIDENCE    WITH  [Aug. 

At  the  end  of  this  conversation,  the  Emperor 
returned  to  Paul  ;  lie  talked  of  the  passionate  fits 
brought  upon  him  by  the  perlidy  of  the  English 
ministry.  He  had  been  promised  Malta,  the  mo- 
ment it  was  taken  possession  of,  and  accordingly, 
he  was  in  great  haste  to  get  himself  nominated 
grand-master.  ]Malta  reduced,  the  English  mini- 
sters  denied  that  they  had  promised  it  to  him. 
It  is  confidently  stated,  that  on  the  reading  of  this 
shameful  falsehood,  Paul  felt  so  indignant,  that 
seizing  the  dispatch,  in  full  council,  he  ran  his 
sword  through  it,  and  ordered  it  to  be  sent  back 
in  that  condition,  by  way  of  answer.  "  If  it  be  a 
"  folly,"  said  the  Emperor,  *'  it  must  be  allowed, 
"  that  it  is  the  folly  of  a  noble  soûl  ;  it  is  the  in- 
"  dignation  of  virtue,  which  was  incapable,  until 
"  then,  of  suspecting  such  baseness." 

At  the  same  time,  the  English  ministers,  treating 
with  us  for  the  exchange  of  prisoners,  refused  to 
include,  ont  he  same  scale,  the  Russian  prisoners 
taken  in  HoUand,  who  were  in  the  actual  service 
and  fought  for  the  sole  cause  of  the  English. 
"  I  had,"  said  the  Emperor,  ''  hit  upon  the  bent 
"  of  Paul's  character.  1  seized  time  by  the  fore- 
"  lock  ;  I  collected  thèse  Russians  ;  I  clothed 
"  them  and  sent  them  back  to  him  without  any 
*'  expense.  From  that  instant,  that  gênerons  heart 
"  was  altogether  devo.ted  to  me  ;  and  as  I  had  no 
"  interest  in  opposition  to  Russia,  and  should 
"  never  hâve  spoken  or  acted  but  with  justice. 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEOX.  175 

"  there  was  no  doubt,  but  that  1  should  hâve 
"  been  enabled,  for  the  future,  to  dispose  of  the 
*'  Cabinet  of  St.  Petersburgh.  Our  enemies  were 
"  sensible  of  the  danger,  and  it  has  beeïi  thought 
"  that  this  good  will  of  Paul  proved  fatal  to 
*'  hini  ;  it  well  might  hâve  been  the  case  ;  for 
"  there  are  Cabinets,  with  whom  nothing*  is 
"  sacred.*' 

N.  B. — It  has  been  already  mentioned,  that 
the  Emperor  complained,  that  the  Prince  de 
Ponte-Corvo  (Bernadotte)  was  scarcely  in  Swe- 
den,  before  he  had  occasion  to  distrust  and 
counteract  his  schemes.  The  foUowing  letter  is 
a  décisive  proof  of  this  assertion,  and  also  con- 
tains  an  important  exposition  of  the  continental 
System. 

"  Tnller'm,  AngustS,  1811. 

"  Monsieur,  the  Prince  Royal  of  Sweden,  your 
private  correspondence  has  reached  me  ;  I  hâve 
appreciated,  as  a  proof  of  the  sentiments  of 
friendship  you  entertain  for  me,  and  as  a  testi- 
mony  of  the  loyalty  of  your  character,  the  com- 
munications M^hich  you  make  to  me.  There  is 
no  political  reason,  which  prevents  me  from  an- 
swering  you. 

"  You  appreciate,  without  doubt,  the  motives 
of  my  decree  of  the  21st  of  November,  1806.  It 
prescribes  no  law^s  to  Europe.  It  merely  traces 
the  steps,  that  are  to  be  followed,  to  reach  the 


i;6  MV    RESIDENCE    WITII  [Auç. 

same  end  ;  the  treaties,  wliich  I  hâve  signed, 
constitiite  the  remainder.  The  right  of  blockade, 
which  Englaiid  has  arrogated  to  herself,  is  as  in- 
jurions to  the  commerce  of  Sweden  and  as  hostile 
to  the  hononr  of  her  flag,  as  it  is  injurions  to 
the  commerce  of  the  French  Empire  and  to  the 
dignity  of  its  power.  I  will  even  assert,  that 
the  domineering  pretensions  of  England  are  still 
more  offensive  with  regard  to  Sweden  ;  for  your 
commerce  is  more  maritime  than  continental  ; 
the  real  strength  of  the  kingdom  of  Sweden  con- 
sists  as  much  in  the  existence  of  its  navy,  as  in 
the  existence  of  its  army. 

**  The  developement  of  the  forces  of  France 
is  altogether  continental.  I  hâve  been  enabîed 
to  create,  within  my  states,  an  internai  trade, 
which  diffuses  subsistence  and  money  from  the 
extremities  to  the  centre  of  the  empire,  by  the 
impulse  given  to  agricultural  and  manufacturing 
industry,  and  by  the  rigorous  prohibition  of  fo- 
reign  productions.  This  state  of  things  is  such, 
that  it  is  impossible  for  me  to  décide,  whether 
French  commerce  would  hâve  much  to  gain  by 
peace  with  England. 

*'  The  maintenance,  observance,  or  adoption  of 
the  decree  of  Berlin  is,  therefore,  I  am  bold 
enough  to  say  it,  more  in  the  interests  of  Sweden 
and  of  Europe,  than  in  the  particular  interests  of 
France. 

**  Such  are  the  reasons,  which  my  ostensible 


ISIC]  THE    EMPEROR    XAPOLEOX.  177 

policy  may  set  up  against  the  ostensible  policy 
of  England.  The  secret  reasons  that  influence 
England  are  the  following  :  She  does  not  désire 
peace  ;  she  has  rejected  ail  the  overtures  whicli 
I  hâve  caiised  to  be  made  to  her  ;  lier  commerce 
and  her  territory  are  enlarged  by  war  ;  she  is 
apprehensive  of  restitutions  ;  vshe  will  not  con- 
solidate  the  new  system  by  a  treaty  ;  she  does 
not  wish  that  France  should  be  powerful.  I  wish 
for  peace,  I  wish  for  it  in  its  perfect  state,  be- 
cause  peace  alone  can  give  solidity  to  new 
interests,  and  states  created  by  conquest.  I 
think,  that  on  this  point,  your  Royal  Highness 
oiight  not  to  differ  in  opinion  from  me. 

*'  I  hâve  a  great  niimber  of  ships;  I  hâve  no 
seamen  ;  I  cannot  carry  on  the  contest  w^itli 
England  for  the  pnrpose  of  compelling  her  to 
make  peace  ;  nothing  but  the  continental  system 
can  prove  successful.  In  this  respect,  I  expé- 
rience no  obstacle  on  the  part  of  Russia  and 
Prussia  ;  their  commerce  can  only  be  a  gainer  by 
the  prohibitive  system. 

*'  Your  cabinet  is  composed  of  enlightened 
men.  There  is  dignity  and  patriotism  in  the 
Swedish  nation.  The  influence  of  your  Royal 
Highness  in  the  Government  is  generally  ap- 
proved  :  you  will  expérience  few  impediments 
in  withdrawing  your  people  from  a  mercantile 
submission  to  a  foreign  nation.  Do  not  suffer 
yourself  to  be  caught  by  the  too  teynpt'mg  baits  îvhich 

Vol.  III.  Part  V.  n 


178  MY    RESIDENCE    WITII  [Aug. 

England  may  ïiold  ont  ta  you.  The  future  will 
prove  to  you,  that,  whatever  may  be  the  révo- 
lutions, which  time  must  produce,  the  Sovereigns 
of  Europe  will  establish  prohibitive  laws,  which 
will  leave  them  masters  in  their  own  dominions. 

"  The  tlïird  article  of  the  treaty  of  the  21stof 
February,   1802,  corrects  the  incomplète  stipula- 
tions of  the  treaty  of  Fredericsham.     It  must  be 
rigorously  observed  in  every  point,  which  relates 
to  colonial  commodities.     You  tell  me,  that  you 
cannot  do  without  thèse  commodities,  and  that 
from  the  want  of  their  introduction,  the  revenue 
of  your  customs  is  diminished.     I  will  give  you 
twenty  millions  of  colonial  productions,  which  I 
hâve  at  Hamburgh  ;    you  will   give   me  twenty 
millions   of  iron.      You  will    hâve   no  specie  to 
export  from  Sweden.     Give  up  thèse  productions 
to  merchants  ;  they  will  pay  the  import  duties  ; 
you  will  get  rid  of  your  iron  ;  this  will  answer 
my  purpose.     I  am  in  want  of  iron  at  Antwerp, 
and  I   know  not  what  to  do  with  the  English 
commodities. 

**  Be  faithful  to  the  treaty  of  the  24th  of  Feb- 
ruary: drive  the  English  smugglers  from  the 
roads  of  Gottenbiirg  ;  drive  them  from  the  coasts, 
where  they  carry  on  an  open  trade  :  I  give  you 
my  Word,  that  I  will,  on  my  part,  scrupulously 
observe  the  conditions  of  that  treaty.  I  shall 
oppose  the  attempts  of  your  neighbours,  to  ap- 
propriate  to  themselves  your  continental  posses- 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR    XAPOLEOX.  179 

sions.     If  you  fail  in  yoiir  engagements,  I  shall 
consider  myself  released  from  mine. 

"  It  is  my  wish  to  be  always  on  an  amicable 
understanding  with  yoiir  Royal  Highness  ;  I 
shall  hear  with  pleasure  your  communication  of 
this  answer  to  his  Swedish  Majesty,  whose  good 
intentions  1  hâve  constantly  appreciated. 

**  My  minister  for  foreign  afFairs  will  retiirn  an 
officiai  answer  to  the  last  note,  which  the  Comte 
d'Essen  has  submitted  for  my  perusal. 

"  This  letter  having  no  other  end,  &c.  &;c. 

-  NAPOLEON." 

Napoleon's  Patrimonial  Fine,  ^c. — His  I^7irse,  ^-c. — His 
Paternal  Roof. — Tears  of  Joséphine  diiring  IVurmser's 
Skirmishes  in  the  Environs  of  Mantua. 

8th. — I  went  to  the  Emperor's  apartment  about 
eleven  o'clock.  He  was  dressing  himself,  and 
looking  over,  with  his  valet,  some  samples  of 
perfumery  and  scents,  received  from  England. 
He  enquired  about  them  ail,  did  not  know  one  of 
them,  and  laughed  heartily  at  his  gross  ignorance, 
as  he  called  it.  He  wished  to  breakfast  in  the 
tent,  and  we  ail  assembled  there. 

He  complained  of  the  bad  quality  of  the  wine; 
and  called  upon  his  maître-d'hôtel,  Cipriani,  who 
is  a  Corsican,  to  prove,  that  they  had  much 
better  in  their  country.  He  said,  he  had  re- 
ceived, as  part  of  his  patrimony,  the  first  vine  in 

N    2 


180  M  Y    RKSIDEXCE    WITII  [Aug. 

the  island,  in  size  and  productiveness.  It  was 
called  CEspo.sata,  and  he  felt  it  his  diity,  he  said, 
not  to  mention  it  but  witli  gratitude.  It  was  to 
that  vine,  that  he  was  indebted,  in  his  youth,  for 
his  visits  to  Paris  ;  it  was  that  which  supplied  the 
expenses  of  his  vacations.  We  asked  him,  what 
was  to  become  of  it.  He  told  us,  that  he  had 
long  ago  disposed  of  it,  in  favour  of  his  nurse,  to 
whom,  he  was  convinced,  he  had  given  about 
one  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  francs  in  lands 
and  houses  in  the  island.  He  had  even  resolved 
to  give  her  his  patrimonial  liouse;  but  finding  it 
too  much  above  her  situation,  he  had  made  a 
présent  of  it  to  the  Romalino  family,  his  nearest 
relatives  by  his  mother's  side,  on  condition,  that 
they  should  transfer  their  habitation  to  his  nurse.  * 

*  The  patrimonial  house  of  Napoléon,  his  cradle,  at  présent 
actually  in  the  possession  of  M.  Romalino,  roember  of  the 
Chamber  of  Deputies,  lias  remained,  as  it  niay  he  thought,  an 
object  of  eager  curiosity  and  great  vénération  to  travellers  and 
military  nien.  f 

I  am  assured  by  eye-witnesses,  that,  on  the  arrivai  of  every 
régiment  in  Corsica,  it  becomes  the  object  of  a  spectacle,  con- 
stantly  renewed.  The  soldiers  instantly  run  to  it  in  crowds, 
and  obtain  admission  \vilh  a  certain  degree  of  authority.  It 
might  be  said,  that  they  believe  themselvs  entitled  to  it  as  a 
right.  Once  admitted,  every  one  conducts  himself  according  to 
the  warmth  of  his  feeling  ;  one  raises  his  hands  to  heaven,  as 

t  Ilaving  obtained  a  view  of  this  house,  we  bave  placed  it,  for  the 
gratification  of  our  readers'  curiosity,  aï  the  head  of  the  Third  Part. 

ISote  of  the  English  Editer. 


1S16.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON'.  181 

In  a  Word,  he  had,  he  said,  made  a  great  lady 
of  lier.  She  had  corne  to  Paris  at  the  time  of 
the  coronation,  and  had  an  audience  of  the  Pope 
for  upwards  of  an  hour  and  a  half.  ''  Poor 
**  Pope,"  exclaimed  the  Emperor,  "  he  must 
"hâve  had  a  good  deal  of  spare  time!  She 
*'  was,  however,  extremely  devout.  Her  hus- 
*'  band  was  a  coasting  trader  of  the  island.  She 
*'  gave  great  pleasure  at  the  Tuileries,  and  en- 
"  chanted  the  family  by  the  vivacity  of  her 
**  language  and  her  gestures.  The  empress 
**  Joséphine  made  her  a  présent  of  some  dia- 
*'  monds." 

After  breakfast,  the  Emperor,  faithful  to  his 
resolution  of  yesterday,  proceeded  withhis  work. 
He  finished  the  chapter  of  Castiglione,  and  then 
went  to  the  wood,  with  the  intention  of  waiting 
for  the  calash.  In  continuance  of  the  conversa- 
tion, which  had  been  brought  on  by  the  chapter, 
he  related,  that  Joséphine  had  left  Brescia  with 
liim,  and  had  thus  commenced  the  campaign 
against  Wurmser.  Arrived  at  Verona,  she  had 
witnessed  the  first  shots  that  were  fired.  When- 
she  returned  to  Castel-Nuovo,  and  saw  the 
wounded  as  they  passed,  she  was  désirons  of 
being  at  Brescia  ;  but  she  found  herself  stopped 

he  looks  about  him,  another  falls  on  his  knecs,  athird  kissesthe 
floor,  and  a  fourth  bursts  into  tears.  Tliere  are  some  who  fecenx 
to  be  seized  by  a  fit  of  insanity.  Somethingsimilar  is  said  of  the 
tomb  of  the  great  Frédéric.     Such  is  the  influence  of  heroes. 


1&2  MV    RESIDENCE    WITII  [Aug. 

by  the  enemy,  who  was  aiready  at  Ponte -Marco. 
In  the  anxiety  and  agitation  of  the  moment,  she 
was  seized  with  fear,  and  wept  a  great  deal,  on 
qiiitting  her  husband,  who  exclaimed,  when  em- 
bracing  her,  and  with  a  kind  of  inspiration, 
**  Wurmsershall  pay  dearly  for  those  tears  which 
'' he  causes  thee!"  She  was  obliged  to  pass 
in  her  carriage  very  close  to  the  fortifications 
of  Mantua.  She  was  fired  upon  from  the  place, 
and  one  of  her  suite  was  even  wounded  !  She 
traversed  the  Po,  Bologna,  Ferrara,  and  stopped 
at  Lucca,  attended  by  dread  and  the  unfavour- 
able  reports,  which  were  usually  spread  around 
our  patriotic  armies  ;  but  she  was  internally 
supported  by  her  extrême  confidence  in  her 
husband's  good  fortune. 

Such  was,  however,  aiready  the  opinion  of 
Italy,  observed  the  Emperor,  and  the  sentiments 
impressed  by  the  French  General,  that  in  spite 
of  the  crisis  of  the  moment,  and  of  ail  the  false 
reports  which  accompanied  him,  his  wife  was  re- 
ceived  at  Lucca  by  the  Senate,  and  treated  by  it 
with  the  same  respect  as  a  very  great  princess. 
It  came  to  compliment  her,  and  presented  her 
with^the  oils  of  honour.  It  had  reason  to  applaud 
itself  for  that  conduct.  A  short  time  afterwards, 
the  couiiers  announced  the  prodigious  achieve- 
ments  of  her  husband,  and  the  annihilation  of 
Wurmser. 

The  Emperor  returned  to  the  saloon  for  the 


ISIC]  THE    EiMPEROR    KAPOLEOX.  183 

first  time  since  the  ûre.  It  is  gradually  furnished 
with  articles  sent  expressly  from  London,  whicli 
make  it  a  little  more  tolerable.  After  dinner, 
the  Emperor  began  with  reading  Turcaret,  with 
which,  he  said,  notwithstanding  ail  its  wit,  he 
felt  himself  disgusted,  in  conséquence  of  its  vul- 
garity  ;  but  it  bore,  he  remarked,  the  impression 
of  Le  Sage.  He  tlien  took  up  l'Avocat  Patelin,  and 
was  much  amused  with  its  genuine  comic  force. 

9th. — The  Emperor  breakfasted  in  the  tent, 
and  revised  the  chapter  of  the  Brenta.  At  three 
o'clock,  he  took  an  airing  in  the  calash.  The 
Governor  called  during  our  ride.  It  was  under- 
stood,  that  he  wished  to  speak  to  the  Emperor 
on  the  célébration  of  the  Prince  Regent's  birth- 
day,  which  is  to  take  place  next  Monday,  the 
12th  inst.,  and  to  give  him  notice  of  the  saintes 
and  vollies,  that  are  to  be  fired  on  the  occasion 
at  the  camp,  situated  so  closely  to  us.  It  is  said, 
on  the  other  hand,  that  he  has  given  directions 
for  supplying  the  Emperor's  table  only,  and  that 
each  of  us  is  to  be  put  upon  a  particular  allow- 
ance,  as  he  finds  the  expense  very  much  beyond 
his  crédit.    We  shall  see,  however. 

Catherine  II. — Impérial   Guards. — Paul  I.  i^c. —  Projects 
on  India,  i^c. 

lOth. — The  Emperor  was  indisposed  and  took 
a  bath.  At  three  he  walked  out  and  called  for 
the  carriage.     He  had  just  read  the  history   of 


184  MY    RESIDENCE    M'ITH  [Aug. 

Catherine.  '*  She  was,"  lie  said,  "  a  commanding 
*'  woman;  slie  was  worthy  of  having  a  beard  iipon 
*'  lier  chiii.  The  catastrophes  of  Peter  and  that 
*'  of  Paul,  were  seraglio  révolutions,  the  work  of 
**  janissaries.  Thèse  palace-soldiers  are  terrible, 
"  and  dangerous  in  proportion  as  the  Sovereign 
**  is  absolute.  .  My  impérial  guard  might  also 
*'  hâve  become  fatal,  under  any  one  but  my- 
-  self." 

The  Emperor  said,  that  lie  and  Paul  had  been 
on  the  best  ternis  together.  At  the  tinie  of  his 
murder,  in  wliich  the  public  spared  neither 
his  relations  nor  his  allies,  he  had  concerted  a 
plan  witli  hini,  at  that  very  moment,  for  an  expé- 
dition to  India,  and  he  would  hâve  certainly  pre- 
vailed  upon  liim  to  carry  it  into  exécution.  Paul 
wrote  to  him  very  often,  and  at  great  length. 
His  first  communication  was  curious  and  original. 
*'  Citizen  First  Consul,"  (he  had  written  to  him 
with  his  own  hand,)  "  I  do  not  discuss  the  merits 
*'  of  the  rights  of  nian  ;  but  wlien  a  nation  places 
"  at  its  liead  a  man  of  distinguished  merit  and 
**  worthy  of  esteeni,  it  lias  a  government,  and 
*'  France  has,  henceforth,  one  in  my  eyes,"  &c.  &c. 

On  our  return,  we  found  the  Admirai  and  his 
lady  ;  the  Emperor  took  tlieni  into  the  calasli  and 
made  another  tour.  He  afterwards  walked,  for 
sonie  timc,  with  Lady  Malcolm,  to  whom  he  be- 
haved  in  a  most  gracious  manner. 

After  dinner,    the  Emperor   turned   over  the 


1S16.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEOX.  185 

leaves  of  two  volumes  of  the  Théâtre  Français, 
without  being  able  to  find  any  thing-  capable  of 
fixing  his  attention. 

The  Emperor  Bisliop,  6fr. — Had  never  suffered  ui  iiis 
Slomach. 

11  th. — After  our  breakfast  in  the  tent  and  a 
few  tiirns  in  the  garden,  the  Emperor  read,  for 
the  last  time,  the  chapter  of  Arcole. 

During  our  ride  in  the  calash,  somebody  ob- 
seiTed  that  it  was  Sunday.  "  We  should  hâve 
*'  mass,"  said  the  Emperor,  "  if  we  were  in  a 
*'  Christian  country,  ïï  we  had  a  priest  ;  and  that 
"  would  hâve  engaged  us  for  an  instant  during 
**  the  day.  I  hâve  been  always  fond  of  the 
*'  Sound  of  the  bells  in  the  country.  We  should," 
lie  added  in  a  gay  tone,  "  résolve  upon  choosing  a 
*'  priest  among  us  ; — the  curate  of  Saint-Helena." 
—But  how  ordain  him,  it  was  said,  without  a 
bishop  ? — "  And  am  I  not  one,"  replied  the  Em- 
peror, "  hâve  I  not  been  anointed  with  the  same 
''  oil,  consecrated  in  the  same  manner?  Were 
"  not  Clovis  and  his  successors  anointed,  at  the 
"  time,  with  the  formula  oï  Re.v  Christ'iquc  sacer- 
"  dosl  Were  they  not,  in  fact,  real  bishops  ?  Was 
**  not  the  subséquent  suppression  of  that  formula 
**  caused  by  the  jealousy  and  policy  of  the 
**  bishops  and  popes?"  8:c.  &c. 

I  did  not  eat  at  dinner,  the  Emperor  wished  to 
know  the  cause.     I   had   a  severe  pain  in  my 


1S6  Mr    RESIDENCE    WITH  [Aug. 

stomach,  a  complaint  to  whicli  I  said  I  was  very 
subject.  "  I  am  more  fortunate  than  you,"  he 
observed.  "  I  hâve  not,  during  my  life,  felt 
*'  any  pain  in  my  head  or  in  mif  stomach T  The 
Emperor  often  repeated  what  he  had  said,  and 
he  has  pronounced  thèse  same  words  perhaps  ten, 
twenty,  or  thirty  times,  in  the  midst  of  us  at  dif- 
férent moments.* 

Campaign  of  180î>,  ^'c.  Sf<i, 

12th. — The  Emperor  passed  the  morning  in  his 
bath,  reading  the  .Tournais  des  Débats  ofMarch 
and  April,  received  yesterday  by  way  of  the 
Cape.  The  Emperor  was  very  much  occupied 
with  them  ;  they  produced  a  great  degree  of  agi- 
tation in  his  System. 

*  I  commonly  pass  over  ail  détails  of  this  kind,  on  account  of 
their  niinuteness,  unless  an  occasion  for  their  utility  présents 
itself,  and  unfortunately  I  hâve  not  time  to  look  for,  or  to  give 
rise  to,  such  occasions.  The  trifling  circumstance,  however, 
vvhich  I  relate  hère,  acquires  but  too  great  a  value  by  the  nature 
of  the  (ieath  and  the  protracted  and  terrible  agonies  of  the  im- 
mortal  victim,  who  expired  under  the  triple  tortures  of  body, 
mind,  and  heart.  He  woukl  hâve  had  much  Icss  to  emlure  froin 
the  hands  of  cannibals  !  .  .  .  .  And  thèse  sufferings  and  thèse 
torments  \vere  coldly  reserved  for  him  by  a  barbarous  admini- 
stration, which,  by  that  proceeding,  has  stained  the  annaîs  of  a 
people  so  justly  renowned  for  tlie  élévation  of  their  sentiments 
and  their  sympathy  -svith  niisfortune  !  .  .  .  .  But  a  sad  and  pain- 
ful  celebrity  will  attach  to  tlie  names  of  the  executioners  of 
Napoléon.  The  indignation  of  the  generous  hearts  of  every 
âge  and  of  evcry  country  strikes  them  for  ever  with  eternal  ré- 
probation ! 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON.  187 

In  gênerai,  since  the  Emperor  had  received 
books,  and  particularly  the  Moniteurs,  he  conti- 
nued  much  more  at  home  ;  he  scarcely  went 
abroad;  he  no  longer  used  a  horse,  nor  even  the 
calash  ;  he  hardly  took  the  air  for  a  few  moments 
in  the  garden  ;  he  was  not  the  better  for  it,  his 
features  and  his  health  underwent  a  visible  altér- 
ation. 

I  found  him  to-day  reading  Les  Croisades  de 
Michaud  whicli  he  left  to  run  over  Les  Mémoires 
de  Bezenval.  He  stopped  at  the  duel  between 
the  Comte  d'Artois  and  the  Duc  de  Bourbon. 
He  found  the  détails  curions,  but  they  seemed  to 
be  very  remote  from  us.  "  It  is  difficult,"  he  ob- 
served,  "  to  see  times  so  close  to  each  other  and 
**  manners  so  différent." 

In  the  course  of  this  day's  conversations,  the 
Emperor  happened  to  repeat,  w^hat  I  hâve 
mentioned  elsewhere,  that  his  finest  manœuvre 
had  been  at  Eckmuhl,  without,  however,  speci- 
fying  it  any  further.  * 

•  Hère  M.  De  Las  Cases,  availing  himself  of  Napoleon's 
striking  allusions  to  th«  battle  of  Eckmuhl,  introduces  a  review 
of  thiî  celcbrated  campaign  of  1S09,  compiled  from  an  unpub- 
lished  work  by  an  officer  of  high  rank  in  the  impérial  guard. 
la  conséquence,  however,  of  its  length  and  its  want  of  immédiate 
connection  with  the  main  objects  of  the  Journal,  we  are  induced 
to  pass  it  over. 

English  Editor. 


18S  31 Y    RESIDENCE    WITH  [Aug. 

On  the  JVarwith  Riissia. — Fatalities,  ^-c. — M.  de  Talley- 
rand,  ^c. —  Tlie  Corinna  of  Madame  de  Sta'tl, —  M. 
Necker,  ^x. 

13th. — At  an  early  hoiir  in  the  morning,  I  ac- 
companied  the  Emperor  very  far  into  the  wood  ; 
he  conversed  for  upwards  of  an  hour,  on  the  si- 
tuation of  France,  and  then  reverted  to  the  per- 
sons  who  had  betrayed  him,  and  the  numeroiis  fa- 
talities which  had  hurried  him  along  ;  to  the 
perfidious  seciirity  caused  by  his  marriage  with 
Austria  ;  to  the  infatuation  of  the  Turks  who  made 
peace  precisely  when  they  ought  to  hâve  made 
war  ;  to  that  of  Bernadotte,  who  was  actuated 
by  his  self-love  and  his  resentment,  rather  than 
by  his  real  grandeur  and  stability  ;  to  a  season 
rigorous  beyond  measure,  and  even  to  the  superio- 
rity  of  talent,  evinced  by  M.  de  Narbonne,  who, 
discovering  the  designs  of  Austria,  compelled  her 
to  take  active  measures.  Finally,  he  reverted  to 
the  successes  of  Lutzen  and  Bautzen,  which  by 
bringing  back  the  king  of  Saxony  to  Dresden, 
put  him,  Napoléon,  in  possession  of  the  hostile 
signatures  of  Austria,  and  deprived  her  of  ail 
further  subterfuge.  "  What  an  unhappy  concur- 
"rence!"  he  exclaimed  in  a  most  expressive 
tone,  **  and  yet,"  he  continued,  "  the  day  after  the 
"  battle  of  Dresden,  Francis  had  already  sent  a 
**  person  to  treat.     It  was  necessary,  that  Van- 


1816.]  THE    EMPEllOR    NAPOLEON.  189 

*'  damme's  disaster  should  happen  at  a  given  mo- 
"  ment,  to  second,  as  it  were,  the  decree  of 
*'  fate." 

M.  de  Talleyrand,  to  whose  conduct  the  Em- 
peror  frequently  alluded,  for  the  purpose  of  dis- 
covering,  he  said,  when  he  had  really  began  to 
betray  him,  had  strongly  urged  him  to  make 
peace,  on  his  return  from  Leipsic.  "  I  must,"  he 
observed,  "  do  him  that  justice.  He  foimd  fault 
"  with  my  speech  to  the  senate,  but  warmly  ap- 
*'  proved  of  that,  which  I  made  to  the  législative 
*'  body.  He  uniformly  maintained,  that  I  de- 
*'  ceived  myself  with  respect  to  the  energy  of  the 
"  nation  ;  that  it  woiild  not  co-operate  with 
*'  mine,  and  that  it  was  requisite  for  me  to  ar- 
"  range  my  affairs  by  every  possible  sacrifice. 
*'  It  appears,  that  he  was  then  sincère.  I  never, 
*'  from  my  own  expérience,  found  Talleyrand  elo- 
*'  quent  or  persuasive.  He  dwelt  a  great  deal, 
*'  and  a  long  time  on  the  same  idea.  Perhaps 
*'  aiso,  as  our  acquaintance  was  of  old  date,  he 
"  behaved  in  a  peculiar  manner  to  me.  He  was, 
*'  however,  so  skilful  in  his  évasions  and  ram- 
**  blings,  that  after  conversations  which  lasted 
*'  several  hours,  he  has  gone  away,  frequently 
**  avoiding  the  explanations  and  objects  I  ex- 
*'  pected  to  obtain  from  him  on  his  coming  in." 

With  regard  to  the  affairs  of  the  moment  and 
to  the  contents  of  the  ;^last  journals  which  de- 
scribed  France  [in  a  constantly  increasing  agita- 


-XV- 


190  MY    RESIDEXCE    VITIl  [Aug. 

tion,  the  resiilt  was,  that  the  chances  of  the  future 
seemed  indefinite,  multiplied,  and  inexhaustible 
for  ail  Europe,  and  that  there  existed,  at  that 
instant,  an  incontrovertible  fact,  communicated 
to  us  from  ail  quarters,  that  nobody  m  Europe 
considered  himself  in  a  permanent  situation. 
Every  one  seemed  to  apprehend  or  to  foresee  new 
events,  &c. 

The  Emperor  kept  me  to  breakfast  with  him 
in  the  tent.  He  afterwards  sent  for  the  Corinna 
of  Madame  de  Staël,  and  read  some  chapters  of 
it.  He  said  he  could  not  get  through  it.  Ma- 
dame de  Staël  had  drawn  so  complète  a  likeness 
of  herself,  in  lier  heroine,  that  she  had  succeeded 
in  convincing  him  that  it  was  herself;  "  I  see  her," 
said  he,  "  I  hear  her,  I  feel  her,  I  wish  to  avoid 
*'  her,  and  I  threw  away  the  book.  I  had  a  better 
**  impression  of  this  work  on  my  memory,  than 
"  what  I  feel  at  présent.  Perhaps,  it  is  because, 
*'  at  the  time,  I  read  it  with  my  thumb,  as  M. 
**  TAbbé  de  Pradt  ingeniously  says,  and  not  with- 
*'  out  some  truth.  I  shall,  however,  persévère  ; 
**  I  am  determined  to  see  the  end  of  it  ;  I  still 
"  think,  that  it  was  not  destitute  of  some  inter- 
*'  est.  Yet  I  cannot  forgive  Madame  de  Staël  for 
"  having  undervalued  the  French  in  her  romance. 
*'  The  family  of  Madame  de  Staël  is  unquestion- 
**  ably  a  very  singular  one  !  Her  father,  her  mo- 
"  ther  and  herself,  ail  three  on  their  knees,  rega- 
"  ling  each  other  with  reciprocal  incense,  for  the 


1S16.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON.  191 

"  better  édification  and  mystification  of  the 
"  public.  Madame  de  Staël  may,  notwithstand- 
**  ing,  exult  in  surpassing  her  noble  parents, 
*'  when  she  presumed  to  write,  that  her  senti- 
**  ments  for  her  father  were  siich,  that  she  detect- 
**  ed  herself  in  being  jealous  of  her  mother. 

*'  Madame  de  Staël, "he  continiied,  "was  ardent 
**  in  her  passions,  véhément  and  extravagant  in 
*'  her  expressions.  This  is  what  was  read  by  the 
**  police,  while  she  was  under  its  superintendence. 
**  *  I  am  far  from  you  ;'  (she  was  probably  writing 
**  to  her  husband,)  '  come  instantly  ; — I  com- 
**  mand  ; — I  insist  upon  it  ;  I  am  on  my  knees  ; 
**  my  daughter  is  beside  me  ;  I  beseech  you, 
**  come  ; — if  you  hesitate,  I  shall  kill  her  first, 
"  and  then  myself  ; — You  alone  will  be  guilty  of 
**  our  destruction,'"  &c. — 

She  had,  said  the  Emperor,  combined  ail  her 
efforts  and  ail  her  means  to  make  an  impression 
on  the  gênerai  of  the  army  of  Italy  ;  without  any 
knowledge  of  him,  she  wrote  to  him,  when  far 
ofF;  she  tormented  him  when  présent.  If  she 
was  to  be  believed,  the  union  of  genius  with  a 
little  insigniiicant  Créole,  incapable  of  appre- 
ciating  or  comprehending  him,  was  a  monstrosity. 
Unfortunately,  the  general's  only  answer  was  an 
indifférence,  which  women  never  forgive,  and 
which,  indeed,  he  remarked  with  a  smile,  is 
hardly  to  be  forgiven. 

On  his  arrivai  at  Paris,  he  was  followed  with 
the  same  eagerness,  but  he  maintained,  on  his 


192  .      MY    RESIDENCE    'SriTII  [Aug. 

part,  the  same  reserve,  the  same  silence.  Madame 
de  Staël  resolved,  however,  to  extract  some 
words  from  him  and  to  struggle  with  the  con- 
queror  of  Italy,  attacked  him  face  to  face,  at  the 
grand  entertainment,  given  by  M.  de  Talleyrand, 
minister  for  foreign  affairs,  to  the  victorious  gê- 
nerai. She  challenged  him  in  the  middle  of  a 
niimerous  circle,  to  tell  her  who  was  the  greatest 
woman  in  the  world,  whether  dead  or  living. 
**  She,  who  lias  had  most  children,"  answered  Na- 
poléon, with  great  simplicity.  Madame  de  Stacl 
was,  at  first,  a  little  disconcerted,  and  endeavour- 
ed  to  recover  herself  by  observing,  that  it  was 
reported  that  he  was  not  very  fond  of  women. 
"  Pardon  me,  Madame,"  again  replied  Napoléon, 
"  I  am  very  fond  of  my  wife." 

The  gênerai  of  the  army  of  Italy,  said  the  Em- 
peror,  might,  no  doiibt,  hâve  excited  the  en- 
thusiasm  of  the  Genevese  Corinna  to  its  highest 
pitch  ;  but  he  dreaded  her  political  perfidy  and 
her  proverbial  intempérance;  he  was,  perhaps,  in 
the  wrong.  The  heroine  had,  however,  been  too 
eager  in  her  pursuit  and  too  often  discouraged, 
not  to  become  a  violent  enemy.  "  She  insti- 
"  gated  the  person,  who  was  then  under  her  in- 
**  fluence,  and  he,"  observed  the  Emperor,  "  did 
"  not  enter  upon  the  business  in  a  very  honourable 
*'  manner.  On  the  appointment  of  the  Tribunate, 
**  he  employed  the  most  pressing  solicitations 
**  with  the  first  Consul  to  be  nominated  a  mem- 
**  ber.     At  eleven  o'clock  at  night,  he  was  on  his 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEOX.  193 

/'  knees  ;  but  at  midnigfht,  wlien  the  favour  was 
'*  granted,  he  was  already  erect  and  almost  in  an 
"  insulting  attitude.  The  first  meeting  of  theTri- 
*'  bunes  was  a  splendid  occasion  for  his  invectives 
"  against  me.  At  night,  Madame  de  Stael's  hôtel 
**  was  illuminated.  She  crowned  her  Benjamin 
**  in  the  middle  of  a  brilliant  assembly,  and  pro- 
"  claimed  him  a  second  Mirabeau.  This  farce, 
**  which  was  ridiculous  enough,  was  followed 
*'  by  more  dangerous  plans.  At  the  time  of  the 
"  concordat,  against  which  Madame  de  Staël 
'*  was  violently  inflamed,  she  united  at  once 
*'  against  me  the  aristocrats  and  the  republicans; 
**  you  hâve,  she  exclaimed,  but  a  single  moment 
**left;  to-morrow  the  tyrant  will  hâve  forty 
*'  thousand  priests  at  his  disposai." 

*'  Madame  de  Staël,"  said  Napoléon,  "  having  at 
*'  length  tired  out  my  patience,  was  sent  into  exile. 
'*  Her  father  had  seriously  offended  me  before,  at 
"  the  time  of  the  campaign  of  Marengo.  I  wished 
**  to  see  him  on  my  way,  and  he  struck  m.e  mereiy 
"  as  a  dull  bloated  collège  tutor.  Shortly  after- 
**  wards,  and  with  the  hope,  no  doubt,  of  again 
*'  appearing,  by  my  help,  in  public  life,  he  pub- 
'•  lislied  a  pamphlet,  in  which  he  proved,  that 
''  France  could  neither  be  a  republic,  nor  a 
"  monarchy.  What  it  might  be,"  remarked 
the  Emperor,  "  was  not  sufficiently  évident. 
**  In  that  work,  he  called  the  First  Consul, 
"  the  necessary  man,  &c,  &c.     Lebrun  replied  to 

\oh,  III.  Part  V.  o 


194  MY    RESIDENCE    WITH  [Aog. 

him,  in  a  letter  of  four  pages,  in  his  admirable 
style,  and  with  ail  his  powers  of  sarcasm  ;  lie 
asked  him,  whether  he  had  not  done  sufficient 
mischiefto  France,  and  whether  his  pretensions 
to  govern  her  again,  were  not  exhausted  by  his 
experiment  of  the  constituent  assembly. 
"  Madame  de  Staël,  in  lier  disgrâce,  carried 
on  hostilities  with  the  one  hand,  and  suppli- 
cated  with  the  otlier.  She  was  informed,  on 
the  part  of  the  First  Consul,  that  he  left  her 
the  universe  for  the  théâtre  of  her  achieve- 
ments  ;  that  he  resigned  the  rest  of  the  world 
to  her,  and  onlv  reserved  Paris  for  himself, 
which  he  forbade  her  to  approach.  But  Paris 
was  precisely  the  object  of  Madame  de  Stael's 
wishes.  Xo  matter;  the  Consul  was  invariably 
mflexible.  Madame  de  Staël,  however,  oc- 
casionally  renewed  her  attempts.  Under  the 
empire,  she  wished  to  be  lady  of  the  palace. 
Yes  or  no  might  certainly  be  pronounced  ;  but 
by  what  means  could  Madame  de  Staël  be  kept 
quiet  in  a  palace?"  Sec.  kc. 
After  dinner,  the  Emperor  read  the  Horatii, 
and  was  frequently  interrupted  by  our  bursts  of 
admiration.  Never  did  Corneille  appear  grander, 
more  noble,  more  nervous  to  us  than  on  our 
rock. 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR    XAPOLEOy.  195 

Shoofiiig  Parti/  at  Sf.  Heleno,  ^c. — Eve  of  fhe  Ibtk 
ofjiigmt,  ^-c. 

14.  The  Emperor  went  out  early.  He  sent 
for  me  before  nine  o'clock.  His  intention  was  to 
mount  his  horse,  and  endeavour  to  get  a  shot  at 
some  partridges,  which  we  saw  every  time  we 
were  in  the  carriage  ;  but  which  never  let  any 
one  with  a  fowling  pièce  corne  near  them.  The 
Emperor  walked  on  for  the  purpose  of  placing 
himself  in  a  convenient  situation,  but  the  part- 
ridges were  no  longer  to  be  found.  He  was  soon 
fatigued,  and  got  on  horseback,  observing,  that 
our  shooting  party  was  not  exactly  after  the 
fashion  of  those  of  Rambouillet  and  Fontaine- 
bleau. We  breakfasted,  on  our  return,  in  the 
tent;  the  Emperor  placed  little  Tristan,  whom 
he  saw  crossing  the  meadow,  at  table,  and  was 
much  amused  with  him  during  the  whole  of  the 
repast. 

After  breakfast,  the  Emperor  had  the  chapter 
of  Rivoli  read  over  again  to  him,  and  finished  it. 
We  had  gone  through  three  fourths  of  it,  when 
the  governor  being  announced,  we  made  a  pre- 
cipitate  retreat  from  the  tent,  and  each  of  us  took 
refuge  in  his  den.  The  Emperor  was  less  in- 
clined  than  any  other  person  to  let  himself  be 
seen  :  his  conversations  with  the  governor  are  by 
far  too  disagreeable  and  painful  to  him.  **  I  am  de- 
**  termined,"  hesaid,  *'tohave  no  more  to  do  with 


196  MY    RESIDEXCE    WITH  [Aug. 

"  him.  Harsh  remarks  escape  me,  which  affect 
"  my  character  and  my  dignity  ;  nothing  should 
**  fall  from  my  mouth  but  what  is  kind  and  com- 
*'  plimentary."  He  found  himself  fatigued  with 
his  exercise  in  the  morning,  and  took  a  bath, 

About  five  o'clock,  he  took  a  turn  in  the  calash, 
the  weather  was  delicioiis. 

The  Governor  had  expressed  an  earnest  désire 
to  see  the  Emperor  ;  he  wished,  he  said,  to 
speak  with  him  on  business.  It  is  suspected, 
that  it  was  to  tell  him,  that  he  had  no  more 
money,  that  he  had  exhausted  ail,  and  that  he 
no  longer  knew  how  to  act  ;  a  matter  of  perfect 
indifférence  to  the  Emperor,  who  would  not 
hâve  failed,  once  more,  to  entreat  to  be  let  alone. 
The  Emperor  played  at  chess,  before  dinner, 
in  the  saloon  ;  he  had  taken  some  punch.  It 
was  late  when  I  arrived  ;  he  told  me,  on  entering, 
to  take  my  share  of  the  punch  ;  but  it  was 
observed,  that  there  were  no  more  glasses.  "  O 
**  yes,"  said  hC;  handing  me  his,  **  and  he  wiil 
**  drink  out  of  it,  I  am  sure."  He  then  added, 
**  This  is  the  English  fashion  ;  is  it  not?  In  our 
*'  country  one  seldom  drinks  after  any  one  but 
**  one's  mistress." 

It  was  remarked,  during  dinner,  that  it  was 
the  eve  of  the  15th  of  August;  the  Emperor  then 
observed;  "  Many  healths  will  be  drank  to- 
"  morrow,  in  Europe,  to  St.  Helena.  There  are 
"  certainly  ?ome  sentiments,  some  wishes,  that 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR    XAPOLEON.  197 

"  will  traverse  the  océan."     He  had  entertained 
the  same  thought  in  the  morning,  when  on  horse- 
back,  and  had  said  the  same  things  to  me. 
After  dmner,  Cinna  ; — Corneille  seems  divine. 

TTie  Emperor's  Birth-Day, 

15th.— This  day,  the  15th  of  August,  was  the 
Emperor's  birth-day.  We  had  determined  to 
wait  upon  him,  in  a  body,  about  eleven  o'clock. 
He  disappointed  us  by  appearing  gaily  at  our 
doors  at  nine.  The  weather  was  mild  ;  he  went 
to  the  garden,  and  we  ail  assembied  there  in 
succession.  The  Grand  Marshal,  with  his  wife 
and  children,  joined  us.  The  Emperor,  sur- 
rounded  by  his  faithful  servants,  breakfasted  in 
the  large  and  beautiful  tent,  which  is  a  real  and 
happy  acquisition.  The  température  was  fine, 
and  he  himself  cheerful  and  fond  of  conversation. 
He  seemed,  for  some  instants,  to  participate  in 
our  sentiments  and  wishes.  He  desired,  he  said, 
to  pass  the  whole  day  in  the  midst  of  us. 
Accordingly,  we  continued  together,  and  spent 
the  tinie  in  conversation,  in  différent  pursuits,"  in 
walking,  and  in  riding  in  the  carriage. 

Polytechnic  School  suppressedy  ^r. — Indecency  ofihe 
Englùih  Journals. — Ice  Machine. 

16th. — My  son  and  I  went,  at  a  very  early 
hour,  to  the  tent,  where  the  Emperor  continued 
eraployed  on  différent  chapters  of  the  campaign 


198  MY    RESIDENCE    WITH  [Auç, 

of  Italy  until  two  o'clock,  when,  the  Governor 
being  announced,  lie  retired,  muttering,  "  The 
"  wretch,  I  believe,  envies  me  the  air  I  breathe." 

During  breakfast,  he  had  called  for  the  Journal 
des  Débats,  which  contained  the  organization  of 
the  académies  ;  he  wished  to  see  the  names  of 
the  members,  who  had  been  expelled  from  the 
Institute.  This  led  him  to  revert  to  the  sup- 
pression of  the  Polytechnic  school,  which  was 
said  to  be  useless  and  dangerous.  The  English 
journal,  which  we  had  received,  was  not  of  that 
opinion.  It  maintaincd,  that  the  suppression 
aloiie  was  more  valuable  to  the  enemies  of  France 
than  a  signal  victory,  and  that  nothing  could 
more  decidedly  prove  the  real  pacifie  sentiments 
and  the  extrême  modération  of  the  dynasty, 
which  then  governed  France,  &c.  &:c.  It  also 
stated  several  other  things. 

Somebody  remarked,  upon  this  subject,  that 
the  English  papers  shewed  a  malevolence  to  the 
French  Government,  which  extended  to  coarse- 
ness  and  indecency. 

Lord  or  Lady  Holland  had,  with  a  peculiar 
degree  of  attention,  sent  to  Longwood,  for  the 
Emperor's  use,  a  newly  invented  machine, 
adapted  to  the  formation  of  ice.  It  was  delivered 
to  us  to-day,  through  the  intervention  of  Admirai 
Malcolm.  The  Emperor  went  out  about  five 
o'clock,  and  was  desirous  of  -v^itnessing  the 
experiment  ;  the  Admirai  was  présent,  but  the 
experiment  proved  very  imperfect. 


1816.]  THE    F.MPEROR    NAPOLEON. 


199 


The  Emperor,  after  some  time,  took  a  walk, 
accompanied  by  the  Admirai,  and  the  convers- 
ation turned  upon  a  variety  of  subjects;  it  was 
maintained  in  the  most  affable  and  friendly  man- 
ner  on  the  part  of  the  Emperor. 

Jleligious  Ideas  of  Napoléon. — Bisliop  of  Nantez  {de  Voisin). 
— The  Pope. — Liber ties  of  t lie  Gallican  Churcli. — Anec- 
dotes.— Concordat  of  Fontainebleau. 

17th. — While  the  Emperor  was  at  breakfast  in 
the  tent,  two  persons  described  the  excesses 
which  they  had  witnessed  in  the  army,  and  which 
had  not  corne  to  his  knowledge.  They  noticed 
the  numerous  violations  of  his  orders,  the  violent 
abuses  of  authority,  and  other  outrages  besides. 
The  Emperor  listened  ;  but  some  were  so  shock- 
ing,  that  he  could  not,  lie  said,  give  crédit  to 
them  and  observed;  ''  Corne,  gentlemen,  thèse 
*'  are  libels." 

The  wind  was  very  violent  ;  it  blew  a  tempest 
with  occasional  showers  of  rain.  The  wetness 
obliged  the  Emperor  to  go  in  again. 

After  dinner  Zaire  and  the  beautiful  scènes  of 
Œdipe  were  read,  among  which  he  particularly 
pointed  out  that  of  the  discovery,  which  he  pro- 
nounced  the  finest  and  the  most  finished  of  the 
draraa. 

In  speaking  of  priests  and  religion,  the  con- 
versation led  the  Emperor  to  say;  **  Man  enter- 
*'  ing  into  life  asks  himself  :  From  whence  do  I 


200  MY    RESIDENCE    WITH  [Aug. 

corne  ?  What  am  I  ?  Whither  am  I  to  go  ? 
Thèse  are  so  many  mysterious  questions,  which 
urge  us  on  to  religion.  We  eagerly  embrace  it; 
we  are  attracted  by  our  natural  propensity; 
but  as  we  advance  in  knowledge  our  course  is 
stopped.  Instruction  and  history  are  the  great 
enemies  of  religion,  deformed  by  human  imper- 
fection. Why,  we  ask  ourselves,  is  the  religion 
of  Paris,  neither  that  of  London  nor  of  Berlin  ? 
Why  is  that  of  Petersburgh  différent  from  that 
of  Constantinople  ?  Why  is  the  latter  différent 
from  that  of  Persia,  of  the  Ganges  and  of  China  ? 
Why  is  the  religion  of  ancient  times  différent 
from  that  of  our  days  ?  Then  reason  is  sadly 
staggered  ;  it  exclaims,  O  religions,  religions  ! 
the  children  ofman!  ....  We  very  properly 
believe  in  God,  because  every  thing  around  us 
proclaims  hini,  and  the  most  enlightened  minds 
hâve  believed  in  him  ;  not  only  Bossuet,  whose 
profession  it  was,  but  also  Newton  and  Leibnitz, 
who  had  nothing  to  do  with  it.  But  we  know 
not  what  to  think  of  the  doctrine,  that  is  taught 
us,  and  we  find  ourselves  like  the  watch  which 
goes,  without  knowing  the  watchmaker  that 
made  it.  And  observe  a  little  the  stupidity  of 
those  who  educate  us;  they  should  keep  away 
from  us  the  idea  of  paganism  and  idolatry; 
because  their  absurdity  excites  the  first  exer- 
cise of  our  reason,  and  prépares  us  for  a  résist- 
ance to  passive  belief  ;  and  they  bring  us  up. 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON'.  iOl 

"  notwithstanding,  in  the  midst  of  the  Greeks 
**  and  Romans,  with  their  myriads  of  divinities. 
**  Such,  for  my  own  part,  has  literally  been  the 
*'  progress  of  my  understanding.  I  felt  the  ne- 
"  cessity  of  belief  ;  I  did  believe,  but  my  belief 
**  was  shocked  and  undecided,  the  moment  I  ac- 
**  quired  knowledge  and  began  to  reason  ;  and 
"  that  happened  to  me,  at  so  early  an  âge  as 
**  thirteen.  Perhaps,  I  shall  agam  believe  impli- 
"citly;  God  grant  I  may.  I  shall  certainly 
*'  make  no  résistance,  and  I  do  not  ask  a  greater 
**  blessing  ;  it  miist,  in  my  mind,  be  a  great  and 
•'  real  happiness. 

"  In  violent  agitations,  however,  and  in  the 
''  casual  suggestions  of  immorality  itself,  the  ab- 
**  sence  of  that  religions  faith  has  never,  I  assert, 
"  influenced  me  in  any  respect,  and  I  never 
"  doubted  the  existence  of  God  ;  for,  if  my  reason 
"  was  inadéquate  to  comprehend  it,  my  mind  was 
"  not  the  less  disposed  to  adopt  it.  My  nerves 
*'  were  in  sympathy  with  that  sentiment. 

"  When  I  seized  on  the  helm  of  affairs,  I  had 
*'  already  fixed  ideas  of  ail  the  primary  éléments 
**  by  which  society  is  bound  together  ;  I  had 
*'  weighed  ail  the  importance  of  religion  ;  I  was 
**  convinced,  and  I  determined  to  re-establish  it. 
**  But  the  résistance  I  had  to  overcome,  in 
"  restorinof  catholicism,  would  scarcelv  be  cre- 
"  dited.  I  should  hâve  been  more  willingly 
*'  followed,  had  I  hoisted  the  standard  of  pro' 


«02  MY    RESIDENCE    WITH  [Aug. 

testantism.  This  reluctance  was  carried  so 
far,  that  in  the  Council  of  State,  where  I  found 
great  difficulty  in  getting-  the  Concordat 
adopted,  several  yielded  only  in  forming  a  plan 
to  extricate  themselves  from  it.  *  Well  !  '  they 
said  to  one  another,  *  let  us  turn  protestants, 
and  that  will  not  affect  us.'  It  is  unquestion- 
able,  that  in  the  disorder  to  which  I  succeeded, 
that  on  the  ruins  where  I  was  placed,  I  was 
at  liberty  to  choose  between  catholicism  and 
protestantism  ;  and  it  may  also  be  said,  with 
truth,  that  the  gênerai  disposition,  at  the 
moment,  was  quite  in  favour  of  the  latter  ;  but, 
besides  my  real  adhérence  to  the  religion  in 
which  I  was  born,  I  had  the  most  important 
motives  to  influence  my  décision.  What  should 
I  hâve  gained  by  proclaiming  protestantism  ? 
I  should  hâve  created  two  great  parties,  very 
nearly  equal,  in  France,  when  I  wished  for  the 
existence  of  none  at  ail  ;  I  should  hâve  revived 
the  fury  of  religions  disputes,  when  their  total 
annihilation  was  called  for  by  the  light  of  the 
century,  and  my  own  feelings.  Thèse  two 
parties  would,  by  their  mutual  distractions, 
hâve  destroyed  France,  and  rendered  her  the 
slave  of  Europe,  when  I  had  the  ambition  to 
make  her  the  mistress  of  it.  By  the  help  of 
catholicism  I  attained,  much  more  efFectually, 
ail  the  grand  results  I  had  in  view.  In  the 
interior,   at  home,    the   smaller   number  was 


1S16.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON.  203 

'*  swallowed  up  by  tlie  greater,  and  I  relied 
"  upoii  my  treating  the  former  with  such  au 
"  equality,  that  there  would  be  shortly  no  motive 
*'  for  marking  the  différence.  Abroad,  the  Pope 
'*  was  bound  to  me  by  catholicism  ;  and  with  my 
**  influence,  and  our  forces  in  Italy,  I  did  not 
**  despair,  sooner  or  later,  by  some  means  or 
**  another,  of  obtaining  for  myself  the  direction 
**  of  that  Pope,  and  from  that  time,  what  an 
*'  influence!  What  a  lever  of  opinion  on  the  rest 
**  of  the  world  !"  &c.  &c.  And  he  concluded 
Avith  saying:  **  Francis  I.  was  really  in  a  state 
**  to  adopt  protestantism,  at  its  birth,  and 
**  déclare  himself  the  head  of  it  in  Europe. 
*'  Charles  V.,  his  rival,  was  the  zealous  champion 
*'  of  Rome,  because  he  considered  that  measure 
*'  as  an  additional  means  to  assist  liim  in  his 
**  project  of  enslaving  Europe.  Was  not  that 
**  circumstance  alone  suflicient  to  point  out  to 
*'  Francis  the  necessity  of  taking  care  of  his 
*'  independeuce  ;  but  he  abandoned  the  greater 
"  to  run  after  the  lesser  advantage.  He  perse- 
"  vered  in  pursuing  his  imprudent  designs  on 
**  Italy,  and  with  the  intention  of  paying  court 
*'  to  the  Pope,  he  burnt  protestants  at  Paris. 

*'  Had  Francis  I.  embraced  Lutheranism,  which 
**  is  favourable  to  royal  supremacy,  he  would 
**  hâve  preserved  France  from  the  dreadful  re- 
"  ligious  convulsions  brought  on,  at  later  periods, 
**  by  the  Calvinists,  whose  efl'orts,  altogether  re- 


204  MY   RESIDENCE    WITH  [Aug. 

**  publican,  were  on  the  point  of  subverting  the 
**  throne,  and  dissolving  our  noble  monarchy. 
**  Unfortunately,  Francis  I.  was  ignorant  of  ail 
**  that,  for  he  could  not  allège  his  scruples  for 
"  an  excuse  ;  he  who  entered  into  an  alliance 
"  with  the  Tiirks,  and  brought  theni  into  the 
**  midst  of  us.  It  was  precisely  because  he  was 
"  incapable  of  extending  his  views  so  far.  The 
**  folly  of  the  time  !  The  extent  of  feudal  intellect  ! 
"  Francis  I.  was,  after  ail,  but  a  hero  for  tilts 
"  and  tournaments,  and  a  gallant  for  the  drawing- 
"  room,  one  of  those  pigmy  great  men. 

**  The  Bishop  of  Nantez  (De  Voisin),  said  the 
"  Emperor,  made  me  a  real  Catholic  by  the  effi- 
"  cacy  of  his  arguments,  by  the  excellence  of 
**  his  morals  and  by  his  enlightened  toleration. 
*'  Marie  Louise,  whose  confessor  he  was,  consulted 
"  him  once  on  the  obligation  of  abstaining  from 
*'  méat  on  Fridays. — *  At  what  table  do  you  dine, 
*'  asked  the  Bishop?* — *  At  the  Emperors.'  *  Do 
'*  you  give  ail  the  orders  there  ?' — '  No.'  *  You 
*'  cannot,  then,  make  any  altération  in  it  ;  would 
**  he  do  it  himself  ?' — '  I  am  inclined  to  think 
"  not.'  *  Be  obedient  then,  and  do  not  provoke 
"  a  subject  for  scandai.  Your  first  duty  is  to 
'*  obey,  and  make  him  respected  ;  you  will  not 
*'  be  in  want  of  other  means  to  amend  your  life, 
"  and  to  suffer  privations  in  the  eyes  of  God.' 

*'  He  also  behaved  in  the  same  way  with  re- 
"  spect  to  a  public  communion,  which  some  per- 


1S16.]  THE    EMPEUOR    NAPOLEON.  305 

"  sons  put  into  Marie  Louise's  liead  to  celebrate 
**  on  Easter-day.  She  would  not,  however,  con- 
**  sent,  without  the  advice  of  her  prudent  con- 
**  fessor,  who  dissuaded  her  from  it  by  similar 
"  arguments.  What  a  différence,  said  the  Em- 
"  peror,  had  she  been  worked  upon  by  a  fanatic  ! 
"  What  quarrels,  what  disagreements  might  he 
"  not  hâve  caused  between  us  !  What  mischief 
"  might  he  not  hâve  donc,  in  the  circumstances 
**  in  which  I  was  placed  ! 

The  Emperor  remarked  to  us,  **  that  the 
"  bishop  of  Nantez  had  lived  with  Diderot,  in 
'*  the  midst  of  unbelievers,  and  had  uniformly 
"  conducted  himself  with  consistency;  he  was 
'*  ready  with  an  answer  to  every  one  ;  and  above 
*'  ail,  he  had  the  good  sensé  to  abandon  every 
*'  thing  that  was  not  maintainable,  and  to  strip 
*'  religion  of  every  thing  which  he  might  not  be 
**  capable  of  defending. — He  was  asked,  *  has  not 
*'  an  animal,  which  moves,  combines,  and  thinks, 
*'  a  soûl  V  'Why  not,'  was  his  answer.  '  But 
*'  whether  does  it  go?  Forit  is  not  equal  to  ours.' 
*'  'What  is  that  to  you?  It  dwells,  perhaps,  in 
'*  limbo.'  He  used  to  retreat  within  the  last  in- 
**  trenchments,  even  within  the  fortress  itself,  and 
*'  there  he  reserved  excellent  means  for  defending 
**  himself.  He  argued  better  than  the  Pope  whom 
"  he  oftenconfounded.  Hewas  the  firmest  pillar, 
*'  among  our  bishops,  of  the  Gallican  liberties. 
**  He  was  my  oracle,  my  luminary  ;  in  religious 


-206  M  Y    RESIDENCE    WITH  [Aug. 

matters,  he  possessed  my  iinboiinded  confi- 
dence. For,  in  my  quarrels  with  the  Pope, 
it  was  my  first  care,  whatever  intrigiiers  and 
marplots  in  cassocs  may  say,  not  to  touch 
upon  any  dogmatic  point  :  I  was  so  steady  in 
this  conduct,  that  the  instant  this  good  and 
vénérable  bishop  of  Nantez  said  to  me,  '  take 
care,  there  yoii  are  grappling  with  a  dogma,'  I 
immediately  turned  oft'  from  the  course  I  was 
taking,  to  retiirn  to  it  by  other  ways,  withoiit 
amusing  myself  by  entering  into  dissertations 
with  him,  or  by  seeking  even  to  comprehend 
his  meaning,  and  as  I  had  not  let  him  into  my 
secret,  how  amazed  must  he  not  hâve  been  at 
the  circuits  I  made  !  How  whimsical,  obsti- 
nate,  capricious,  and  incohérent,  must  I  not  hâve 
appeared  to  him  !  It  was  because  I  had  an 
object  in  view,  and  he  was  iinacquainted  with 
it. 

'*  The  Popes  could  not  forgive  us  our  liberties 
of  the  Gallican  church.  The  four  famous  pro- 
positions of  Bossuet,  in  particular,  provoked 
their  resentment.  It  was,  in  their  opinion,  a 
real  hostile  manifesto,  and  they  accordingly 
considered  us  at  least  as  much  out  of  the  pale 
of  the  church  as  the  protestants.  They  thought 
us  as  guilty  as  them,  perhaps  more  so,  and  if 
they  did  not  overwhelm  us  with  their  ostensive 
thunders,  it  was  because  they  dreaded  the  con- 
séquences— our  séparation.     The  example  of 


1816.]  THE    EMPEUOR    NAPOLEOX.  207 

"  Engiand  was  before  them.  They  did  not  wish 
*'  to  eut  off  their  right  arm  with  their  own  hand, 
**  but  they  were  eonstantly  on  the  wateh  for  a 
**  favourable  opportunity,  they  trusted  to  time 
"  for  it.  They  are,  no  doubt,  on  the  point  of 
"  believing,  that  it  has  now  actually  happened. 
'*■  They  will,  however,  be  again  disappointed  by 
**  the  light  of  the  century  and  the  manners  of  the 
*'  time  s. 

"  Some  time  before  my  coronation,"  said  the 
Emperor,  "  the  Pope  wished  to  see  me,  and  made 
*'  it  a  point  to  visit  me  himself.  He  had  made 
*'  many  concessions.  He  had  corne  to  Paris  for 
**  the  purpose  of  crowning  me,  he  consented  not 
"  to  place  the  crown  on  my  head,  he  dispensed 
"  with  the  ceremony  of  the  public  communion, 
**  he  had,  therefore,  in  his  opinion,  many  compen- 
''  sations  to  expect  in  return.  He  had  accord- 
*'  ingly  at  first,  dreamt  of  Romagna  and  the  Le- 
"  gâtions,  and  he  began  to  suspect  that  he  should 
*'  be  obliged  to  give  up  ail  that.  He  then  lower- 
"  ed  his  pretensions  to  a  very  trifling  favour,  as 
"  he  called  it,  my  signature  to  an  ancient  docu- 
*'  ment,  a  worn-out  rag,  which  he  held  from  Louis 
**  XIV.  'Do  me  that  favour,  said  he,  in  fact,  it 
"  signifies  nothing.'  'Cheerfully,  most  holy  fa- 
*'  ther,  and  the  thing  is  donc,  if  it  be  feasible.' 
"  It  was,  however,  a  déclaration,  in  which  Louis 
*'  XIV.  at  the  close  of  his  life,  seduced  by  Ma- 
"  dame  de  Maintenon,  or  prevailed  upon  by  his 


208  MY    RESIDENCE    WITH  [Aug. 

**  confessors,  expressed  his  disapprobation  of  the 
'*  celebrated  articles  of  1682, the  foundations  ofthe 
**  liberties  ofthe  Gallican  church.  The  Emperor 
"  shrewdly  replied,  that  he  had  not,  for  his  own 
*'  part,  any  personal  objection,  but  that  it  was 
*'  requisite  for  him,  as  a  matter  of  form,  to  speak 
"  to  the  bishops  aboiit  it  ;  on  which  the  Pope  re- 
*'  peatedly  observed,  that  such  a  communication 
"  was,  by  no  means  necessary,  and  that  the  thing 
"  did  not  deserve  to  make  so  much  noise.  *I 
"  shall  never,'  he  remarked,  *she\v  the  sig- 
"  nature,  it  shall  be  kept  as  secret  as  that  of 
*'  Louis  XIV.'  'But  if  it  signifies  nothing,'  said 
'*  Napoléon,  *what  use  is  there  for  my  signature  ? 
**  And  if  any  signification  can  be  drawn  from  it, 
"  I  am  bound  by  a  sensé  of  propriety  to  consult 
"  my  doctors.'  " 

With  the  view,  however,  of  avoiding  the  im- 
putation of  a  constant  refusai  of  every  request, 
the  Emperor  wished  to  seem  rather  inclined  to 
grant  the  favour.  "  The  Bishop  of  Nantez  and 
"  the  other  bishops,  who  were  really  French, 
**  came  to  me  in  great  haste.  They  were  furious, 
*'  and  watched  me,"  said  the  Emperor,  "  as  they 
**  would  hâve  watched  Louis  XIV.  on  his  death- 
**  bed,  to  prevent  hini  from  turning  protestant. 
**  The  Sulpicians  were  called  in  ;  they  were 
"  Jesuits  au  petit  pied,  they  strove  to  find  out  my 
"  intention,  and  were  ready  to  do  whatever  I 
**  wished."    The  Emperor  concluded  with  ob- 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR   XAPOLEON.  209 

serving  ; — "The  Pope  had  dispensed  with  the 
"  public  communion  in  my  favour,  and  it  is  by 
**  his  détermination  in  that  respect,  that  I  form  my 
**  opinion  of  the  sincerity  of  his  religious  belief. 
**  He  had  held  a  congrégation  of  cardinals  for 
"  the  purpose  of  settling  the  cérémonial.  The 
*'  greaternumberwarmly  insisted  uponmy  taking 
"  the  communion  in  public,  asserting  the  great 
*'  influence  of  the  example  on  the  people,  and  the 
**  necessity  of  my  holding  it  out.  The  Pope,  on 
*'  the  contrary,  fearful  lest  I  should  fulfil  that 
**  duty  as  if  I  were  going  through  one  of  the 
"  articles  of  M.  de  Ségur's  program,  looked 
**  upon  it  as  a  sacrilège,  and  was  inflexible  in 
"  opposing  it.  '  Napoléon,'  he  observed,  *  is  not 
**  perhaps  abeliever;  the  time  will,  no  doubt, 
"  come,  in  which  his  faith  will  be  established,  and 
"  in  the  meantime,  let  us  not  burthen  his  con- 
*'  science  or  our  own.' 

*'  In  his  Christian  charity,  for  he  really  is  a 
"  worthy,  mild,  and  excellent  man,  he  ne\  er  once 
"  despaired  of  seeing  me  a  pénitent  at  his  tri- 
"  bunal  ;  he  has  often  let  his  hopes  and  thoughts 
**  on  that  subject  escape  him.  We  sometimes 
**  conversed  about  it  in  a  pleasant  and  friendly 
**  manner.  '  It  will  happen  to  you,  sooner  or 
**  later,'  said  he,  with  an  innocent  tenderness  of 
"  expression  ;  *  you  will  be  converted  by  me  or 
"  by  others,  and  you  will  then  feel  how  great  the 
**  content,  the  satisfaction  of  your  own  heart,'  &c. 

Vol.  III.  Part  F.  r 


10  MY    RESIDENCE    WITII  [Aug. 

In  the  mean  time,  my  influence  over  him  was 
such,  that  I  diew  from  him,  by  the  mère  power 
of  my  conversation,  that  famous  concordat  of 
Fontainebleau,  in  which  he  renounced  the  tem- 
poral sovereignty,  an  act,  on  account  of  which, 
he  lias  since  shown  that  he  dreaded  the  judg- 
ment  of  posterity,  or  rather  the  réprobation  of 
his  successors.  He  had  no  sooner  signed  than 
he  felt  the  stings  of  repentance.  He  was  to 
hâve  dined  the  following  day  with  me  in  public  ; 
but  at  night,  he  was,  or  pretended  to  be  ill. 
The  trutli  is,  that  immediately  after  I  left  him, 
he  again  fell  into  the  hands  of  his  habituai 
advisers,  who  drew  a  terrible  picture  of  the 
error  he  had  committed.  Had  we  been  left  by 
ourselves,  I  might  hâve  donc  what  I  pleased 
with  him  ;  I  should  hâve  governed  the  religions 
with  the  same  facility  that  I  did  the  political 
world.  He  was,  in  truth,  a  lamb,  a  good  man  in 
every  respect,  a  man  of  real  worth,  whom  I  es- 
teem  and  love  greatly,  and  who,  on  his  part,  is,  I 
am  convinced,  not  altogether  destitute  of  interest 
with  regard  to  me.  You  will  not  see  him  make 
any  severe  complaints  against  me,  nor  prefer, 
in  particular,  any  direct  and  personal  accus- 
ation against  me,  no  more  than  the  other  sove- 
reigns.  There  may,  perhaps,  be  some  vague 
and  vulgar  déclamations  against  ambition  and 
bad  faith,  but  nothing  positive  and  direct  ;  be- 
cause  statesmeu  are  well  aware,  that  when  the 


ISIC]  THE    ElIPEROR    NAPOLEOX.  211 

"  liour  of  libels  is  past,  no  one  would  be  allowed  to 
*'  prefer  a  public  accusation  without  corroborative 
**  proofs,  and  they  hâve  none  of  thèse  to  produce; 
*'  such  will  be  the  province  of  history.  On  the 
"  other  hand,  there  will  be  at  most,  but  some 
*'  wretched  chroniclers,  shallow  enough  to  take 
"  the  ravings  of  clubs,  or  intrigues,  for  authentic 
**  facts,  or  some  writers  of  memoirs,  who,  de- 
"  ceived  by  the  errors  of  the  moment,  will  be 
"  dead,  before  they  are  enabled  to  correct  their 
"  mistakes,  ^'C.  î^'c. 

*'  When  the  real  particulars  of  my  disputes  with 
*'  the  Pope  shall  be  made  public,  the  world  will 
''  be  surprised  at  the  extent  of  my  patience,  for 
"  it  is  known,  that  I  was  not  of  a  very  enduring 
**  temper.  When  he  left  me,  after  my  coronation, 
"  he  felt  a  secret  disgust  at  not  having  obtained 
*'  the  compensations  he  thought  he  had  deserved. 
*'  But,  however  grateful  I  might  hâve  been  in  other 
**  respects,  I  could  not,  after  ail,  make  a  traffic  of 
*'  the  interests  of  the  empire  by  way  of  acquit- 
"  ting  my  own  obligations,  and,  I  was,  be- 
"  sides,  too  proud  to  exhibit  a  seeming  acknow- 
**  ledgment,  that  I  had  purchased  his  kindnesses. 
**  He  had  hardly  set  his  foot  on  the  soil  of  Italy, 
**  when  the  intriguers  and  mischief-makers,  the 
**  enemies  of  France,  took  advantage  of  the  dis- 
"  position  he  was  in,  to  govern  his  conduct,  and 
**  from  that  instant  every  thing  was  hostile  on  his 
**  part.     He  no  longer  was  the  gentle,  the  peace- 


212  MY    RESIDENCE    AVITH  [Aug. 

able  Chiaramonti,  that  worthy  bishop  of  Imola, 
who  had  at  so  early  a  period  shown  himself 
worthy  of  the  enlightened  state  of  the  centiiry: 
His  signature  was  thenceforth  affixed  to  acts 
only  which  characterised  the  Gregories  and 
Bonifaces  more  than  him.  Rome  became  the 
focus  of  ail  the  plots  hatched  against  us.  I 
strove  in  vain,  to  bring  him  back  by  the  force  of 
reason,  but  I  found  it  impossible  to  ascertain  his 
sentiments.  Our  wrongs  became  so  serions, 
and  the  insults  offered  to  us  were  so  ostensible, 
that  I  was  imperiously  called  upon  to  act,  in  my 
turn.  I,  therefore,  seized  upon  his  fortresses, 
I  took  possession  of  some  provinces,  and  I 
finished  by  occupying  Rome  itself,  at  the  same 
time  declaring  and  strictly  observing  that  I  held 
him  sacred  in  his  spiritual  capacity,  which  was 
far  from  being  satisfactory  to  him.  A  crisis, 
however,  presented  itself;  it  was  believed,  that 
fortune  had  abandoned  me  at  Essling,  and  mea- 
sures  were  in  immédiate  readiness  for  excitinsf 
the  population  of  that  great  capital  to  insurrec- 
tion. The  ofHcer,  who  commanded  there, 
thought  that  he  could  escape  the  danger  only 
by  getting  rid  of  the  Pope,  whom  he  sent  for- 
ward  on  his  journey  to  France.  That  measure 
was  carried  into  effect  without  my  orders,  and 
was  even  in  direct  opposition  to  my  views.  I 
despatched  instant  orders  for  stopping  the  Pope, 
wherever  he  might  be  met  with,  and  he  was  kept 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR    XAPOLEON.  '213 

"  at  Savona,  where  he  was  treated  with  every 
*'  possible  care  and  attention;  for  I  wished  to 
**  make  myself  feared,  but  not  to  ill-treat  him  ;  to 
'*  bend  liim  to  my  views,  not  to  dégrade  him; — 
**  I  entertained  very  différent  projects  !  This  re- 
**  moval  served  only  to  inflame  the  spirit  of  re- 
**  sentment  and  intrigue.  Until  then,  the  quarrel 
"  had  been  but  temporal  ;  the  Pope's  advisers,  in 
"  the  hope  of  re-establishing  their  affairs,  involved 
**  it  in  ail  the  jumble  of  spirituality.  I  then  found 
*'  it  necessary  to  carry  on  the  contest  with  him 
**  on  that  head  ;  I  had  my  council  of  conscience, 
**  my  ecclesiastical  councils,  and  I  invested  my 
*'  impérial  courts  with  the  power  of  deciding  iu 
**  cases  of  appeal  froni  abuses;  for  my  soldiers 
"  could  be  of  no  further  use  in  ail  this;  I  felt  it 
**  necessary  to  fight  the  Pope  with  his  own  wea- 
*'  pons.  To  his  men  of  érudition,  to  his  sophists, 
*'  his  civilians,  and  his  scribes,  it  was  incumbent 
*'  upon  me  to  oppose  mine. 

"  An  English  plot  was  laid  to  carry  him  ofF 
"  from  Savona;  it  was  of  service  to  me,  I  caused 
"  him  to  be  removed  to  Fontainebleau  ;  but  that 
**  was  to  be  the  period  of  his  sufferings,  and  the 
**  régénération  of  his  splendor.  Ail  my  grand 
**  views  were  accomplished  in  disguise  and  mys- 
*'  tery  ; — I  had  brought  things  to  such  a  point,  as 
*'  to  render  the  developement  infallible,  without 
*'  any  exertion,  and  in  a  way  altogether  natural. 
^*  It  was  accordingly  consecrated  by  the  Pope  in 


214  MY    RESIDENCE    WITII  [Aug. 

'*  the  famoiis  concordat  of  Fontainebleau,  in  spite 

**  even  of  my  disasters  at  Moscow.     What  thcn 

"  would  hâve  been  the  resuit,  had  I  returned 

'*  victorious  and  triumphant  ?  I  had  consequently 

*'  obtained  the  séparation,  which  was  so  désirable, 

"  of  the  spiritual  from  the  temporal,  which  is  so 

"  injurions  to  his  Holiness,  and  the  commixture 

"  of  which  produces  disorder  in  society  in  the 

*'  name  and   by  the  hands   of  him,  who   ought 

*'  himself  to  be  the  centre  of  harmony;  and  from 

"  that  time,  I  intended  to  exalt  the  Pope  beyond' 

"  measure,  to-  surround  him  with  grandeur  and 

"  honours.     I  should  hâve  succeeded  in  suppres- 

"  sing  ail  his  anxiety  for  the  loss  of  his  temporal 

'  '  power  ;    I  should  hâve  made  an  idol  of  him ,' 

"  he  would  hâve  remained  nearmy  person.  Paris 

*'  would  havebecome  the  capital  of  Christendom, 

"  and    I    should    hâve    governed    the    religions 

"  as  well  as  the  political  world.     It  was  an  ad- 

"  ditional  means  of  binding  tighter  ail  the  fede- 

**  rative  parts  of  the  empire,  and  of  preserving 

**  the  tranquillity  of  every  thing  placed  without 

**  it.     I  should  hâve  had  my  religions  as  well  as 

*'  my   législative   sessions  ;   my   councils   would 

*'  hâve  constituted  the  représentation  of  Chris- 

*'  tianity,  and  the  Popes  would  hâve  only  been 

**  the  présidents.     I  should  hâve  called  together 

**  and  dissolved  those  assemblies,  approved  and 

*'  published  their  discussions  as  Constantine  and 

*'  Charlemagne  had  done  ;  and  if  that  supremacy 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON.  215 

**  had  escaped  theEmperors,  itwas,  becaiise  tlicy 
**  had  committed  the  fault  of  letting  the  spiritual 
*'  heads  réside  at  a  remote  distance  from  them, 
**  who  took  advantage  of  the  weakness  of  the 
*'  princes,  or  of  the  critical  events,  to  shake  off 
"  their  dependence  and  enslave  them  in  their 
'*  turn. 

"But"  resumed  the  Emperor,  *'  to  accomplish 
**  that  object,  I  had  found  itrequisite  to  manœuvre 
*'  with  a  great  deal  of  dexterity  ;  above  ail,  to 
*'  conceal  my  real  way  of  thinking,  to  give  a  di- 
"  rcction,  altogether  différent  to  gênerai  opinion, 
"  and  to  feed  the  public  with  vulgar  trifles  for  the 
"  purpose  of  more  effectually  concealing  the  im- 
*'  portance  and  depth  of  my  secret  design.  I  ac- 
**  cordingly  experienced  a  kind  of  satisfaction  in 
"  findingmyself  accused  of  barbarity  towards  the 
**  Pope,  and  of  tyranny  in  religions  matters. 
**  Foreigners,  in  particular,  promoted  my  wishes 
*'  in  this  respect  by  filling  their  wretched  libels 
'*  with  invectives  against  my  pitiful  ambition, 
**  which,  according  to  them,  had  driven  me 
**  to  devour  the  misérable  patrimony  of  Saint 
*'  Peter,  &c.  &c.  But  I  was  perfectly  aware, 
"  that  public  opinion  would  again  déclare  itself 
**  in  my  favour  at  home,  and  that  no  means  could 
*'  exist  abroad  for  disconcerting  my  plan.  What 
**  measures  would  not  hâve  been  employed  for 
"  its  prévention,  had  it  been  anticipated  at  a  sea- 
*'  sonable  period,  for  how  vast  its  future  ascend- 


aiG  •       MY    RESIDENCE    WITII  [Aug. 

'  ency  over  ail  the  Catholic  coiintries,  and  how 

*  great  its  influence  even  upon  those  that  are  not 

*  so,  by  the  co-operation  of  the  members  of  that 

*  religion  who  are  spread  throughout  thèse  coun- 
'  tries,  &c.  &c. 

**  The  Emperor  said,  that  this  deliverance  from 

*  the  Court  of  Rome,  this  légal  union,  the  con- 
'  troul  of  religion  in  the  hands  of  the  sovereign, 
'  had  been,  for  a  long  time,  the  constant  object 
'  of  his  méditations  and  his  wishes.     England, 

*  Russia,  the  northern  crowns,  and  part  of  Ger- 

*  many,  are,  he  said,  in  possession  of  it.  Venice 
'  and  Naples  had  enjoyed  it.  No  government 
'  can  be  carried  on  without  it  ;  a  nation  is  other- 
'  wise,  every  instant,  affected  in  its  tranquillity, 
'  its  dignity,  its  independence.    But  the  task,"  he 

added,  "  was  very  difficult;  at  every  step  I  was 
'  alive  to  the  danger.  I  was  induced  to  think, 
'  that  once  engaged  in  it,  I  should  be  abandoned 
'  by  the  nation.  I  more  than  once  sounded  and 
'  strove  to  elicit  public  opinion,  but  in  vain,  and 
'  I  hâve  been  enabled  to  convince  myself  that  I 
'  never  should  hâve  had  the  national  co-opera- 

*  tion."     And  this  explains  a  sally,  which  I  had 
witnessed. 

The  Emperor  perceiving,  at  one  of  those  grand 
Sunday  audiences,  which  were  very  numerously 
attended,  the  Archbishop  of  Tours  (de  Barrai) 
addressed  him  in  a  very  elevated  tone  ;  *'  Well  ! 
*•  Your  Grâce,  how  do  our  affairs  with  the  Pope 


ISIG.]  THE    E.AIPEROR    NAPOLEON.  217 

"  go  on  ? — 'Sire,  the  deputation  of  your  bishops  is 
**  about  to  set  ont  for  Savona.'  Very  well  !  en- 
**  deavoiir  to  make  the  Pope  listen  to  reason  ; 
'*  prevail  upon  him  to  conduct  himself  with  pru- 
*'  dence  ;  otherwise,  the  conséquences  will  be 
*'  unpleasant.  Tell  him  plainly,  that  he  is  no 
"  longer  in  the  times  of  the  Gregories,  and  that  I 
*'  am  not  a  Débonnaire.  He  has  the  example  of 
**  Henry  the  VUL,  and  without  his  wickedness. 
**  I  possess  more  strength  and  power  than  he  had. 
**  Let  him  know,  that  whatever  part  I  may  take, 
*'  I  hâve  G00,000  Frenchmen  in  arms,  who,  in 
"  every  contingency  will  march  with  me,  for  me, 
*'  and  as  myself.  The  peasantry  and  mechanics 
"  look  to  me  alone  and  repose  unlimited  confi- 
**  dence  in  me.  The  prudent  and  enlightened 
*'  part  of  the  intermediate  class,  those  who  take 
'*  care  of  their  interest,  and  wish  for  tranquillity 
"  will  follow  me  ;  the  only  class  favourable  to 
**  him  will  be  the  meddling  and  talkative,  who, 
*'  will  forget  him  at  the  end  of  ten  days,  to  chat 
"  upon  some  fresh  subject." 

And  as  the  archbishop,  who  betrayed  his  em- 
barassment  by  his  countenance,  was  about  to 
stammer  out  some  words,  the  Emperor  added  in 
a  very  softened  tone  ;  "  You  are  unacquainted 
*'  with  ail  this  ;  I  participate  in  your  doctrines  ; 
**  I  honour  your  piety  ;  I  respect  your  charac- 
"  ter  !" 

The  Emperor,  I  now  understand  him  perfectly, 


218  MY    RESIDENCE    WITII  [Aug. 

liad,  no  doubt,  merely  thrown  out  those  observ- 
ations in  order,  tliat  we  might  give  effect  to  them 
in  other  places  ;  but  he  deceived  himself  with 
respect  to  our  dispositions,  or  at  least  to  those 
of  the  palace.  Some,  the  least  reflecting  part, 
were  decided  and  loud  in  censuring  his  conduct 
on  thèse  occasions  ;  others,  with  the  best  inten- 
tions, were  extremely  cautions  not  to  let  a  word 
of  it  transpire,  least  it  should  prove  injurions  to 
him  in  the  public  opinion  ;  for  such  was,  in 
gênerai,  our  misconception,  our  singular  manner 
of  understanding  and  explaining  the  Emperor's 
meaning,  that  although  without  any  bad  design, 
and  solely  through  levity,  incoherency,  or  for 
fashion's  sake,  instead  of  making  him  popular, 
we  were,  perhaps,  the  very  persons,  who  did 
him  most  injury.  I  very  well  remember,  that 
the  morning,  when  that  famous  concordat  of  Fon- 
tainebleau unexpectedly  appeared  in  the  Moniteur, 
some  persons  confidentially  assured  each  other  in 
the  saloons  of  Saint  Cloud,  that  nothing  was  less 
authentic  than  that  document,  and  that  it  was  a 
base  fabrication  ;  others  whispered,  that  it  was, 
no  doubt,  genuine  in  the  main  points,  but  that  it 
had  been  extracted  from  the  Pope  by  the  Em- 
peror's anger  and  violence.  And  this  was  so  well 
described,  that  I  should  not  be  surprized,  were 
the  happy  dramatic  épisode  of  Napoléon,  at  Fon- 
tainebleau, draggi?ig  the  fatlier  of  the  faïthful  hy 
his  white  hair,  not  supplied  by  the  imagination  of 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON.  219 

tlie  poetical  proser  who  wrote  it,  but  cauglit  up 
from  the  moutlis  Qf  tlie  courtiers  and  even  of  tlie 
Emperor's  servants  themselves  ;  yet  this  is  the 
way  in  which  history  is  written  ! 

fFar»i   Conversation  with  the  Gavernor,  in  tlie  AdmiraVs 
Présence. 

18th. — The  weatherwas  most  dreadful  durinfj 
the  whole  of  the  night  and  day.  About  three 
o'clock,  the  Emperor  took  advantage  of  its  clear- 
ing up  a  little  and  went  out.  He  came  to  my 
apartment,  and  \ve  called  on  General  Gourgaud 
who  was  indisposed.  We  then  visited  Madame 
de  Montholon,  who  folio wed  us  to  the  garden. 
The  Emperor  was  in  excellent  spirits,  which  en- 
livened  the  conversation.  He  undertook  to  per- 
suade Madame  de  Montholon  to  make  a  gênerai 
confession,  particularly  insisting  upon  lier  setting 
out  with  lier  first  sin.  *'  Come,"  said  he,  "  speak 
**  out  without  appréhension,  do  not  letour  neigli- 
"  bour  constrain  you  ;  consider  him  merely  as 
"  your  confessor  ;  we  shall  forget  it  ail  in  a  quar- 
**  ter  of  an  hour  afterwards,"  &c.  8zc. 

And  I  really  believe  he  would  hâve  succeeded 
in  persuading  lier,  when  the  governor  unfortu- 
nately  came  to  interrupt  so  pleasant  a  scène  ;  he 
made  his  appearance,  and  the  Emperor  to  avoid 
receiving  him,  hastily  took  shelter  in  the  bottom 
of  the  wood.  We  were  joined  in  a  few  instants 
by    M.    de    Montholon,     who    acquainted    the 


-220  MY    RESIDENCE    WITH  [Aug. 

Emperor,  that  the  governor  and  the  admirai  ear- 
nestly  requested  the  honour  of  speaking  with 
him.  He  thonglit  that  some  communication  was 
to  be  made  on  their  part  and  returned  to  the  gar- 
den,  where  he  received  them. 

We  remained  behind,  with  the  governor's  offi- 
cers.  The  conversation  soon  became  animated 
on  the  part  of  the  Emperor,  who,  as  he  walked 
between  the  governor  and  the  admirai,  almost 
uniformly  addressed  himself  to  the  latter,  even 
when  he  spoke  to  the  former.  We  continued  at 
too  great  a  distance  to  hear  any  thing  distinctly  ; 
but  I  hâve  since  learnt,  that  he  again  repeated,  and 
with,  perhaps,  more  energy  and  warmth,  ail  that 
he  had  said  to  him  in  the  preceding  convers- 
ations. 

In  conséquence  of  the  favourable  explanations, 
which  the  Admirai,  who  acted  the  part  of  me- 
diator,  laboured  to  give  of  the  Governor's  inten- 
tions, the  Emperor  observed  :  '*  The  faults  of 
**  M.  Lowe  proceed  from  his  habits  of  life.  He 
*'  has  ne  ver  had  the  command  of  any  but  foreign 
"  deserters,  of  Piedmontese,  Corsicans,  and  Sici- 
**  lians,  ail  renegadoes,  and  traitors  to  their 
**  country  ;  the  dregs  and  scum  of  Europe.  If 
**  he  had  commanded  Englishmen  ;  if  he  were 
*'  one  himself,  he  would  shew  respect  to  those 
'*  who  hâve  a  ridit  to  be  honoured."  In  another 
instance,  the  Emperor  declared,  that  there  was 
a  moral  courage,  as  necessary  as  courage  on  the 


1S16.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON'.  221 

field  of  battle  ;  that  M.  Lowe  did  net  exercise  it 
hère  with  regard  to  us,  in  dreaming*  only  of  our 
escape,  rather  than  in  employing  the  only  real, 
prudent,  reasonable,  and  sensible  means  for  pre- 
venting  it.  The  Emperor  also  told  him,  that, 
although  his  body  was  in  the  hands  of  evil- 
minded  men,  his  soûl  was  as  lofty  and  inde- 
pendent  as  when  at  the  head  of  400,000  men,  or 
on  the  throne,  when  he  disposed  of  kingdoms. 

To  the  article  respecting  the  réduction  of  our 
expenses,  and  the  money  which  was  asked  of  the 
Emperor,  he  answered  ;  "  Ali  those  détails  are 
"  very  painful  to  me  ;  they  are  mean.  You 
"  might  place  me  on  the  burning  pile  of  Monte- 
"  zuma  or  Guatimozin  without  extracting  from 
"  me  gold,  which  I  do  not  possess.  Besides, 
*'  who  asks  you  for  any  thing  ?  Who  entreats 
"  you  to  feed  me  ?  When  you  discontinue 
**  your  supply  of  provisions,  those  brave  soldiers, 
"  whom  you  see  there/'  pointing,  with  his  hand, 
to  the  camp  of  the  53d,  "  will  take  pity  on  me  ; 
"  I  shall  go  place  myself  at  the  grenadier's  table, 
"  and  they  will  not,  I  am  confident,  drive  away 
"  the  first,  the  oldest  soldier  of  Europe." 

The  Emperor  having  reproached  the  Governor 
with  having  kept  some  books,  which  were  ad- 
dressed  to  him,  he  answered,  that  he  had  donc 
so  in  conséquence  of  their  having  been  sent  under 
the  address  of  Emperor.  **  And  who,"'  replied 
the  Emperor,  with  émotion,  **  gave  you  the  right 


222  M  Y    RESIDENCE    WITH  [[Aug. 

*'  of  disputinsf  tliat  title  ?  In  a  few  years,  yoiir 
*'  Lord  Castlereagh,  yoiir  Lord  Bathurst,  and  ail 
'*  the  others  ; — you,  wlio  speak  to  me, — will  be 
**  buried  in  the  dust  of  oblivion,  or  if  your  names 
**  be  remembered,  it  will  be  only  on  account  of 
**  the  indignity  with  wliich  you  hâve  treated  me, 
"  -while  the  Emperor  Napoléon  sliall,  doubtless, 
**  continue  for  ever  the  subject,  the  ornament  of 
"  history,  and  the  star  of  civilized  nations.  Your 
"  libels  are  of  no  avail  against  me  ;  you  hâve 
*'  expended  millions  on  them  ;  what  hâve  they 
"produced?  Truth  pierces  through  the  clouds, 
.*'  it  shines  like  the  sun,  and  like  it,  is  im- 
*'  perishable." 

The  Emperor  admitted  that  he  had,  during 
this  conversation,  seriously  and  repeatedly  offend- 
ed  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  ;  and  he  also  did  him 
the  justice  to  acknowledge,  that  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe  had  not  precisely  shewn,  in  a  single  instance, 
any  want  of  respect  ;  he  had  contented  himself 
with  muttering,  between  his  teeth,  sentences 
which  were  not  audible.  He  once  said,  that  he 
had  solicited  his  recal,  and  the  Emperor  observed, 
that  that  was  the  most  agreeable  word  he  could 
possibly  hâve  said.  He  also  said,  that  we  endea- 
voured  to  blacken  his  character  in  Europe,  but  that 
our  conduct,  in  that  respect,  was  a  matter  of  indif" 
ference  to  him.  The  only  failure,  perhaps,  said  the 
Emperor,  on  the  part  of  the  Governor,  and  which 
was  trifling,  compared  with  the  treatment  he  had 


.816.]  THE    EMPEllOR    NAPOLEOX.  033 

received,  was  the  abrupt  way  in  which  hc 
retired,  while  the  Admirai  withdrew  slowly,  and 
with  niimerous  saintes,  **  The  Admirai  was 
*'  precisely  then,"  observed  the  Emperor,  in  a 
gay  tone  of  voice,  "  what  the  Marquis  de  Gallo 
**  was  at  the  time  of  my  rupture  of  Passeriano," 
&c.  &c.  An  allusion  to  one  of  the  chapters  of 
the  campaign  of  Italy,  which  lie  had  dictated 
to  me. 

The  Emperor  remarked,  that,  after  ail,  he  had 
tareproach  himself  with  that  scène.  "  I  must 
*'  see  this  officer  no  more  ;  he  makes  me  fly  into 
*' a  violent  passion;  it  is  beneath  my  dignity  ; 
*'  expressions  escape  me  which  would  hâve  been 
"  unpardonable  at  the  Tuileries;  ifthey  can  at 
*'  ail  be  excused  hère,  it  is  because  I  am  in  his 
*'  hands,  and  subject  to  his  power." 

After  dinner,  the  Emperor  caused  a  letter  to 
be  read,  in  answer  to  the  Governor,  who  had 
officially  sent  the  treaty  of  the  2d  of  August,  by 
which  the  allied  Sovereigns  stipulated  for  the 
imprisonment  of  Napoléon.  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  by 
the  same  conveyance,  asked  to  introduce  the  fo- 
reign  commissioners  to  Longwood.  The  Emperor 
had,  in  the  course  of  the  day,  dictated  the  letter 
to  Monsieur  de  Montholon.  It  was  his  wish, 
that  every  one  of  us  should  propose  his  objec- 
tions, and  state  his  opinions.  It  seemed  to  us  a 
master-piece  of  dignity,  energy,  and  sound  rea- 
soning. 


224  MV    HESIDENCE    "U'ITH  [Aug. 

Tlie  Conver-fùtion  ivith  the  Governor  again  noticed,  ^-c. — 
Effect  of  the  Lïbels  agaimt  Napoléon. — Treaty  of  Fon- 
tainebleau.— The  Work  of  General  S n. 

19th. — The  weather  continued  as  dreadful  as 
we  had  ever  seen  it.  It  bas  been,  for  several 
days,  like  one  ofour  equinoctial  stormsin  Europe. 
The  Emperor  exposed  himself  to  it  to  corne  to 
my  apartment  about  ten  o'clock  ;  in  going  ont 
he  struck  one  of  his  legs  against  a  nail  near  the 
door;  his  stocking  was  torn  halfway  down  the 
leg;  happily,  the  skinAvas  only  scratched.  He 
was  obliged  to  retiirn  to  change.  *'  You  owe 
**  me  a  pair  of  stockings,"  he  said,  while  his  valet 
de  chambre  was  putting  on  another  pair;  "  a 
"  polite  man  does  not  expose  his  visitors  to  such 
"  dangers  in  his  apartments.  You  are  lodged 
"  toc  much  like  a  seaman  ;  it  is  true,  that  is  not 
"  your  fault.  I  thought  myself  careless  about 
"  thèse  matters,  but  you  actually  surpass  me." — 
**  Sire,"  I  answered,  "  my  merit  is  not  great,  no 
**  choice  is  left  me.  I  am  truly  a  hog  in  its  mire, 
**  I  must  confess  ;  but  as  your  Majesty  says,  it 
"  is  not  altogether  my  fault." 

We  went  into  the  garden,  when  it  had  cleared 
up  for  a  moment.  The  Emperor  reverted  to  the 
conversation  which  he  had  yesterday  with  the 
Governor,  in  the  AdmiraFs  présence,  and  again 
reproached  himself  with  the  violence  of  his  ex- 
pressions.   ''  It  would  hâve  been  more  worthy  of 


1S16.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON.  o<jr, 

**  me,  more  consistent  and  more  dignified,  to  hâve 

"  expressed  ail  thèse  things  with  perfect  com- 

"  posure  ;  they  would,  besides,  hâve  been  more 

**  impressive."     He  recollected,  in  particular,  a 

name  which  had  escaped  him  against  M.  Lowe 

(sa^ibe  (retat-niqjor),  which  must  hâve  shocked 

him,  and  the  more  so  becaiise  it   described  the 

truth,   and   that,  we  know,  is  always  offensive. 

**  I  hâve  myself,"  said  the  Emperor,  "  experienced 

**  that  feeling  in  the  island  of  Elba.     When  I  ran 

**  over   the  most  infamous   libels,   they  did  not 

*'  affect  me  even  in  the  slightest  manner.     When 

**  I  was  told  or  read,  that  I  had  strangled,  poisoned, 

"  ravished  ;  that  I  had  massacred  my  sick  ;  that     ^.vW:^  " 

"  my  carriage  had  been  driven  over  my  wounded  ;  .,t  '"*. i|?^  \ 

'*  I  laus^hed  ont  of  commisération.   How  often  did  ?"'   -Vx'  .r^'l 

"  I  not  then  say  to  Madame;   *  Make  haste,  my         •  ';i5«"-=< 

"  mother,  come  and  see  the  savage,  the  man-tigei\       ^    ♦''-  »  '^  *■  - 

**  the  devourer  ofthe  huma n-r ace  ;  come  and  admire 

*'  the  fruit  of  your  womb  !'  But  when  their  was 

**  a  slight  approach  to  truth,  the  effect  was  no 

"  longer  the  same,  I  feltthe  necessity  of  defending 

*'  myself;    I  accumulated  reasons  for  my  justifi- 

**  cation,  and  even  then,  it  never  happened,  that 

**  I  was  left  without  some  traces  of  a  secret  tor- 

**  ment.     My  dear  Las  Cases,  this  is  man  !" 

The  Emperor  passed  from  this  subject  to  his 
protestation  against  the  treaty  of  the  2d  of  Au- 
gust,  which  had  been  read  to  us  after  dinner.  I 
presumed  to  ask  him,  whether,  after  noticing  in 

Vol.  IIL  Part  1.  q 


B2fi  MY    RESIDENCE    WTTU  [Aug. 

a  conspicuoiis  manner,  the  acknowledgment  of 
his  title  of  Emperor  by  the  English,  during  their 
négociations  at  Paris  and  Chatillon,  he  had  not 
forgotten  that,  which  they  must  hâve  made  on 
the  treaty  of  Fontainebleau,  and  which,  it  struck 
me  wasomitted.  **Itwas,"  he  quickly  replied, 
done  on  purpose;  I  hâve  nothing  to  do  with 
that  treaty  ;  I  disclaim  it  ;  I  am  far  from  boast- 
ing  of  it,  I  am  rather  ashamed  of  it.  It  was  dis- 
cussed  for  nie.  I  was  betrayed  by  N  .  .  .  .  , 
who  broiight  it  to  me.  If  I  had  been  then 
willing  to  treat  with  common  sensé,  I  should 
hâve  obtained  the  kingdom  of  Italy,  Tuscany, 
or  Corsica,  &c.  kc.  ail  thati  could  hâve  desired. 
My  décision  was  the  resuit  of  a  fault  inhérent 
in  my  character,  a  caprice  on  my  part,  a  real 
constitutional  excess.  I  was  seized  with  a  dis- 
like  and  contempt  of  every  thing  around  me,  I 
was  affected  with  the  same  feeling  for  fortune, 
which  I  took  delight  in  out-facing.  I  cast 
my  eye  on  a  spot  of  land,  where  I  might  be 
uncomfortable  and  take  advantage  of  the 
mistakes  that  might  be  made.  I  fixed  upon 
the  island  of  Elba.  It  was  the  act  of  a  soûl 
of  rock.  I  am,  no  doubt,  my  dear  Las  Cases, 
of  a  very  singular  disposition,  but  we  should 
not  be  extraordinary,  were  we  not  of  a  peculiar 
mould  ;  I  am  a  pièce  of  rock,  lanched  into' 
space  !  You  will  not,  perhaps,  easily  believe 
me,  but  I  do  not  regret  my  grandeur  ;  you  see 


1816.]  TIIÈ    EMPEROR    NAPOLEOK.  22^ 

**  me  slightly  affected  by  what  I  hâve  lost."  ''And 
"  why,  Sire,"  I  observed,  "  should  I  not  believe 
"  yoii  ?  AVhat  hâve  you  to  regret?  ....  The 
"  life  of  man  is  but  an  atom  in  the  duration  of 
*'  history,  biitwith  regard  to  your  majesty,  the 
"  one  is  already  so  full,  that  you  scarcely  ought 
*'  to  take  any  interest  but  in  the  other;  if  your 
*'  body  sufFers  hère,  your  memory  is  enriched  a 
*'  hundred-fold.  Had  it  been  your  lot  to  end 
*'  your  days  in  the  bosom  of  uninterrupted  pros- 
**  perity,  how  many  grand  and  striking  circum- 
**  stances  would  hâve  passed  away  unknown! 
**  You  yourself.  Sire,  hâve  assured  me  of  this, 
"  and  I  hâve  remained  impressed  with  the  force 
"  of  that  truth.  Not  a  day,  in  fact,  passes  in 
**  which  those,  who  were  your  enemies,  do  not 
**  repeat  with  us,  who  are  your  faithful  servants, 
"  that  you  are  unquestionably  greater  hère  than 
**  in  the  Tuileries.  And  even  on  this  rock  to  which 
"  you  hâve  been  transplanted  by  violence  and 
"  perfidy,  do  you  not  still  command  ?  Your 
**  jailors,  your  masters,  are  at  your  feet,  your 
"  soûl  captivâtes  every  one  that  comes  near 
**  you  ;  you  shew  yourself  what  history  repre- 
**  sents  Saint  Louis,  in  the  chains  of  the  Saracens, 
*'  the  real  master  of  his  conquerors.  Your  irre- 
**  sistible  ascendency  accompanies  you  hère. 
**  We,  who  are  ail  about  you.  Sire,  entertain  this 
"  opinion  of  you  ;  the  Russian  commissioner  ex- 
"  pressed  the  same  sentiment,  we  are  assured, 


«228  MY    RESIDENCE    W'ITH  [Aug. 

**  the  other  day,  and  it  is  felt  by  those  who 
*' giiard  you.  .  .  .    What  hâve  you  to  regret  ?" 

On  our  return  the  Emperor,  in  spite  of  the 
storm,  ordered  his  breakfast  in  the  tent,  and  kept 
me  with  him.  The  water  did  not  penetrate; 
the  only  inconvenience  was  a  considérable  degree 
of  moisture  ;  but  the  squalls  of  wind  and  rain 
whirled  round  us,  and  vented  themselves  far 
before  us,  towards  the  bottom  of  the  valley  ; 
the  spectacle  was  not  destitute  of  beauty. 

The  Emperor  retired  about  two  o'clock;  he 
sent  for  me  some  time  afterwards  to  his  cabinet. 
**  I  hâve,"  said  he,  lâying  down  the  book, 
**  just  read  General  S — — n;  he  is  a  madman,  a 
**  hair-brained  fellow,  he  writes  nonsense.  He 
"  is,  however,  after  ail,  readable  and  amusing;  he 
"  cuts  up,  dissects,  judges,  and  pronounces  sen- 
**  tence  upon  men  and  things.  He  does  not 
*'  hesitate  to  give  advice,  in  several  instances,  to 
"  Wellington,  and  asserts,  that  he  ought  to  hâve 
"  made  some  campaigns  under  Kleber,  &c. 
"  Kleber  was  no  doubt  a  great  gênerai,  but  the 
**  notice  taken  of  Soult  is  not  precisely  the  best 
"  part  of  the  book  ;  he  is  much  better  as  an  ex- 
**  cellent  director,  as  a  good  war  minister." 

*'  This  S n,"hecontinued,  **  deserted  from 

"  the  camp  at  Boulogne,  with  ail  my  secrets,  to 
*' the  English  ;  that  might   hâve  been  attended 

"  with    serions    conséquences.     S n    was  a 

**  gênerai  officer;  his  conduct  was  dreadful  and 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON'.  29.9 

"  unpardonable.  But  observe  how  a  man  in  the 
**  moment  of  révolution  may  be  a  bad  character, 
"  impudent,  and  shameless.  I  found  him,  on  my 
•'  return  from  the  island  of  Elba,  he  waited  for 
**  me  with  confidence,  and  wrote  a  long  letter  in 
"  which  he  attempted  to  make  me  his  dupe.  The 
"  English,  he  said,  were  misérable  créatures;  he 
**  had  been  a  long  time  among  them  ;  he  was  ac- 
**  quainted  with  their  means  and  resources,  and 
*'  could  be  very  useful  to  me.  He  knew  that  I 
**  was  too  magnanimous,  too  great  to  remem- 
"  ber  the  wrongs  I  had  suffered  from  him,  &c.  I 
"  ordered  him  to  be  arrested,  and  as  he  had  been 
**  already  tried  and  condemned,  I  am  at  a  îoss  to 
**  know  why  he  was  not  shot.  Either  there  was 
"  not  time  to  carry  his  sentence  into  efFect,  or  he 
"  was  forgotten.  There  can  be  no  forbearance, 
*.'  no  indulgence  for  the  gênerai,  who  has  the  in- 
**  famy  to  prostitute  himself  to  a  foreign  power." 

The  grand  marshal  came  in  ;  the  Emperor, 
after  continuing  the  conversation  for  some  time, 
took  him  away  to  play  at  chess.  He  suffered 
much  from  the  badness  of  the  weather. 

After  dinner  he  read  Le  Tartufe  ;  but  he  was  so 
fatigued,  that  he  could  not  get  through  it.  He 
laid  down  the  book,  and  after  paying  a  just  tribute 
of  eulogy  to  Molière,  he  concluded  in  a  manner 
which  we  little  expected.  *'  The  whole  of  the 
*'  Tartufe"  he  remarked,  is,  "  unquestionably, 
*'  finished  with  the  hand  of  a  master,  it  is  one  of  the 


<230  MV    RESIDENCE    WITII  [Aug. 

**  chefs  d'œuvre  of  an  inimitable  writer.  This  pièce 
*'  is,  however,  marked  with  siich  a  character,  tïiat 
**  I  am  not  at  ail  surprized,  its  appearance  should 
"  hâve  been  the  siibject  of  interesting  negocia- 
**  tions  at  Versailles,  and  of  agréât  deal  of  liesita- 
**  tion  on  the  part  of  Louis  XIV.  If  I  hâve  a 
"  right  to  be  astonished  at  any  thing,  it  is  at  his 
"  allowing  it  to  be  performed.  It  holds  out,  in 
**  my  mind,  dévotion  under  such  odious  colours  ; 
"  a  certain  scène  présents  so  décisive  a  situation, 
**  so  completely  indécent,  that  for  my  own  part, 
"  I  do  not  hesitate  to  say,  if  the  comedy  had  been 
*'  written  in  my  time,  I  would  not  hâve  aiiowed 
•*  it  to  be  represented." 

The  Baj'oness  de  S.  .  .  .,  S^c. 

20th. — About  four  o'clock,  I  attended  the  Em-' 
peror,  according  to  his  orders,  in  the  billiard' 
room.  The  weather  still  continued  dreadful  ;  if 
did  not  allow  him  to  set  his  foot  out  of  doors,  and' 
he  was,  he  said,  notwithstanding,  driven  from  his 
apartment  and  the  saloon  by  the  smoke.  He 
found  my  countenance,  he  remarked,  quite  cast 
down  ;  it  was  with  the  most  lively  indignation, 
and  he  wished  to  know  the  cause  of  it. 

*'  Two  or  three  years,"  I  said,  "  hâve  passed 
"  since  a  clerk  in  the  war  office,  a  very  worthy 
"  man,  as  far  as  I  know,  used  to  come  to  my 
**  house  to  give  my  son  lessons  in  writing  and  in 
**  Latin.  He  had  a  daughter,  whom  he  wished 
"  to  make  a  ijoverness,  and  bcofsfed  us  to  recom-' 


1816J  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEOy.  "^^ 

**  mend  her,  shoiild  an  occasion  présent  itself. 
'*  Madame  Las  Cases  sent  for  her  ;  she  was 
'*  charming,  and  in  every  respect  higlily  attrac- 
**  tive.  From  that  moment,  Madame  Las  Cases 
**  invited  her  occasionally  to  her  house,  with  the 
"  view  of  introducing  her  into  the  world,  and  ob- 
**  taining  some  acquaintances  for  her  who  might 
**  prove  usefuL  But  how  strange  !  this  young 
**  person,  our  acquaintance,  our  obliged  friend, 
"  is  actually  at  this  moment,  the  Barouess  de 
*'  *S' .  .  .  .  ,  the  wife  of  one  of  the  Commissioners 
"  of  the  allied  powers,  who  arrived  nearly  a 
'*  month  since,  in  the  island. 

**  Your  Majesty  may  judge  of  my  surprize,  and 
*'  of  ail  my  joy  at  this  singular  caprice  of  fortune; 
**  I  am  then  aboiit  to  hâve,  I  said  tomyself,  positive^ 
*'  particular,  and  even  secret  information  respect- 
*'  ing  every  thing  that  interests  me.  Several  days 
*'  passed  without  any  communication,  but  without 
"  any  anxiety,  and  even  with  some  satisfaction  on 
*'  my  part.  For,  I  thought  the  greater  the  cautiouj 
*'  the  more  I  had  to  expect.  At  length  hurried  on 
"  by  my  impatience,  I  sent  three  or  four  days  ago 

"  my  servant  to  Madam  de  S ;  I  had  de- 

*'  scribed  hervery  properly,  and  as  an  inhabitant 
"  of  the  island  he  found  no  difficulty  in  gaining 
**  admittance.  He  returned  shortly  with  an  an- 
**  swer  from  Madam  de  S  .... ,  that  she  did  not 
"  know  the  person  who  had  sent  him.  I  might, 
•'  under  every  circumstance,  be  still  induced  to 


<23'2  MV    RESIDENCE    AVITH  [Aug. 

*'  think,  that  this  was  an  excess  of  prudence,  and 
**  that  she  was  unwilling  to  place  confidence  in  one 
**  unknown  to  her.  But  this  very  day,  I  received 
**  notice  from  the  governor,  not  to  attempt  to 
*'  form  any  secret  connexion  in  the  island,  that  I 
"  ought  to  be  aware  of  the  danger  to  which  I  ex- 
"  posed  myself,  and  that  the  attempt  with  which 
**  he  reproached  me  was  not  a  matter  of  doubt; 
**  for  he  was  put  in  possession  of  it  by  the  very 
*'  person  to  whom  I  had  addressed  myself.  Your 
*'  Majesty  now  knows  what  has  confounded  me. 
"  To  find  so  villanous  a  charge  in  a  quarter 
"  where  I  had  a  right  to  expect  some  interest  in 
*'  my  afFairs,  and  even  gratitude,  has  irritated  me 
"  beyond  measure;  I  am  no  longer  the  same 
"  person." 

The  Emperor  laughed  in  myface;  *'  How  little 
"  do  you  know  of  the  human  heart  !  What!  her 
**  father  was  your  son's  tutor,  or  something  of  that 
**  kind  ;  she  enjoyed  your  wife's  protection  when 
**  she  was  in  want  of  it,  and  she  is  become  a  Ger-i 
"  man  baroness  !  But,  my  dear  Las  Cases,  you 
*'  are  the  person  whom  she  dreads  most  hère, 
"  who  lay  her  most  under  constraint;  she  did 
**  not  even  see  yoiir  wife  at  Paris,  and  besides, 
*'  this  mischievous  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  may  hâve 
"  been  delighted  with  giving  an  odious  turn  to 

•'  the  thing  ;  he  is  so  artful,  so  malignant." 

Aiid  he  then  began  again  to  laugh  at  me  and  my 
anger. 


1816]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEOX.  233 

After  dinner  the  Emperor  resumed  his  reading 
of  the  Tartufe,  which  he  had  not  finished  yester- 
day,  and  there  was  enoiigh  left  for  to-day.  The 
Emperor  was  quite  dejected  ;  the  bad  weather 
has  a  visible  effect  upon  him. 

Corvisard. — Anecdotes  of  the  Saloons  of  Pariai. 

21  st. — The  weather  as  horrible  as  ever. — We 
are  serioiisly  incommoded  with  the  wet  in  our 
apartments  ;  the  rain  pénétrâtes  every  where. 

The  governor's  secretary  brought  me  a  letter 
from  Europe  ;  it  communicated  a  few  moments 
of  real  happiness  ;  it  contained  the  recollections 
and  good  wishes  of  my  dearest  friends.  I  went 
and  read  it  to  the  Emperor. 

The  Emperor  sufFered  seriously  from  the  bad- 
ness  of  the  weather.  He  went  to  his  saloon  about 
four  o'clock  ;  he  thought  he  had  the  fever,  and 
found  himself  much  depressed  ;  he  called  for 
some  punch,  and  played  a  few  games  of  chess 
with  the  grand  marshal.  The  doctor  is  arrived 
from  the  town.  The  two  vessels  just  arrived  came 
from  the  Cape;  one  of  them  is  the  Podargus, 
which  left  Europe  ten  days  after  the  Griffin  ;  the 
other,  a  small  frigate  on  her  way  from  India  to 
Europe.  There  was,  it  was  said,  a  letter  for  the 
Emperor  Napoléon,  but  it  was  not  delivered,  and 
we  did  not  know  from  whom  it  came. 

After  dinner  it  was  said,  that  the  medicines  in 
the  island  were  exhausted,  and  it  was  remarked, 


234  MV    RESIDENCE    WITII  [Aug. 

that  the  Emperor  could  not  be  accused  of  haviiig 
contributed  to  it.  This  led  him  to  obsen^e,  that 
he  did  not  recollect  having  ever  taken  ariy  medi- 
ciue  at  the  Tuileries.  He  had  had  three  blisters 
at  once,  and  he  had  stopped  them  without  taking 
any.  He  received  a  serions  wound  at  Toulon  ;  it 
was  he  said,  like  that  of  Ulysses,  by  which  his 
old  nurse  knew  him  again  ;  he  had  recovered, 
altogether  without  taking  physic.  One  of  us  taking 
the  liberty  to  say  ;  *'  If  your  majesty  had  the  dy- 
"  sentary  to-morrow,  would  y  ou  still  reject  ail 
"  kind  of  medicine?"  llie  Emperor  answered; 
*•  At  présent  that  I  am  tolerably  mcII,  I  answer, 
'*  yes,  without  hésitation  ;  but  if  I  got  very  ill,  I 
"  should,  perhaps,  alter  my  mind,  and  should 
*'  then  feel  that  kind  of  conversion,  which  is  pro- 
"  duced  on  a  dying  man  through  the  fear  of  the 
"  devil."  He  again  mentioned  his  incredulity  in 
physic,  but  he  did  not  think  so,  he  said,  of  sur- 
gery.  He  had  three  times  commenced  a  course 
of  anatomical  study  ;  but  he  had  been  always  in- 
terrupted  by  business  and  disgust.  *'  On  a  cer- 
"  tain  occasion  and  at  the  end  of  a  long  discus- 
"  sion,  Corvisard,  désirons  of  speaking  to  me 
"  with  his  proofs  in  hand,  was  so  abominable  and 
"  filthy  as  to  bring  a  stomach,  wrapped  up  in  his 
*'  pocket  handkerchiefto  Saint  Cloud,  and  I  was 
"  instantly  compelled,  at  that  horrible  sight,  td 
**  cast  up  ail  I  had  in  mine." 
The  Emperor  attempted,  after  dinner,  to  read 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON.  235 

a  comedy,  but  he  was  so  fatigued  ànd  suffered  so' 
much,  that  he  was  forced  to  stop  and  retire  about 
iiine  o'clock.  He  made  me  follow  him,  and  as  he 
felt  no  inclination  to  sleep,  he  said;  *'  Corne,  my 
"  dear  Las  Cases,  let  us  see  ;  let  us  hâve  a  story 
**  about  your  fauxbourg  Saint  Germain,  and  let  us 
*'  endeavour  to  laugh  at  it,  as  if  we  were  listening 
'.'  to  the  Thousand  and  One  Nights'  Taies  !"-^ 
**  Very  well,  Sire  ;  there  was  forraerly  one  of 
"  your  Majesty's  chamberlains,  who  had  a  grt^nd 
*'  uncle,  who  was  very  old,  very  old  indeed,  .  .  ,  . 
"■  and  I  remember  your  Majesty  telling  us  the 
**  story  of  a  heavy  German  officer,  who,  taken 
*'  prisoner  at  the  opening  of  the  campaign  of 
"  Italy,  complained  that  a  young  conceited  fellow 
"  had  been  sent  to  command  against  them,  who 
*'  spoiled  the  profession,  and  made  it  intolérable. 
"  Well!  we  had  precisely  his  likeness  among  us; 
"  it  was  the  old  grand-uncle,  who  was  still  dress- 
*'  ed  nearly  in  the  costume  of  Louis  XIV.  He 
"  showed  oft",  whenever  you  sent  accounts  of  any- 
*'  extraordinary  achievements  on  the  other  side 
"  of  the  Rhine  ;  your  bulletins  of  Ulm  and  Jena 
"  operated  upon  him  like  so  many  révulsions  of 
"  bile.  He  was  far  from  admiring  you.  You' 
"  also  spoiled  the  profession  in  his  opinion.  He 
**  had,  he  frequently  said,  made  the  campaigns 
"  of  the  Marshal  de  Saxe,  which  indeed  were 
"  prodigies  in  war,  and  had  not  been  sufficiently 
**  appreciated.   '  War  was,  no  doubt,  then  an  art, 


2S6  aiV    RESIDENCE    WlTIl  [Aug. 

**  but  now  !  !  !'  lie  remarked,  shrugging  up  his 
*'  shoulders  ....  *  In  oiir  time,  we  carried  on  war 
**  with  great  décorum  ;  we  had  our  mules  ;  we 
*'  were  foUowed  by  our  canteens  ;  we  had  our 
"  tents;  we  lived  well  ;  we  had  even  plays  per- 
"  formed  at  head-quarters  ;  the  armies  approached 
**  each  other;  admirable  positions  were  occu- 
**pied;  a  battle  took  place;  a  siège  was  oc- 
**  casionally  carried  on,  and  afterwards  we  wçnt 
**  into  winter-quarters,  to  renew  our  opérations 
*'  in  the  Spring.  That  is,'  he  exclaimed,  with 
**  exultation,  '  what  may  be  called  making  war  ! 
"But  now,  a  whole  army  disappears  betbre 
*'  another  in  a  single  battle,  and  a  monarchy  is 
*'  overturned;  a  hundred  leagues  are  run  over  in 
*'  ten  days  ;  as  for  sleeping  and  eating,  they  are 
"  ont  of  the  question.  Truly,  if  you  call  that 
*'  genius,  I  am,  for  my  own  part,  obliged  to  ac- 
*'  knowledge,  that  I  know  nothing  about  it  ;  and 
**  accordingly,  you  excite  my  pity,  when  I  hear 
"  you  call  him  a  great  man.'  " 

The  Emperor  burst  into  fits  of  laughter,  par- 
ticularly  when  the  mules  and  canteens  were  men- 
tioned.  He  then  added;  **  you  were  of  course 
**  accustomed  to  say  a  great  many  foolish  things 
**  about  me." — **0  yes,  Sire,  and  in  vast  abund- 
**  ance."  **Verywell!  We  are  alone;  nobody 
**  will  intrude  ;  tell  me  some  more  of  them."  *'  A 
"  fine  gentleman,  who  had  formerly  been  a  cap- 
*'  tain  of  cavalry,  and  who  seemed  perfectly  satis- 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON'.  237 

"  fied  with  his  own  person  and  accomplishments, 
**  was  introduced  to  a  sélect  society  where  I  was 
**  présent.  *  I  corne,'  he  said,  *  from  the  plain  des 
**  Sablons.  I  hâve  just  seen  oitr  Ostrogot  h  qian' 
"  œuvre.'  That,  Sire,  was  your  Majesty.  *  He 
*'  had  two  or  three  régiments  which  he  threw 
**  into  confusion  upon  each  other,  and  they 
*'  were  ail  lost  in  some  bushes.  I  would 
**  hâve  taken  him  and  ail  his  men  prisoners 
"  with  fifty  maitres  (formerly  troopers)  only. 
"  An  usurped  réputation  !'  he  exclaimed.  '  Ac* 
"  cordingly,  Moreau  M^as  always  of  opinion, 
**  that  he  would  fail  in  Germany.  A  war  with 
**  Germany  is  talked  of  ;  if  it  take  place,  we  shall 
*'  see  how  he  will  extricate  himself.  He  will 
**  hâve  justice  done  to  him.' 

*'  The  war  took  place,  and  your  Majesty  sent 
"  us  in  a  very  few  days  the  bulletin  of  Ulm  and 
**  that  of  Austerlitz,  &c.  ;  our  fine  gentleman 
*'  again  made  his  appearance  in  the  same  com- 
**  pany,  and  for  the  instant,  we  could  not,  not- 
**  withstanding  our  malevolence,  help  crying  out 
"  ail  in  the  same  breath  ;  *  And  your  fifty  maitres  !' 
**  '  Oh!  truly,'  said  he,  '  it  is  impossible  to  com- 
"  prehend  the  thing  ;  this  man  triumphs  over 
**  every  obstacle;  fortune  leads  him  by  the  hand, 
**  and  besides,  the  Austrians  are  so  awkward  ; 
•*  suchfools!'"  .... 

The  Emperor  laughed  heartily,  and  wished  for 
some  anecdote  still  more  absurd.     **  That  would 


238  MY    RKSIDENCE    WITH       '  [Aug. 

"  indeed,  Sire,  be  very  difficult.  I  recollect, 
**  however,  an  old  dowager,  who  to  the  day  of 
*'  her  death  obstinately  refused  to  give  crédit  to 
'*  any  of  your  successes  in  Germany.  When  Ulm, 
**  A'usterlitz,  and  your  entrance  into  Vienna  weré 
*'  mentioned  in  her  présence  ; — *  So  yon  be- 
*'  lieve  ail  that,'  said  she,  shrugging  up  her  shoul- 
**  ders.  '  It  is  ail  his  fabrication.  He  wonld  not 
**  présume  to  set  a  foot  in  Germany  ;  be  assured, 
**  that  he  is  still  behind  the  Rhine,  where  he  is 
"  perishing  from  fear,  and  sends  us  those  silly 
*'  stories  :  you  will  learn  in  time  that  I  am  not 
**  to  be  imposed  upon.'  " 

And  thèse  stories  being  over,  the  Emperor 
sent  me  away,  saying  ;  '*  What  are  they  doing, 
"  what  must  they  say,  at  présent?  I  am  certamly 
**  now  giving  them  a  fine  opportunity." 

22d. — This  was  a  day  of  real  mourning  for  me, 
it  was  the  first,  since  our  departure  from  France, 
in  which  I  did  not  see  the  Emperor.  I  was  the 
only  one,  in  conséquence  of  fortunate  circum- 
stances,  who,  until  now,  had  enjoyed  that  hap- 
piness.  His  sufferings  were  great,  and  his 
seclusion  complète.  He  did  not  wish  to  see  a 
single  person. 


1S16.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON.  88? 


The   Emperor   contuiues   ill. — Remarkahle  O^cial   Docu- 
ment, addressecl  to  Sir  JJitchon  Loive. 

23(1.— The  weather  has  continu ed  wet  and 
rainy.  About  half-past  three,  the  Emperor  sent 
for  me  to  lus  chamber.  He  was  dressing  him- 
self  ;  he  had  been  very  serionsly  indisposed,  but 
thanks  to  his  mode  of  treating  himself,  he  saidi 
and  to  his  hermetical  seclusion  of  the  preceding 
day,  his  complaint  was  over.  He  was  agaiii 
well. 

I  dared  to  express  my  sincère  grief;  I  had 
inscribed,  I  said,  an  unhappy  day  in  my  journal; 
I  should  hâve  marked  it  in  red  ink.  And  when 
he  learned  what  it  was  ;  "  What,  in  fact,"  hç 
said,  "  is  it  the  only  day,  since  we  left  France, 
"  in  which  you  hâve  not  seen  me  ?  . .  .  And  y  ou 
**  are  the  only  one!  . . . .  "  And  after  some 
seconds  of  silence,  he  added,  in  a  tone  peculiarly 
adapted  to  make  me  amends,  if  that  were  pos- 
sible ;  "  But,  my  dear  Las  Cases,  if  you  set 
"  such  a  value  on  it,  if  you  consider  it  of  so 
**  much  moment,  why  did  you  not  come  and 
**  knock  at  my  door  ?  I  am  not  inaccessible  to 
-  you." 

The  Doctor  was  introduced  ;  he  assured  us 
that  the  Governor  had  promised  never  again  ta 
set  foot  at  Longwood.    It  was  ironically  observed 


840  MY    RESIDENCE    M'ITH  [Aug. 

by  one  of  us,  that  he  began  to  make  himself 
agreeable. 

The  Emperor  then  went  to  his  library,  where 
a  long  letter  I  had  written  to  Rome  *,  was  read 
to  him  by  my  son.  He  was  driven  out  by  tlie 
wet,  and,  on  his  way  to  the  saloon  and  billiard- 
room,  he  was  tempted  by  the  sight  of  the  steps 
to  walk  a  little.  "  I  know,"  he  said,  **  I  am 
**  doing  what  is  net  prudent."  Happily,  the  wet 
weather  forced  him  to  return  almost  instantly. 
He  took  a  seat  in  the  saloon,  where  there  was  a 
good  fire,  called  for  some  orange-leaf  ptisan,  and 
played  some  games  of  chess. 

After  dinner,  the  Emperor  read  Marmontel's 
taies,  and  stopped  at  that  of  the  self-styled  philo- 
sopher. He  still  coughed  a  great  deal,  and  again 
called  for  some  of  the  same  ptisan.  He  entered 
into  a  long  and  most  interesting  review  of  Jean 
Jaques,  of  his  talents,  his  influence,  his  eccen- 
tricities,  his  private  vices,  ^c.  He  retired  at  ten 
o'clock.  I  regret  very  much,  that  I  cannot  now 
recollect  the  particulars  relative  to  ail  thèse 
objects. 

In  the  course  of  the  day  M.  de  Montholon 
addressed  the  following  officiai  answer  to  the 
Governor,  who  had  sent  a  letter,  respécting  the 

*  It  was  iny  letter  to  Prince  Lucien,  since  so  celebrated  in 
the  history  of  niy  persécutions,  and  which  will  be  found  in  its 
proper  place. 


1816.]  TIIK    EMPEROR    XAPOLEO^T.  îâ4i 

commissioners  of  the  allied  powers,  and  the 
embarrassed  state  of  his  finances.  It  is  tlie  letter, 
whicli  I  hâve  already  noticed,  the  18th  of  this 
month. 

OFFICIAL  DOCUMENT. 

**  General,-—!  hâve  received  the  treaty  of  the 
2d  of  Augiist,  1815,  concluded  betv^een  his 
Britannic  Majesty,  the  Emperor  of  Austria,  the 
Emperor  of  Russia,  and  the  King  of  Prussia, 
which  was  annexed  to  your  letter  of  the  23d  of 
July. 

*'  The  Emperor  Napoléon  protests  against  the 
piirport  of  that  treaty  ;  he  is  not  the  prisoner  of 
Eng'land.  After  having  placed  his  abdication  in 
the  hands  of  the  représentatives  of  the  nation, 
for  the  benefit  of  the  constitution,  adopted  by 
the  French  people,  and  in  favour  of  his  son,  he 
proceeded  voluntarily  and  freely  to  England,  for 
the  piirpose  of  residing  there,  as  a  private  person, 
in  retirement,  iinder  the  protection  of  the  British 
laws.  The  violation  of  ail  laws  cannot  con- 
stitute  a  right  in  fact.  The  person  of  the  Em- 
peror Napoléon  is  in  the  power  of  England; 
but  neither,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  nor  of  right,  has 
it  been,  or  is  it,  at  présent,  in  the  power  of 
Austria,  Russia,  and  Prussia  ;  even  according  to 
the  laws  and  customs  of  England,  which  has 
never  included,  in  its  exchange  of  prisoners, 
Russians,   Austrians,    Prussians,    Spaniards,    or 

Vol.  III.  Part  V.  r 


04'2  MV    RESIDEXCE    M'ITH  [Aug-. 

Portucfuese,  altliough  united  to  thèse  powers 
by  treatie?;  of  alliance,  and  making:  war  con- 
jointly  witli  them.  The  Convention  of  the  2d  of 
Aiigust,  made  fifteen  days  after  the  Emperor 
Napoléon  had  arrived  in  England,  cannot,  as 
a  matter  of  right,  hâve  any  effect  ;  it  merely 
présents  the  spectacle  of  the  coalition  of  the 
four  principal  powers  of  Europe,  for  the  op- 
pression of  a  single  man  ;  a  coalition  which 
the  opinion  of  every  people  disavows,  as  do 
ail  the  principles  of  sound  morality.  The 
Emperors  of  Austria  and  Russia,  and  the  King 
of  Prussia  not  possessing,  either  in  fact  or  by 
right,  any  power  over  the  person  of  the  Emperor 
Napoléon,  v^ere  incapable  of  enacting  any  thing 
with  regard  to  him.  If  the  Emperor  Napoléon 
had  been  in  the  power  of  the  Emperor  of 
Austria,  that  prince  would  hâve  remembered 
the  relations  formed  by  religion  and  nature 
between  a  father  and  a  son,  relations  which 
are  never  violated  with  impunity.  He  would 
hâve  remembered  that,  four  times,  Napoléon 
re-established  him  on  his  throne  ;  at  Leoben, 
in  1797,  and  at  Lune  ville  in  1801,  when  his 
armies  were  under  the  walls  of  Vienna  ;  at  Pres- 
bnrg  in  If^OG,  and  at  Vienna  in  1809,  when  his 
arm.ies  were  in  possession  of  the  capital  and  of 
three  fourths  of  the  monarchy.  That  prince 
would  hâve  remembered  the  protestations  which 
he  made  to  him   at  the   bivouac  of  Moravia  in 


1S16.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON.  243 

180G,  and  at  the  interview  at  Dresden  in  1812. 
ir  the  person  of  the  Emperor  Napoléon  had 
beeh  in  the  power  of  the  Emperor  i\.Iexander,  he 
would  hâve  remembered  the  ties  of  friendship, 
contracted  atTilsit,  at  Erfurth,  and  during  twelve 
years  of  daily  intercoiirse  ;  he  woiild  hâve  re- 
membered the  conduct  of  the  Emperor  Napoléon 
the  day  subséquent  to  the  battle  of  Austerlitz, 
when  having  it  in  his  power  to  take  him  prisoner 
with  the  remains  of  his  army,  he  contented  him- 
self  with  his  word,  and  let  him  effect  his  retreat  ; 
he  would  hâve  remembered  the  dangers  to  whicli 
the  Emperor  Napoléon  personally  exposed  him- 
self  to  extinguish  the  fire  of  Moseow  and  préserve 
that  capital  for  him  ;  unquestionably  that  prince 
would  not  hâve  violated  the  duties  of  friendship 
and  gratitude  towards  a  friend  in  distress.  If  the 
person  of  the  Emperor  Napoléon  had  been  even 
in  power  of  the  King  of  Prussia,  that  sovereign 
would  not  hâve  forgotten  that  it  was  optional 
with  the  Emperor,  after  the  battle  of  Friedland, 
to  place  another  prince  on  the  throne  of  Berlin  ; 
he  would  not  hâve  forgotten,  in  the  présence  of  a 
disarmed  enemy,  the  protestations  of  devotedness 
and  the  sentiments  which  he  expressed  to  him  in 
1812,  at  the  interviews  at  Dresden.  It  is,  accord- 
ingly,  évident  from  the  2d  and  5th  articles  of  the 
said  treaty,  that  being  incapable  of  any  influence 
whatever  over  the  fate,  and  the  person  of  the 
Emperor  Napoléon,  who  is  not  in  their  power, 

r2 


244  MY    RESIDENCE    M'ITH  [Aug. 

thèse  princes  refer  themselves  in  that  respect 
to  the  future  conduct  of  his  Britannic  Majesty, 
who  undertakes  to  fuliil  ail  obligations. 

"  Thèse  princes  hâve  reproached  the  Emperor 
Napoléon  with  preferring  the  protection  of  the 
English  laws  to  theirs.  The  false  ideaswhich  the 
Emperor  Napoléon  entertained  of  the  liberality  of 
the  English  laws,  and  of  the  influence  of  a  great, 
gênerons,  and  free  people  on  its  government, 
decided  hini  in  preferring  the  protection  of  thèse 
laws  to  that  of  his  father-in-law,  or  of  his  old 
friend.  The  Emperor  Napoléon  always  would 
hâve  been  able  to  obtain  the  security  of  what  relat- 
ed  personallyto  himself,  whether  by  placing  him- 
self  again  at  the  head  of  the  army  of  the  Loire,  or 
by  putting  himself  at  the  head  of  the  army  of  the 
Gironde,  commanded  by  General  Clauzel  ;  but 
looking  for  the  future  only  to  retirement  and  to 
the  protection  of  the  laws  of  a  free  nation,  either 
English  or  American,  ail  stipulations  appeared 
iiseless  to  him.  He  thought,  that  the  English 
people  would  hâve  been  more  bound  by  his 
frank  conduct,  which  was  noble  and  full  of  con- 
fidence, than  it  could  hâve  been  by  the  most 
solemn  treaties.  lie  lias  been  deceived,  but  this 
delusion  will  for  ever  excite  the  indignation  ofreal 
Britons,  and  with  the  présent  as  well  as  future 
générations,  it  will  be  a  proof  of  the  perfidy  of 
the  English  administration.  Austrian  and  Rus- 
sian  commissioners  are  arrived  at  Saint  Helena  ; 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROK    NAPOLEON'.  245 

if  the  object  of  their  mission  bc  to  fulfil  part  of 
thc  duties,  which  the  Emperors  of  Aiistria  and 
Russia  hâve  contracted  by  the  treaty  of  the  2d  of 
August,  and  to  take  care,  that  the  English  agents, 
in  a  small  colony,  in  the  middle  of  thc  Océan,  do 
not  fail  in  the  attentions,  due  to  a  prince,  connccted 
with  them  by  thc  tics  of  affinity,  and  by  so  many 
relations,  the  characteristics  of  thèse  two  so- 
vereigns  will  be  recognized  in  that  measure. 
But  you,  Sir,  hâve  asscrted,  that  thèse  commis- 
sioners  possessed  neither  the  right  nor  the  power 
of  giving  any  opinion  on  whatever  may  be  trans- 
acted  on  this  rock. 

*'  The  English  ministry  hâve  caused  the  Em- 
peror  Napoléon  to  bc  transported  to  Saint  Helena, 
two  thousand  leagues  from  Europe.  This  rock, 
situated  under  thc  tropic  at  the  distance  of  five 
hundred  leagues  from  every  kind  of  continent  is, 
in  that  latitude,  exposed  to  a  devouring  heat  ;  it 
is,  during  three-fourths  of  the  year,  covered  with 
clouds  and  mists,  it  is  at  once  the  dryest  and 
wettest  country  in  the  Avorld.  This  is  the  most 
inimical  climate  to  the  Emperor's  health.  It  is 
hatred  which  dictated  the  sélection  of  this  résid- 
ence as  well  as  the  instructions,  given  by  the  Eng- 
lish ministry  to  the  ofïicers,  wlio  command  in  this 
country  ;  they  hâve  been  ordered  to  call  the  Em- 
peror  Napoléon,  General,  being  désirons  of  com- 
pelling  him  to  acknowledge,  that  he  never  reigned 
in  France,  which  decided  him  not  to  take  an  incog- 


'246  M  Y    «ESIDENCE    WlTll  [Aug. 

nito  title,  as  he  had  determiiied,  in  quitting  France. 
First  magistrate  for  life,  imder  tlie  title  of  first- 
consul,  he  concluded  tlie  preliminaries  of  London 
and  the  treaty  of  Amiens  witli  tlie  king  of  Great 
Britain.       He  received    as    ambassadors.    Lord 
Cornwallis,    Mr.    Merry,   and  Lord  Whitworth, 
wlio  resided  in  that   quality  at  his  court.     He 
sent  to  the  King  of  England,  Count  Otto  and  Ge- 
neral Andreossi,  who  resided  as  ambassadors  at 
the    Court   of  Windsor.      When,   after  the   ex- 
change   of   letters    between    the    ministers    for 
foreign  affairs  belonging  to  the  two  monarchies, 
Lord     Lauderdale     came     to    Paris,     provided 
with   full    powers   from    the    King   of  England, 
he  treated  with    the   plenipotentiaries    provided 
with  full  powers  from  the  Emperor    Napoléon, 
and  resided    several  months  at  the  court  of  the 
Tuileries.       When,     afterwards,     at     Chatillon, 
Lord  Castlereagh  signed  the  ultimatum,  which 
the  allied  powers   presented  to  the  plenipoten- 
tiaries  of  the  Emperor  Napoléon,   he   thereby, 
recognized  the  fourth  dynasty.       That  ultima- 
tum was  more  advantageous  than  the   treaty  of 
Paris  ;    but    France  was   required    to   renounce 
Belgium  and  the  left  bank  of  the  Rhine,  which 
was    contrary  to    the  propositions  of    Frankfort 
and  to  the  proclamations  of  the  allied  powers; 
and  was  also  contrary  to  the  oath  by  which,  at 
his  consécration,  the  Emperor  had  sworn  the  in- 
trcgrity  of  the  empire.  The  Emperor  then  thought 


ISIO'O  '^"^'    EMPEROR    NAPOLEOX.  "247 

thèse  national  limits,  were  necessary  to  the 
security  of  France  as  well  as  to  the  equilibriuni 
of  Europe  ;  he  thought  that  the  French  nation, 
in  the  circumstances  under  which  she  Ibiind 
herself,  ought  rather  to  risk  every  chance  of  war 
than  to  give  Ihem  up.  France  would  hâve  ob- 
tained  that  integrity,  and  with  it  preserved  her 
honour,  had  not  treason  contributed  to  the  suc- 
çess  of  the  allies.  The  treaty  of  the  2d  of 
August,  and  the  bill  of  the  British  parliament 
style  the  Emperor,  Napoléon  Buonaparte,  and 
give  him  only  the  title  of  General.  The  title  of 
General  Buonaparte  is,  no  doiibt,  eminently  gio- 
rious;  the  Emperor  bore  it  at  Lodi,  at  Castig- 
lione,  at  Rivoli,  at  Arcole,  at  Leoben,  at  tlie 
Pyramids,  at  Aboukir;  but  for  seventeen  ycars 
he  lias  borne  that  of  First  Consul  and  of  Em- 
peror; it  would  be  an  admission,  that  he  has 
been  neither  first  magistrate  of  the  republic, 
nor  sovereign  of  the  fourth  dynasty.  Those, 
Avho  think  that  nations  are  flocks,  which,  by 
divine  right,  belong  to  some  familles,  are  neither 
of  the  présent  âge,  nor  of  the  spirit  of  the  English 
législature,  which  has  several  times  changed  the 
succession  of  its  dynasties,  because  the  great 
altérations  occasioned  by  opinions,  in  which 
the  reigning  princes  did  not  participate,  had 
made  them  enemies  to  the  happiness  of  the 
great  majority  of  that  nation.  For  kings  are  but 
hereditary   magistrates,  who  exist   but   for  the 


048  MV    RESIDENCE    WITII  [Aug. 

liappiness  of  nations,  and  not  nations  for  tlie 
s-atisfaction  of  kings.  It  is  the  same  spirit  of 
hatred,  which  directed  that  the  Emperor  Na- 
poléon shoiild  not  Write,  nor  receive  any  letter 
Avithout  its  bcing  opened  and  read  by  the  Eng- 
lish  ministers  and  the  officers  of  Saint  Helena. 
He  has,  by  that  régulation,  been  interdicted  the 
possibility  of  receiying  intelligence  from  his  mo- 
ther,  his  wife,  his  son,  his  brothers;  and  when, 
wishing  to  free  himself  from  the  inconvenience  of 
having  his  letters  read  by  inferior  officers,  he  de- 
sired  to  send  sealed  letters  to  the  Prince  Régent, 
he  was  told,  that  open  letters  only  coidd  be  taken 
charge  of  and  conveycd,  and  that  such  were  tlic 
instructions  of  the  ministry.  That  measure  stands 
in  need  of  no  comment  ;  it  will  suggest  strange 
ideas  of  the  spirit  of  the  administration  by  whicli 
it  was  dictated  ;  it  would  be  disclaimed  even  at 
Algiers  !  Letters  hâve  been  received  for  gênerai 
officers  in  the  Emperor's  suite  ;  they  were  opened 
and  delivered  to  you  ;  you  hâve  retained  them, 
because  they  had  not  been  transmitted  through 
the  médium  of  the  English  ministry  ;  itwasfound 
necessary  to  make  them  travel  four  thousand 
leagues  over  again,  and  thèse  officers  had  the 
misfortune  to  know,  that  there  existed  on  this 
rock  news  from  their  wives,  their  mothers,  and 
their  children,  and  that  they  could  not  be  put  in 
possession  of  it,  in  less  than  six  months  !  !  ! — The 
heart  revolts.      Permission  could  not  be  obtained 


ISIG.]  THK    F.MPEROR    XAPOLEOy.  249 

to  subscribe  to  the  Morning  Chronicle,  to  the 
Morning  Post,  or  to  some  French  journals  :  some 
brokeii  numbers  of  the  Times  hâve  been  occa- 
sionally  sent  to  Longwoocl.  ïn  conséquence  of 
the  demand  made  on  board  of  the  Northiimberland, 
some  books  hâve  been  sent,  but  ail  those,  which 
relate  to  the  transactions  of  late  years,  hâve  been 
carefully  kept  back.  It  was  since  intended  to 
open  a  correspondence  with  a  London  bookseller 
for  the  purpose  of  being  directly  supplied  with 
books  which  might  be  wanted,  and  with  those  re- 
lative to  the  events  of  the  day  ;  that  intention  was 
frustrated.  An  English  author  having  published 
at  London,  an  account  of  his  travcls  in  France, 
took  the  trouble  to  send  it,  as  a  présent  to  the 
Emperor,  but  you  did  not  think  yourself  author- 
ized  to  deliver  it  to  him,  because  it  hadnotreach- 
ed  you  through  the  channel  of  your  government. 
It  is  also  said,  that  other  books,  sent  by  their 
authors  hâve  not  been  delivered,  because  the  ad- 
dress  of  some  was, — To  the  Emperor  Napoléon, 
and  of  others, — To  Napoléon  the  Great.  The 
English  ministry  are  not  authorized  to  order  any 
of  thèse  vexations.  The  law,  however  unjust, 
considers  the  Emperor  Napoléon  as  a  prisoner  of 
war  ;  but  prisoners  of  war  hâve  never  been  pro- 
hibited  from  subscribing  to  the  journals,  or 
receiving  books  that  are  printed  ;  such  a  prohibi- 
tion is  exercised  only  in  the  dungeons  of  the 
inquisition. 


^50  M  Y    RESIDENCE    AVI  TU  [Aug. 

**  The  island  of  St.  lielena  is  ten  leagues  iii 
circumference  ;  it  is  every  where  inaccessible  ; 
t)ie  coast  is  guarded  by  brigs,  posts  within  sight 
of  each  otlier  are  placed  on  the  shore,  and  ail 
communication  with  the  sea  is  rendered  imprac- 
ticable.  There  is  but  one  small  town,  James 
Town,  where  the  vessels  anchor,  and  from  which 
they  sail.  In  order  to  prevent  the  escape  of  an 
individual,  it  is  sufficient  to  guard  the  coast  by 
land  and  sea.  By  interdicting  the  interior  of  the 
island,  one  object  only-can  be  in  view,  that  of 
preventing  a  ride  of  eight  or  ten  miles,  which  it 
would  be  possible  to  take  on  horseback,  and  the 
privation  of  which,  according  to  the  consultations 
of  médical  men,  is  abridging  the  Emperor's  days. 

"  The  Emperor  has  been  placed  at  Longwood, 
which  is  exposed  to  every  wind  ;  a  barren  pièce 
of  ground,  uninhabited,  without  water,  and  in- 
ca])able  of  any  kind  of  cultivation.  The  space 
Gontains  about  120()  uncultivated  fathoms.  At  the 
distance  of  11  or  1200  fathoms,  a  camp  was 
established  on  a  small  emincnce  ;  another  has 
been  since  placed  nearly  at  the  same  distance  in 
an  opposite  direction,  so  that  in  the  intense  beat 
of  the  tropic,  whatever  way  the  eye  is  directed, 
nothing  is  seen  but  encampments.  Admirai 
Malcolni,  perceiving  the  utility  of  which  a  tent 
would  be  to  the  Emperor  in  that  situation,  has 
had  one  pitched  by  his  seamen  at  the  distance  of 
twenty  paces  from  the  house  ;   it  is  the  only  spot 


1816.]  THE    EMPEHOll    NAPOLKOX.  251 

in  whicli  sliade  is  to  be  found.  Tlie  Emperor, 
has,  however,  every  reasoii  to  be  satisfied  witli 
tlie  spirit  which  animâtes  the  ofFicers  and  «oldiers 
ol'  the  gallant  53d,  as  he  had  been  witli  the  crew 
of  the  Northumberland.  Longwood  house  was 
constructed  to  serve  as  a  barn  to  the  company's 
farni  ;  some  apartments  were  afterwards  made  in 
it  by  the  Deputy-Governor  of  the  island  ;  he 
nsed  it  for  a  country-house  ;  but  it  was,  in  no 
respect,  adapted  for  a  résidence.  Duriiig  the 
year  it  has  been  inhabited,  it  has  been  always  in 
want  of  repair,  and  the  Emperor  has  been  con- 
stantly  exposed  to  the  inconvenience  and  un- 
wholesomeness  of  a  house,  in  which  workmen  are 
employed.  His  bedchamber  is  too  small  to  con- 
tain  a  bedstead  of  ordinary  size  ;  but  every  kind 
of  building  at  Longwood  would  prolong  the  in- 
convenience arising  from  the  workmen  employed. 
There  are,  however,  in  this  wretched  island,  some 
beautiful  situations,  with  fine  trees,  gardens,  and 
tolerably  good  houses^  among  others  Plantation 
House  ;  but  you  are  prevented  by  the  positive 
instructions  of  the  ministry  from  granting  this 
house,  which  would  hâve  saved  a  great  deal  of 
expense  laid  out  in  building,  at  Longwood,  buts 
covered  with  pitched  paper,  which  are  no  longer 
of  any  use.  You  hâve  prohibited  every  kind  of 
intercourse  betv/een  us  and  the  inhabitants  of  the 
island  ;  you  hâve,  in  fact,  converted  Longwood 
House  into  a  secret  prison  ;  you  hâve  even  throwu 


252  MV    RESIDENCir:    WITH  [Aug. 

difficulties  in  the  way  of  our  communication  with 
the  oliicers  of  the  garrison.  The  most  anxioiis 
care  would  seem  to  be  taken  to  deprive  us  of  the 
few  rcsources  afforded  by  this  misérable  country, 
and  we  are  no  better  oft'  hère  than  we  should  be  on 
Ascension  Rock.  During  the  four  months  you 
hâve  been  at  8t.  Helena,  you  hâve,  Sir,  rendered 
the  Emperor's  condition  worse.  It  was  observcd 
to  you  by  Count  Bertrand,  that  you  violated  the 
law  of  your  législature,  that  you  trampled  upon 
the  privilèges  of  gênerai  officers,  prisoners  of  war. 
You  answered,  that  you  knew  nothing  but  the 
letter  of  your  instructions,  and  that  they  were 
still  worse  than  your  conduct  appeared  to  us. 

1  hâve  the  lu:)nour,  (S:c.  cS:c. 
(Signed)  Count  de  Moxtuolox. 

"  P.  S. — I  had,  Sir,  signed  this  letter,  when  I 
received  yours  of  the  17th,  to  which  you  annex 
the  estimate  of  an  annual  sum  of  20,000/.  sterling, 
Avhich  you  consider  indispensable  to  meet  the  ex- 
penses  of  the  establishment  of  Longwood,  after 
having  niade  ail  the  réductions  which  you  hâve 
thought  possible.  The  considération  of  this  es- 
timate can,  in  no  respect,  concern  us  ;  the  Em- 
peror's  table  is  scarcely  supplied  with  what  is 
necessary  ;  ail  the  provisions  are  of  a  bad  quality 
and  four  times  dearer  than  at  Paris.  You  require 
a  fund  of  twelve  thousand  pounds  sterling  from 
the  Emperor,  as  your  governmentonlyallows  you 


181G.]  TllK    EMPKROR    NAPOLEON".  253 

eight  thoiisand  poiinds  for  ail  thèse  expenses.  I 
hâve  had  the  honour  of  telling  y  ou,  that  the  Em- 
peror  had  no  funds  ;  that  no  letter  had  been 
received  or  written  for  a  year,  and  that  he  was 
altogether  unacqiiainted  with  what  is  passing  or 
what  may  hâve  passed  in  Europe.  Transplanted 
by  violence  to  this  rock,  at  the  distance  of  two 
thousand  leagues,  without  being  able  to  receive 
or  to  Write  any  letter,  he  now  finds  himself  at  the 
discrétion  of  the  English  agents.  The  Emperor 
lias  uniformly  desired  and  still  desires  to  provide 
himself  for  ail  his  expenses  of  every  nature,  and 
he  will  do  so,  as  speedily  as  you  shall  give  possi- 
bility  to  the  means,  by  taking  off  the  prohibition, 
laid  upon  the  merchants  of  the  island,  of  carrying 
on  his  correspondence,  and  releasing  it  from  ail 
kind  of  inquisition  on  your  part  or  on  that  of  any 
of  your  agents.  The  moment  the  Emperor's  wants 
shall  be  known  in  Europe,  the  persons  who  in- 
terest  themselves  for  him,  will  transmit  the  neces- 
sary  funds  for  his  supplies. 

*'  The  letter  of  Lord  Bathurst,  which  you  hâve 
communicated  to  me,  gives  rise  to  strange  ideas! 
can  your  ministers  then  be  so  ignorant  as  not  to 
know,  that  the  spectacle  of  a  great  man  struggling 
with  adv' ersity  is  the  most  sublime  of  spectacles  ? 
Can  they  be  ignorant,  that  Napoléon  at  Saint 
Helena,  in  the  midst  of  persécutions  of  every  kind, 
against  whidi  his  serenity  is  his  only  shield,  is 
greater,  more  sacred,  more  vénérable  than  on  the 


254  M  Y    RESIDEXCE    WITII  [Aiig. 

first  throne  of  the  world,  where  lie  was,  so  iono-, 
the  arbiter  of  King-s  ?  Tliose,  who,  fail  in  re- 
spect to  Napoléon,  tluis  sitiiated,  merely  dégrade 
their  own  cliaracter  and  the  nation  wliich  they 
represent!" 


My  EnfrVifth  Famili/. — Jwst  Debt  of  Gratitude  to  the  l'^ng- 
Z/.ç/i  on  the  port  of  the  Em>grnnts,  &;c. — General  Jouhert. 
— Petersbnrg. — Moscow  ;  the  Fire. — Projects  of  Nn- 
"poleon,  had  he  retnrned  victorlons. 

24th. — I  went,  at  two  o'clock,  to  the  Emperor, 
in  his  apartment.  He  had  sent  for  my  atlas  in 
the  mornino'.  I  found  him  finishinç^  his  examin- 
ation  of  the  map  of  Riissia,  and  of  that  part  of 
America  adjoining  the  Russian  establishments. 

He  had  suffered,  and  conghed  a  great  dealy 
during  the  night.  The  weather  had,  howevery 
assumed  a  mild  appearance.  Wliile  he  was 
dressing  to  go  ont,  he  often  dwelt  upon  the  happy 
idea  of  the  atlas,  the  merit  of  its  exécution,  and 
the  immensity  of  its  contents.  He  concluded,  as 
usual,  with  saying  ;  "  What  a  collection  !  What 
"  détails  !  How  complète  in  ail  its  parts!" 

The  Emperor  went  to  the  garden.  I  told  him, 
that  I  had  written,  in  the  morning,  to  England, 
and  answered  the  letter  which  I  had  read  to  him 
two  or  three  days  ago.  **  Your  English  family," 
he  then  observed,  "  seem  to  be  very  good  kind 


1816',]  THE    EMPEIIOR    NAPOLEON.  255 

'  of  people  ;  they  are  very  fond  of  yoii,  and  you 

*  appear  very  much  attached  to  them."     I  an- 
swered  ;  "  Sire,  I  took  care  of  them  in  France, 

*  during  tlieir  ten  years  of  captivity,  and  they 
'  had  taken  care  of  me   in  England,  during  my 

*  ten  years  of  émigration,     It  is  altogether  the 

*  hospitality  of  the  ancients  which  \ve  exer- 
'  cise   towards  each  other.     I  rely  npon  them, 

*  in  every  respect,  and  they  are  at  liberty  to 
'  dispose  of  ail  I  possess."  *'  This,"  said  he; 
'  is  a  very  happy  connexion.  How  did  you 
'  obtain  it  ?  To  what  are  you  indebted  for  it  ?  " 

I  then  told  him  how  I  became  acquainted  with 

this  family. 

'*  Never  was  the  plank,  by  the  assistance  of 
'  which  an  unfortunate  person,  after  shipwreck, 
'  preserved    his   life,    dearer    to   him   than    this 

*  family  is  to  me.  There  are.  Sire,  no  favour?, 
'  no  treasures,  which  can  compensate  the  kind- 
'  nesses  I  hâve  received  from  it,  and  the  hap- 
'  piness  it  lias  conferred  upon  me. 

**  When  the  horrible  excesses  of  our  révolution 
'  compelled  us  to  take  refuge  in  England,  our 

*  émigration  produced  the  liveliest  sensation  in 
'  that  country  ;  the  arrivai  of  so  many  illus- 
'  trions  exiles,  their  past  fortunes,  and  their 
'  actual  forlorn  condition,  were  impressed  on 
'  every  mind,  and  filled  every  heart.  They  be- 
'  came  the  subject  of  considération  in  political 

*  assemblies,    in   places    of  divine   worship,    in 


25G  MY    UESIDEXCK    WITIl  [Aug. 

fashionable  circles,  and  in  private  familles. 
Tliat  catastrophe  agitated  every  class,  and  ex- 
clted  every  sympathy.  We  were  surroiinded 
by  a  gênerons  and  feeling  multitude.  We  were 
the  objects  of  the  most  délicate  attentions,  and 
of  the  most  substantlal  favours.  Such,  it  must 
be  acknowledged,  was  the  affecting  slght  held 
out  by  a  vast  portion  of  English  society,  even 
In  splte  of  the  différence  of  opinions.  It  is  a 
testlmony  due  from  our  gratitude  to  the  truth 
of  hlstory. 

"  I  was  then  at  London  with  a  cousin  of  my 
name,  whose  situation  at  the  court  of  Ver- 
sailles,  had  enabled  her  to  be  of  some  service 
to  the  most  distlnguished  persons  in  Europe, 
where  she  was  a  lady  of  honour  to  the  Princess 
Lamballe,  who  was  herself  sub-lntendant  of  the 
Queen's  household.  That  turned  out  a  for- 
tunate  circumstance  for  our  family.  My  cousin 
experienced  proofs  of  the  greatest  benevolence  ; 
a  great  number  of  persons  were  eager  In  making 
a  tender  of  thelr  services,  and,  among  others, 
a  certain  young  couple.  The  wife  was  charming, 
and  distlnguished  for  the  élégance  and  nobleness 
of  her  manners  ;  the  husband  was  of  an  easy 
temper,  of  a  mild  and  honourable  character. 
Thelr  house  was  almost  instantly  open  to  my 
cousin,  and  to  ail  her  relations,  who  had  every 
reason  to  find  themselves  as  much  at  thelr  ease 
there,  as  if  they  had  been  In  thelr  own  familles. 


1816.]  THE    E.MPEHOR    NAPOLEON*.  'iÔT 

*'  Tins  worthy  couple  took  every  occasion 
**  to  oblige,  and  to  be  of  use  to  our  rcfugees. 
**  Their  house  was  frequented  by  the  most  distin- 
**  guished  emigrants.  A  great  number  of  us 
"  there  contracted  a  debt  of  gratitude,  which, 
*'  notwithstanding  ail  its  extent,  I  should  not  de- 
*'  spair  of  paying,  were  I  alone  left  to  discharge 
**  it.  I  shall  leave  it  as  a  legacy  to  my  children, 
'*  who,  if  they  resemble  me,  will  look  upon  it  as 
*'  sacred,  and  deem  themselves  happy  in  re- 
*'  deemino^  the  obliofation. 

"  Elévation  of  soûl,  and  the  émotions  of  a 
**  French  heart,  characterized  the  conduct  of 
**  Lady  .  .  .  When  the  Prince  of  Condé,  (arrived 
*'  at  London,)  was  looking  fora  country  résidence, 
**  she  sent  me  to  offer  him  the  superb  mansion 
**  she  possessed,  in  the  county  of  Durham.  The 
*'  Prince,  after  hearing  the  particulars,  having 
*'  remarked,  that  it  would,  no  doubt,  cost  him 
"  the  ransom  of  a  King,  was  agreeably  surprised 
"  at  learning,  that  it  was  presented  to  him  by 
**  a  French  woman,  who  would,  she  said,  consider 
"  that  she  had  received  an  inestimable  price, 
**  should  a  Condé  condescend  to  inhabit  it.  He 
*'  went,  instantly,  to  express  his  acknowdedg- 
"  ments  in  person. 

"  This  family  visited  Paris  after  the  peace  of 
"  Amiens,  and  it  was  in  its  bosom,  and  through 
"  its  protection,  that  I  was  enabled,  a  few  days 

Vol.  II L  Part  T.  s 


59  M  Y    RESIDENCE    WITII  [Aug. 

sooner,  to  breathe  the  air  oï  m  y  coimtry.  I 
was  exempted,  through  its  means,  from  the 
tedious  and  painful  formaiities  required  from 
me  by  tlie  act  of  amnesty  on  the  frontier,  and 
I  felt  it  my  duty  to  provide  for  their  accom- 
modation at  Paris,  with  much  more  facility 
and  less  inconvenience  than  they  could  hâve 
done  themselves.  I  had  also  the  happiness, 
when  the  measiire  for  detaining  the  English 
résidents  was  carried  into  effect,  and  this  family 
was  phiced  among  the  number,  of  alleviating, 
in  my  turn,  their  condition,  and  becoming  their 
security. 

'*  We  were,  at  length,  separated  by  time  and 
circumstances  ;  but  they  hâve  lost  nothing  in 
my  recollection  ;  and  the  needle  is  less  con- 
stant to  the  pôle,  and  less  faithful  in  its 
guidance,  than  are  my  thoughts,  and  my  gra- 
titude, with  respect  to  those  good  and  valuable 
friends.  Such,  Sire,  is  what  your  Majesty  is 
pleased  to  call  my  English  family." 
We  had,  however,  during  my  relation,  walked 
to  the  stable,  and  called  for  the  calash.  The 
Emperor  ordered  it  to  take  us  up  at  the  bottom 
of  the  wood.  We  waited  for  it  a  long  time, 
because  Madame  de  Montholon  was  seized  with 
a  sudden  indisposition.  Her  husband  came  to 
apologize  for  the  delay,  and  the  Emperor  made 
him  get  in. 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEOX.  259 

The  conversation  turned,  during  oiir  ride,  upon 
General  Joiibert,  whose  brother-in-law  and  aid- 
de-camp  M.  de  Montholon  had  been. 

**  Joubert,"  said  the  Emperor,  "  entertained  a 
*' high  vénération  for  me;  he  deplored  my  ab- 
"  sence  at  every  reverse  experienced  by  the  re- 
"  public,  during  the  expédition  to  Egypt.  He 
*'  was,  at  that  time,  at  the  head  of  the  army  of 
*'  Italy  ;  he  had  taken  me  for  his  model,  aspired 
"  to  imitate  my  plans,  and  attempted  to  accom- 
"  plish  nothing  less  than  what  I  afterwards  effected 
"  in  Brumaire:  he  had,  however,  the  jacobins  to 
**  assist  him.  The  measures  and  intrigues  of  that 
**  party,  to  place  the  means  of  executing  that 
*'  grand  enterprise  in  his  power,  had  raised  him 
*'  to  the  command  in  Italy,  after  the  disasters  of 
*'  Scherer;  of  that  Scherer,  who  was  an  ignorant 
*'  peculator,  and  deserving  of  every  censure. 
*'  But  Joubert  was  killed  at  Novi,  in  his  first 
**  rencounter  with  Suwarrow  ;  any  attempt  of 
**  his,  at  Paris,  would  hâve  failed  ;  he  had  not 
**  yet  acquired  a  sufficient  degree  of  glory,  of 
*'  consistency  and  maturity.  He  was,  by  nature, 
"  calculated  for  ail  thèse  acquirements,  but,  at 
**  that  moment,  he  was  not  adequately  formed  ; 
"  he  was  still  too  young,  and  that  enterprise  was 
"  then  beyond  his  ability." 

The  following  is  the  GeneraFs  portrait,  drawn 
by  the  Emperor,  for  his  campaigns  of  Italy,  and 
of  which  I  hâve  recovered  the  sketch. 

s  2 


SCO  MV    RESIDENCE    -NVITH  [Aug, 

Joubert,  born  in  the  department  of  the  Ain,  in 
ancient  Bressa,   liad  gone  through  a  course  of 
studies  for  the  bar.     He  was  induced  by  the  ré- 
volution to  turn  his  thoughts  to  the  military  art; 
he  served  in  the  army  of  Italy  and  was  there  pro- 
moted  to  the  rank  of  General  of  Brigade.    He  was 
tall  and  thin,  and  seemed  naturally  of  afeeble  con- 
stitution ;  but  he  had  exercised  it  by  severe  fatigues 
in  the  Alps,  and  had  inured  it  to  hardship.   He  was 
intrepid,  vigilant,  extremely  active,  and  marched 
always  at  the  head  of  his  columns.    He  was  made 
General  in  the  room  of  Vaubois,  whose  corps  d'armée 
he  commanded.    He  gained  a  grcat  deal  of  honour 
in  the  campaign  of  Leoben,  commanding  the  left 
wing',  which  he  led  to  efFect  a  jonction  with  the 
main  body  of  the  army  i'rom  the  mountains  of  the 
Tyrol  through  the  défiles  of  the  Putherstal.    He 
was  very  warmly  attached  to  Napoléon,  who  en- 
trusted  him  with  the  présentation  of  the  lost  stand- 
ards taken  by  the  army  of  Italy,  to  the  Directory. 
Having  remained  at  Paris  during-  the  campaign  of 
Egypt,  he  married  the  daughtcr  of  the  senator 
Semonville,  who  afterwards  became  the  wife  of 
General  Macdonald.    That  marriage  involved  him 
in  the  intrigues  of  the  Mancge,  and  got  him  ap- 
pointed  Commander  in  chief  of  the  army  of  Italy 
after   Scherer's  defeat.       He  was   killed   at  the 
battle  of  Novi.     He  might  hâve  acquired  great 
celebrity. 

The  Emperor  was  only  ablc  to  take  one  round  ; 


ISIC]  THE    EMPEROR    XAPOLEON.  261 

lie  found  himself  too  much  fatigued,  and  was  far 
from  being  Mell. 

At  half  past  eight  o'clock,  the  Empcror  ordered 
me  to  be  called.  Ile  told  me,  hc  had  been  obliged 
to  take  a  batb,  and  thonght  he  was  a  little  feverish. 
Hc  felt  he  had  siiddcnly  caught  cold,  but  hc  no 
longer  coughed  since  he  was  in  the  batli.  He  con- 
tiniied  for  a  long  time  in  the  water.  He  dincd  in 
it,  and  a  small  table  was  laid  for  me  at  the  side  of 
it.  The  Empcror  reverted  to  the  history  of  Russia. 
**  Had  Peter  the  Great,"  he  asked,  *'  acted  with 
*'  wisdom  in  founding  a  capital  at  Petersbiirgh  at 
"  so  vast  an  expense  ?  Would  not  the  results  hâve 
"  been  greatcr,  had  he  expended  ail  his  moncy  at 
"  Moscow  ?  What  was  his  object  ?  Had  he  accom- 
"  plished  it  ?"  I  rcplied  ;  '*  if  Peter  had  remaincd 
"  at  Moscow,  his  nation  woidd  hâve  continiied 
**  Muscovite,  a  people  altogether  Asiastic;  it  was 
**  necessary  that  it  shonld  be  displaced  for  its  re- 
"  form  and  altération.  He  had,  therefore,  selected 
"  a  position  on  the  very  frontiers,  wrested  from 
**  the  enemy,  and  in  fonnding  his  capital,  and  ac- 
**  cnmulating  ail  his  strength,  he  rendered  it  in- 
"  vulnérable;  heconnected  himself  with  European 
"  Society;  he  established  his  powerin  the  Baltic 
''  sea,  by  which  he  could  with  ease  prevent  his 
*'  natural  enemies,  the  Pôles  and  Swedes,  from 
'*  forming  alliances,  when  they  stood  in  need  of 
"  them,  with  the  nations  situated  behind  thcm," 
Sec.  Sic, 


268  MY    RESIDENCE    WITII  {\w^. 

The  Emperor  said,  "  lie  was  not  altogether 
"  satisfied  witli  thèse  reasons.  However,  it  may 
"-  be,"  he  observed,  "  Moscow  bas  disappeared, 
"  and  who  can  compiite  tbe  wealththat  bas  been 
*'  swallowed  up  tbere?  Let  us  contemplate  Paris 
"  with  the  accumulation  of  centuries,  of  works 
**  and  of  industry.  Ilad  its  capital,  for  the  1400 
"  years  it  bas  existed,  increased  but  a  million  a 
'*  year,  what  sums  !  Let  us  connect  with  that  tbe 
"  warebouses,  tbe  furniture,  tbe  union  of  sciences 
"  and  tbe  arts,  tbe  complète  establishments  of 
"  trade  and  commerce,  &c.  &c.,  and  tbis  is  tbe 
*'  picture  of  Moscow,  and  j-et  ail  tbatvanisbed  in 
"  an  instant!  What  a  catastrophe!  Does  not  tbe 
*'  bare  idea  of  it  make  one  shudder  ?  ...  I  do  not 
"  think  it  could  be  re-establisbed  at  the  expense 
"  of  two  thousand  millions." 

He  expatiated  at  great  length  on  ail  thèse 
events,  and  let  a  word  escape  bira,  which  was 
too  characteristic,  not  to  be  specially  noted  down 
by  me.  The  name  of  Rostopchin  baving  been 
pronounced,  I  presumed  to  remark,  that  tbe 
colour  at  that  time  given  to  bis  patriotic  action, 
bad  very  much  surprized  me,  for  he  bad  interest- 
ed  me  instead  of  exciting  my  indignation,  and 
even  much  more,  that  I  bad  envied  bim  !  .  .  .  . 
To  which  the  Emperor  replied  with  singular  viva- 
city,  and  with  a  kind  of  contraction  which  betray- 
ed  vexation  ;  "  If  many  at  Paris  bad  been  capable 
''  of  reading  and  feeling  it  in  that  way,  believe  me 


181&.}  THE    £MP£ROR    NAPOLEON'.  263 

"  I  should  have  applauded  it?  But  I  had  no 
"  choice  left  me."  Resuming  the  subject  of 
Moscow,  he  said  : 

"  Never  with«  ail  the  powers  of  poetry,  have 
"  the  fictions  of  the  burning  of  Troy  equalled  the 
*'  reality  of  that  of  Moscow.  The  city  was  of 
"  wood,  the  wind  was  violent;  ail  the  pumps 
*'  had  been  carried  off'.  It  was  literally  an  océan 
"  of  fire.  Nothing  had  been  saved  from  it;  onr 
"  mardi  was  so  rapid,  our  entrance  so  sudden. 
*'  We  found  even  diamonds  on  the  women's  toilets, 
"  tliey  had  iied  so  precipitately.  They  wrote  to  us 
"  in  a  short  time  afterwards,  that  they  had  sought 
"  to  escape  from  the  first  bursts  ofadangerous 
"  soldiery  ;  that  they  recommended  their  pro- 
"  perty  to  the  generosity  of  the  conquerors,  and 
"  would  not  fail  to  reappear  in  the  course  of  a 
*'  few  days  to  solicit  their  kindnesses  and  testify 
*'  their  gratitude. 

"  The  population  was  far  from  having  plotted 
*'  that  atrocity.  Even  they  themselves  delivered 
*'  up  to  us  three  or  four  hundred  criminals, 
"  escaped  from  prison,  who  had  executed  it." 
*'  But,  Sire,  may  I  présume  to  ask,  if  Moscow 
"  had  not  been  burnt,  did  not  your  Majesty 
"  intend  to  establish  your  quarters  there  ?"  "  Cer- 
"■  tainly,"  answered  the  Emperor,  '*  and  I  should 
"  then  have  held  up  the  singular  spectacle  of  an 
"  army  wintering  in  the  midst  of  a  hostile  nation, 
**  pressing  upon  it  from  ail  points;  it  would  have 


264  M  Y    RESIDEKCE    M'ITIl  [Auç. 

been  the  ship  caught  in  the  ice.  You  would 
hâve  been  in  France  withoiit  any  intelligence 
from  me  for  several  months  ;  but  you  would 
hâve  remained  quiet,  you  would  hâve  acted 
wisely  ;  Cambacères  would,  as  usual,  hâve 
conducted  affairs  in  my  name,  and  ail  would 
hâve  been  as  orderly,  as  if  I  had  been  présent. 
The  winter,  in  Russia,  would  hâve  weighed 
heavy  on  every  one,  the  torpor  would  hâve 
been  gênerai.  The  spring  also  would  hâve  re- 
vivcd  for  ail  the  world.  AU  v.ould  hâve  been 
at  once  on  their  legs,  and  it  is  well  known,  that 
the  French  are  as  nimble  as  any  others. 
"  On  the  first  appearance  of  fine  v/eather,  I 
should  havc  marched  against  the  enemy,  I 
sliould  hâve  beaten  them  ;  I  should  hâve  been 
master  of  their  empire.  Alexander,  be  as- 
sured,  would  not  hâve  suffered  me  to  pro- 
ceed  so  far.  He  would  hâve  agreed  to  ail  the 
conditions  M'hich  I  might  hâve  dictated,  and 
France  would  then  hâve  begun  to  enjoy  ail  her 
advantages.  And  truly,  my  success  depended 
upon  a  mère  trifle.  For  I  had  undertaken  the 
expédition  to  fight  against  armed  men,  not 
against  nature  in  the  violence  of  her  wrath.  I 
defeated  armies,  but  1  could  not  conquer  the 
fiâmes,  the  frost,  stupéfaction,  and  death!  .  .  . 
I  was  forced  to  yield  to  fate.  And,  after  ail, 
how  unfortunate  for  France — indeed  for  ail 
Europe  ! 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR    XAPOLEON.  265 

**  Peace,  concluded  at  Moscow,  woiild  hâve 
*'  fulfilled  and  wound  iip  my  hostile  expéditions. 
"  It  would  hâve  been,  with  respect  to  thc 
"  grand  cause,  the  term  of  casualties  and  the 
"  commencement  ofseciirity.  A  ncw  horizon,  new 
"  undertakings,  would  hâve  unfolded  themselves, 
**  adapted,  in  every  respect,  to  the  well-being 
"  and  prosperity  of  ail.  The  foundation  of  the 
"  European  system  would  hâve  been  laid,  and 
**  my  only  remaining  task  would  hâve  been  its 
'^  organization. 

"  Satisfied  on  thèse  grand  points,  and  every 
''  where  at  peace,  I  should  hâve  also  had  my 
"  congress  and  my  lioly  alliance.  Thèse  are  plans 
"  which  were  stolen  from  nie.  Jn  that  assembly 
"  of  ail  the  sovereigns,  we  should  hâve  discussed 
*'  our  interest  in  a  family  way,  and  settled  our 
*'  accounts  with  the  people,  as  a  clerk  does  with 
"  his  master. 

"  The  cause  of  the  âge  was  victorious,  the  re- 
"  volution  accomplished  ;  the  only  point  in  ques- 
*'  tion  was  to  reconcile  it  with  what  it  had  not 
"  destroyed.  But  that  task  belonged  to  me;  I 
"  had  for  a  long  time  been  making  préparations 
"  for  it,  at  the  e.vpeusc,  perhaps,  of  mif  popularity. 
"  i-^o  matter.  I  became  the  arch  of  the  old  and 
"  new  alliance,  the  natural  mediator  between  the 
"  ancient  and  modem  order  of  things.  I  main- 
"  tained  the  principles  and  possessed  the  confid- 
**  ence  of  the  one  ;  I  had  identified  mvself  with 


«66  MY    RESIDENCE    NVITH  [Aug. 

"  the  other.     I  belonged  to  them  both  ;  I  should 
"hâve  actecl  conscientiously  in  favour  ofeach: 

"  My  glory  would  hâve  consisted  in  ray  equity." 

And,  after  having  enumerated  what  he  would 
hâve  proposed  between  sovereign  and  sovereign, 
and  between  sovereigns  and  their  people,  he  con- 
tiniied;  "  Powerful  as  we  were  ail  that  we 
"  might  hâve  conceded,  would  hâve  appeared 
"  grand.  It  would  hâve  gained  us  the  gratitude 
**  of  the  people.  At  présent,  what  they  may  ex- 
"  tort,  will  never  seem  enough  to  them,  and  they 
*'  will  be  uniformly  distrustful  anddiscontcnted." 

He  next  took  a  review  of  what  he  would  hâve 
proposed  for  the  prosperity,  the  interests,  the 
enjoyments  and  the  well-being  of  the  European 
confederacy.  He  wished  to  establish  the  same 
principles,  the  same  system  every  where.  An 
European  code;  a  court  of  European  appeal, 
with  fuU  powers  to  redress  ail  wrong  décisions, 
as  our's  redresses  at  home  those  of  our  tribunals. 
Money  of  the  same  value  but  with  différent  coins  ; 
the  same  weights,  the  same  measures,  the  same 
laws.  Sec.  Sec. 

"■  Europe  would  soon  in  that  manner,"  he  said, 
*'  hâve  really  been  but  the  same  people,  and 
"  every  one,  who  travelled,  would  hâve  every 
**  where  found  himself  in  one  common  country." 

He  would  hâve  required,  that  ail  the  ri  vers 
should  be  navigable  in  common  ;  that  the  seas 
should  Idc  thrown  open  ;  that  the  great  standing 


1816.]  THE   EMPEROR   NAPOLEON.  267 

armies  should,  in  future,  be  reduced  to  the  single 
establishment  of  a  guard  for  the  sovereign.  Sec.  &c. 

In  fine,  a  crowd  of  ideas  fell  from  him,  the 
greater  part  of  whicli  were  new;  sonie  of  the 
simplest  nature,  others  altogether  sublime,  rela- 
tive to  the  différent  political,  civil,  and  législative 
branches,  to  religion,  to  the  arts,  and  commerce  : 
they  embraced  every  subject. 

He  concluded  :   "  On  my  return  to  France,  in 

*  the  bosom  of  my  country,  at  once  great,  power- 
'  fui,  magnificent,  at  peace  and  glorious,  I  would 
''  hâve  proclaimed  the  immutability  of  bounda- 
'  ries,  ail  future  wars,  purely  défensive;  ail  new 
'  aggrandizement,  anti-national.  I  would  hâve 
'  associated  my  son  with  the  empire  ;  my  dicta- 
'  torship  would  hâve  terminated,  and  his  consti- 
'  tutional  reign  commenced.   .   .   . 

"  Paris  would  hâve  been  the  capital  of  the 
'  world,  and  the  French  the  envy  of  nations  !  .  .  . 

"  My  leisure  and  my  old  âge  would  hâve  been 
'  consecrated,  in  company  with  the  Empress, 
'  and,  during  the  royal  apprenticeship  of  my  son, 
'  in  visiting,  with  my  own  horses,  like  a  plain 
'  country  couple,  every  corner  of  the  empire  ; 
'  in  receiving  complaints,  in  redressing  wrongs, 

*  in  founding  monuments,  and  in  doing  good 
'  every  where  and  by  every  means  !  .  .  .  Thèse 
'  also,  my  dear  Las  Cases,  were  among  my 
'  dreams  !  !  !" 

The  Emperor  conversed  a  great  deal  about  the 


268  ■     MV    RESIDENCE    M'ITH  [Aug. 

interior  of  Riissia,  of  the  prosperity  of  which,  he 
said,  we  had  no  idea.  He  dwelt,  atgreat  lengtli, 
upon  Moscow,  which  had,  iinder  every  point  of 
view,  much  surprized  him,  and  might  bear  a  com- 
parison  with  ail  the  capitals  of  Europe,  the  greater 
mimber  of  which  it  surpassed.  Hère  unfortu- 
nately  I  can  find  but  bare  outlines  in  my  notes, 
which  it  is  impossible  for  me,  at  présent,  to  fill  up. 

He  was  particularly  struck  with  the  gilded 
spires  of  Moscow,  and  it  was  that  which  induced 
him,  on  his  rcturn,  to  hâve  the  dôme  of  the  In- 
valids  regilded  ;  he  intended  to  embellish  many 
other  édifices  at  Paris  in  the  same  manner. 

N.  B. — As.  the  city  of  Moscow  seems  to  hâve 
bccn  so  difierent  from  the  idca,  which  wc  havc 
generally  entertained  of  it  in  our  Western  world, 
I  am  inclined  to  think,  that  a  description  of  it 
in  this  place,  supplied  by  an  eye-witness,  a  dis- 
tinguished  person,  attached  to  the  expédition, 
will  not  prove  disagreeable.  It  is  by  Baron 
Larrey,  principal  surgeon  to  the  grand  army.  I 
take  it  from  a  work  of  that  celebrated  character, 
(les  Mémoires  de  la  Chirurgie  Militaire)  in  no 
great  circulation,  on  account,  perhaps,  of  its  pe- 
culiarly  scientific  nature. 

The  relation  begins  at  the  moment  wlien  the 
French  army  was  setting  ont  on  its  march  from 
Moscow,  after  the  battlc  of  Mozaisk  or  of  Mos- 
kowa. 

'*  We  were  hardly  a  few  miles  off  from  Mozaisk, 


iSlo.]  THE    ËMPEUOU    NAPOLtOX.  26*9 

wheii  we  v/ere  ail  surprised  at  finding  oiirselves, 
notwithstanding  tlie  viciiiity  of  tlie  spot  lo  one  of 
the  greatest  capitals  of  the  world,  on  a  sandy, 
arid,  and  completely  désert  plain.  The  mournful 
aspect  of  that  solitude,  which  discouraged  the 
soldiers,  seemed  an  omen  of  the  entire  abandon- 
ment  of  Moscow,  and  of  the  misfortunes  which 
awaited  us  in  that  city,  from  the  opulence  of 
which  we  had  promised  ourselves  such  advantages. 

*'  The  army  marched,  with  difficulty,  over  that 
tract.  The  horses  were  harassed,  and  exhausted 
with  hunger  and  thirst,  for  water  was  as  rare  as 
forage.  The  men  had  also  a  great  deal  to  sufier. 
They  were,  in  fact,  overwhclmed  with  fatigue, 
and  in  want  of  ail  subsistence.  The  troops  had 
not,  for  a  long  time,  received  any  rations,  and  the 
small  quantity  of  provisions  found  at  Mozaisk, 
was  only  sufficient  for  the  young  and  old  guard. 
A  considérable  number  of  the  former  corps  fell 
victims  to  their  abuse  of  Chenaps  (the  brandy  of 
the  country).  They  were  observed  to  quit  their 
comrades  a  few  paces,  to  totter,  whirl  round,  and 
afterwards  fall  on  their  knees  or  sit  down  involun- 
tarily;  they  remained  immoveable  in  that  atti- 
tude, and  expired  shortly  afterwards,  without 
uttering  a  single  complaint.  Thèse  young  men 
were  predisposed  to  the  pernicious  effects  of  that 
liquor  by  languor,  privations,  and  excessive  fa- 
tigue. 

*'  We  arrived,  however,  on  the  evening  of  the 


270  M  Y    RESIDEXCE    WITH  [Aug. 

14th  of  September,  in  one  of  the  fauxbourgs  of 
Moscow  ;  we  there  learnt,  that  the  Russian  army 
had,  in  its  passage  throiigh  the  city,  carried  ofF 
ail  the  citizens  and  public  functionaries,  some  of 
the  low  classes  and  some  servants  alone  were  left  ; 
so  that  in  going-  through  the  principal  streets  of 
that  great  city,  which  we  entered  the  following 
morning,  we  scarcely  met  any  one  ;  ail  the  honses 
were  completly  abandoned.  But  what  very  much 
surprised  us,  was  to  see  the  fire  break  out  in 
several  remote  quarters,  where  none  of  our  troops 
had  yet  been,  and  particularly  in  the  bazar  of  the 
Kremlin,  an  immense  building,  with  porticoes 
Avhich  hâve  some  resemblance  to  those  of  the 
Palais  Royal  at  Paris. 

*'  After  what  we  had  witnessed  on  our  passage 
through  little  Russia,  we  were  astonished  at  the 
vastness  of  Moscow,  at  the  great  number  of 
churches  and  palaces  which  it  contained,  at  the 
beautiful  architecture  of  those  édifices,  at  the 
comniodious  disposition  of  the  principal  houses, 
and  ail  the  objects  of  luxury  which  were  found  in 
the  greater  part  of  them.  The  streets  in  gênerai 
were  spacious,  regular,  and  well  laid  out.  No- 
thing  had  the  appearance  of  discordance  through- 
ont  that  city.  Every  thing  announced  its  wealth, 
and  the  immense  trade  it  carried  on  in  the  produc- 
tions of  the  four  cpiarters  of  theVorld. 

"  The  variety  displayed  in  the  construction  of 
the  palaces,  houses,  and  churches,  was  an  infinité 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR    KAPOLEOX.  471 

addition  to  the  beauty  of  the  city.  There  were 
places,  which,  by  the  pcciiliar  kind  of  architecture 
of  the  différent  édifices,  indicated  the  nations  that 
generally  inhabited  them  ;  thus,  the  résidence  of 
the  Franks,  Chinese,  Indians,  and  Germans,  was 
easily  distinguished.  The  Kremlin  might  be 
considered  the  citadel  of  Moscow  ;  it  is  in  the 
centre  of  the  town,  situated  on  an  eminence  suf- 
ficiently  elevated,  surrounded  by  a  wall  with 
bastions,  and  flanked,  at  regular  distances,  by 
towers,  mounted  with  camion.  The  bazar,  which 
has  been  already  noticed,  usually  filled  with  the 
merchandize  of  India  and  valnable  furs,  had  be- 
come  the  prey  of  the  fiâmes,  and  the  only  articles 
preserved  were  those  which  had  been  laid  up  in 
the  vaiilts,  where  the  soldiers  penetrated,  after  the 
lire  that  consurned  the  whole  of  the  exterior  of 
that  beantiful  édifice.  The  palace  of  the  Em- 
perors,  that  of  the  senate,  the  archives,  the  arsenal, 
and  two  very  ancient  temples,  occupy  the  rest 
of  the  Kremlin.  Thèse  différent  monuments  of  a 
rich  species  of  architecture,  form  a  magnificent 
appearance  about  the  parade.  One  might  imagine 
one's  self  transported  to  the  public  place  of  ancient 
Athens,  where  the  x4reopagus  and  the  temple  of 
Minerva  on  one  side,  and  the  academy  and  the 
arsenal  on  the  other,  were  the  objects  of  admir- 
ation. A  cylindrical  tower  présents  itself  between 
the  two  temples,  in  the  shape  of  a  column,  known 
by  the  name  of  Yvan's  tower;   it  is  rather  an 


Q79  MV    UESIDEXCK    WÏTH  [Aug. 

Egyptian  minaret,  within  which  several  bells  of 
différent  sizes,  are  liimg.  At  tlie  bottom  of  this 
tower,  one  is  seen  of  a  prodigious  magnitude, 
which  has  been  noticed  by  ail  the  historians. 
The  whole  of  the  city  and  its  environs  are  seen 
from  the  top  of  the  towers,  they  présent  them- 
selves  to  the  eye  in  the  form  of  a  star,  with  four 
forked  branches.  The  city  assumes  a  most  pictur- 
esque  appearance  from  the  variegated  colours  of 
the  roofs  of  the  houses,  and  from  the  gold  and 
silver  expended  on  the  dômes  and  tops  of  the 
belfries,  of  which  there  is  a  considérable  number. 
Nothing  can  equal  the  richness  of  one  of  the 
temples  or  churches  of  the  Kremlin  (it  was  the 
sepulchre  of  the  Emperors)  ;  its  walls  are  covered 
with  plates  of  vermilion,  five  or  six  lines  thick,  on 
which  the  history  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments 
is  represented  in  relievo  ;  the  lustres  and  candela- 
bras  of  massy  silver,  were  particularly  remarkable 
for  their  extraordinary  proportions. 

"  The  hospitals  to  which  my  attention  was  pe- 
culiarly  directed,  .are  worthy  of  the  most  civilized 
nation  in  the  world  ;  I  class  them  as  military  and 
civil.  The  grand  military  hospital  is  divided  into 
three  parts,  forming  altogether  a  parallelogram. 
The  principal  part  was  constructed  on  the  side  of 
a  great  road,  opposite  to  an  immense  barrack, 
which  may  be  compared  to  the  military  school  at 
Paris.  Two  latéral  buildings,  by  cutting  it  at 
right  angles,  inclose  the  court,  which  communi- 


ISIO'.]  THE    EMPEllOR    XAPOLEOX.  '273 

cates  with  a  fine  aiicl  extensivc  garden  appronri- 
ated  to  the  use  of  tlie  sick.  The  front  of  this  build- 
ing-, which  is  two  stories  high,  consists  of  a  portico, 
with  columns  of  the  composite  order.  At  the 
entrance,  is  a  spacious  lobby,  where  the  doors  of 
the  wards  on  the  ground-floor  correspond  v/ith 
each  other,  and  a  large  and  magnificent  stair-case 
leads  to  the  upper  stories.  The  wards  occupy 
the  entire  length  of  the  building,  and  the  Windows 
on  each  side  reach  from  the  ceiling  to  the  floor  ; 
theyare  made  with  double  sashes,  as  is  customary 
throughout  Russia,  and  are  completely  closed  in 
winter;  stoves  are  placed  in  the  inside  at  suitable 
distances.  The  wards  contain  four  rows  of  beds 
of  the  same  kind,  separated  by  the  requisite  space 
for  wholesomeness  ;  each  row  consists  of  fifty  beds, 
and  the  total  number  may  be  estimated  at  more 
than  three  thousand  ;  the  hospital  contains  four- 
teen  principal  wards  of  very  nearly  the  same  ex- 
tent.  The  offices,  pharmacy,  kitchen,  and  other 
establishments,  are  very  commodiously  situated 
in  separate  places  at  a  convenient  distance  from 
the  wards. 

"  The  civil  hospitals  are  equally  entitled  to 
notice.  The  four  principal  are  those  of  Chereme- 
tow,  Galitzin,  Alexander,  and  the  Foundlings. 

"  The  first,  remarkable  for  its  shape,  its  struc- 
ture, and  its  internai  arrangements,  was  used  to 
receive  the  sick  and  woundcd  belonging  to  the 
guard. 

Vol.  III.  Part  V.  T 


«74  M  Y    RESIDENCE    M'ITII  \;Aug. 

"  The  hospital  whicli  is  three  stories  high,  is 
built  in  the  form  of  a  crescent  ;  the  reqiiisite 
offices  are  situated  in  the  rear.  A  beautiful  por- 
tico,  projecting  from  the  centre  of  the  half-moon, 
forms  the  entrance  of  a  chapel  in  the  middle  of 
the  édifice  ;  the  chapel  surmounted  with  a  dôme, 
is  the  central  point  of  ail  the  wards,  and  contains 
the  mausoleum  of  the  prince  who  founded  the 
hospital  ;  it  is  ornamented  with  columns  in  stucco, 
with  statues  and  beautiful  pictures.  The  phar- 
macy  is  one  of  the  finest  and  best  supplied  I 
know. 

"  The  Foundling  hospital  situated  on  the  banks 
of  the  Moscowa,  and  protected  by  the  cannon 
of  the  Kremlin,  is  indisputably  the  largest  and 
noblest  establishment  of  the  kind  in  Europe.  It 
consists  of  two  divisions  of  buildings  ;  the  first, 
where  the  entrance  is  placed,  is  appropriated  to 
the  résidence  of  the  governor,  who  is  selected 
from  the  old  gênerais  of  the  army,  of  the  board 
of  management,  of  the  médical  officers,  and  of 
ail  those  employed  in  the  service  of  the  hospital. 
The  second  forms  a  perfect  square.  In  the  centre 
of  the  court,  which  is  very  spacious,  is  a  ré- 
servoir, that  supplies  the  whole  of  the  establish- 
ment with  water  from  the  river.  Each  of  the 
sides  is  composed  of  four  great  floors,  round 
which  is  a  regular  corridor,  not  very  broad,  yet 
sufficiently  spacious  for  the  admission  of  air,  and 
the  accommodation  of  the  individuals  who  pass 


ISIG.]  THE    EMPEROIl    XAPOLEOX.  276 

tlirough  it.  The  wards  ocupy  the  remainder  of 
the  breadth,  and  the  whole  extent  of  each  wing 
of  the  building.  There  are  two  rows  of  beds 
with  curtains  in  each  ward,  their  size  corresponds 
with  that  of  the  children  ;  the  boys  are  kept  se- 
parate  from  the  girls,  and  the  greatest  cleanliness 
and  regularity  are  observed. 

"  We  had  scarcely  taken  possession  of  the 
town,  and  succeeded  in  extinguishing  the  fire, 
kindled  by  the  Russians  in  the  most  beautiful 
quarters,  when  in  conséquence  of  two  principal 
causes,  the  fiâmes  again  broke  out  in  the  most 
violent  manner,  spread  rapidly  from  one  street 
to  another,  and  involved  the  whole  place  in  one 
common  ruin.  The  first  of  thèse  causes  is  justly 
reported  to  hâve  been  the  desperate  resolution  of 
a  certain  class  of  Russians,  who  were  said  to  hâve 
been  confined  in  the  prisons,  the  doors  of  whioli 
were  thrown  open  on  the  departure  of  the  army  ; 
thèse  wretches,  whether  incited  by  superior  au- 
thority,  or  by  their  own  feelings,  with  the  view,  no 
doubt,  of  plunder,  openly  ran  from  palace  to 
palace,  and  from  house  to  house,  setting  fire  to 
every  thing  that  fell  in  their  way.  The  French 
patroles,  although  numerous  and  on  the  alert, 
were  unable  to  prevent  them.  I  saw  several  of 
thosemiscreants  taken  in  theact;  lighted  matches 
and  combustibles  v/ere  found  in  their  possession. 
The  pain  of  death  infiicted  upon  those  caught  in 
the  actual  commission  of  the  atrocity,  made  no 

T   2 


276  M  Y    RESIDES' CI-:    WITÎI  [Aug. 

impression  on  the  others,  and  tlie  fire  raged  Ihree 
days  and  tlirec  nights  without  interruption  ;  the 
bouses  were  pulled  down  in  vaui  by  our  soldicrs, 
the  liâmes  quickly  spread  themselves  over  the 
vacant  space,  and  the  buildings  thus  insulated 
were  set  on  fire  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye.  The 
second  cause  must  bè  attributed  to  the  violence 
of  the  equinoctial  winds  which  are  always  very 
powerful  in  those  parts,  and  by  means  of  which 
the  conflaoTation  increased  and  extended  its  ra- 
vages  with  extraordinary  activity. 

"  It  would  be  difhcult,  under  any  circum- 
stances,  to  imagine  a  picture  more  horrible  tlian 
that  with  which  our  eyes  were  afflicted.  It  was 
more  particularly  during  the  night  between  the 
IStli  and  19th  of  September,  the  period  when 
the  fire  Vv^as  at  the  highest  pitch,  that  its  con- 
séquences presented  a  terrifie  spectacle  ;  the 
weather  was  fine  and  drv,  the  wind  continuinu* 
to  blow  from  East  to  North,  or  froin  North  to 
East.  During  that  night,  the  dreadful  image  of 
which  will  never  be  effaced  from  my  recollection, 
the  whole  of  the  city  was  on  fire.  Large  co- 
lumns  of  fiâmes  of  varions  colours  shot  up  from 
every  quarter,  entirely  covered  the  horizon,  and 
difi'used  a  glaring  light  and  a  scorching  beat  at 
a  considérable  distance.  Thèse  masses  of  fire, 
driven  on  by  the  violence  of  the  winds,  were  ac- 
companied  in  their  rise  and  rapid  movement  by 
a  dreadful  whizzing  and  by  thundering  explo- 


1816.]  'i'iir:  e:mpei{ou  xapoi.eox.  277 

sions,  the  resuit  of  tlie  combustion  of  gunpow- 
der,  saîtpetre,  oil,  resin,  and  brandy,  with  wliich 
the  greater  part  of  the  houses  and  shops  had  been 
filled.  The  varnished  iron  plates  which  covered 
the  buildings,  were  torn  off  by  the  efFect  of  the 
heat,  and  carried  to  a  great  distance  ;  very  large 
pièces  of  beams  and  rafters  made  of  fir,  seized  by 
the  flanies,  were  thrown  an  immense  way  off,  and 
contributed  to  extend  the  conflagration  to  houses 
which  were  considered  the  least  exposed,  on  ac- 
count  of  the  distance.  Every  one  was  struck  with 
terror  and  consternation.  The  guard,  with  the 
head  quarters  and  the  staff  of  the  army,  was 
transferred  from  the  Kremlin  and  the  town,  and 
a  camp  was  established  at  Petrowski,  a  castle 
belonging  to  Peter  the  Great,  on  the  road  to 
Petersburg.  ï  remained  with  a  very  small  nuni- 
ber  of  my  comrades,  in  a  house  built  of  stone, 
which  stood  alone,  and  was  situated  on  the  top 
of  the  quarter  of  the  Franks  close  to  the 
Kremlin.  I  was  there  enabled  to  observe  ail 
the  phenomena  of  that  tremendous  conflagration. 
\Ve  had  sent  our  équipage  to  the  camp,  and  kept 
ourselves  constantly  on  the  look  out,  to  be  pre- 
pared  for  or  to  prevent  danger. 

The  lower  classes,  who  had  remained  at  Mos- 
cow,  driven  from  house  to  house  by  the  fire, 
ejaculated  the  m.ost  lamentable  cries;  extreroely 
anxious  to  préserve  what  v»^as  most  valuable  to 
them,   they  loaded   themselves  with  packap'es, 


278  M  Y    RESIDENCE    WITH  [-^"g- 

Avhich  they  could  hardly  sustain,  and  which  they 
frequently  abandoned  to  escape  from  the  fiâmes. 
The  women,  impelled  by  a  very  natural  feeling-  of 
hiimanity,  carried  one  or  two  childreii  on  their 
shoulders,  and  dragged  the  others  along  by  the 
hand,  and  in  order  to  avoid  the  death  which 
threatened  them  on  every  side,  they  ran,  Mith 
their  petticoats  tucked  up,  to  take  shelter  in  the 
corners  of  the  streets  and  squares  ;  but  they  were 
soon  compelled,  by  the  intenseness  of  the  beat, 
to  abandon  those  spots  and  to  fly  with  précipita- 
tion every  way  that  was  open  to  them,  some- 
times  without  being  able  to  extricate  themselves 
from  that  kind  of  labyrinth  in  which  many  of 
them  experienced  a  misérable  end.  I  saw  old 
men,  whose  long  beards  had  been  caught  by  the 
fiâmes,  drawn  on  small  carts  by  their  own  chil- 
dren,  who  endeavoured  to  rescue  them  from  that 
real  Tartarus. 

**  As  for  our  soldiers,  tormented  with  hunger 
and  thirst,  they  exposed  themselves  to  every 
danger  to  obtain  in  the  cellars  and  shops  which 
w^ere  on  fire,  eatables,  wines,  liquors,  orany  other 
article  more  or  less  useful.  They  were  seen  run- 
ning  through  the  streets,  pell-mell,  with  the 
broken-hearted  inhabitants,  carrying  away  every 
thing  they  could  snatch  from  the  ravages  of  this 
dreadful  conflagration.  At  length,  in  the  course 
of  eight  or  ten  days,  this  immense  and  superb 
city  was  reduced  to  ashes,  with  the  exception  of 


181G.]  THF,    E:srPEftOIl    XAPOLEONT.  279. 

the  Kremlin  palace,  some  large  houses,  and  ail  the 
ehurches  :  thèse  édifices  are  built  of"  stone. 

"  This  calamity  threw  the  armyinto  great  con- 
sternation, and  was  a  présage  to  us  of  more  serions 
misfortuncs.  We  ail  thonght  that  we  should  no 
longer  find  either  subsistence,  cloth,  or  any  other 
necessary  for  eqiiipping  the  troops,  and  of  which 
we  were  in  the  most  pressing  want.  Coiild  a. 
more  dismal  idea  suggest  itself  to  our  imagin- 
ation ?  The  head  quarters  were,  howevcr,  after 
the  fire,  again  cstablished  at  the  Kremlin,  and 
the  guard  sent  to  some  houses  of  the  Franks 
quarter,  which  had  been  preserved.  Every  one  ' 
resumed  the  exercise  of  his  duties. 

"  Magazines  of  flour,  meal,  sait  fish,  oil,  wine 
and  liquors,  were  discovered  by  dint  of  persévér- 
ance. Some  were  served  ont  to  the  troops,  but 
there  was  too  great  a  ^"  "sh  to  spare  or  hoard  up 
thèse  articles,  and  that  excess  of  précaution, 
which  is  sometimes  a  mère  pretext,  induced  us  to 
burn  or  leave  behind  us,  in  the  end,  provision  of 
every  kind,  from  which  we  might  hâve  derived 
the  greatest  advantages,  and  which  would  hâve 
even  been  sufficient  for  the  wants  of  the  army  for 
more  than  six  months,  had  we  remained  at  Mos- 
cow.  The  same  conduct  was  pursued  with  re- 
gard to  the  stuffs  and  furs,  which  ought  to  hâve 
been  immediately  worked  up  for  the  purpose  of 
supplying  our  troops  with  ail  the  clothing  capable 
of  preserving  them,  as  much  as  possible,  from 


.280  MV    RESIDENCE    WITH  [Aug. 

the  iiiclemency  of  the  cold  that  was  at  hand. 
The  soldiers,  wlio  never  tliink  of  the  future,  far 
from  obviating,  on  their  part  and  for  thcir  o^Yn 
interests,  that  defect  of  précaution,  were  solely 
engaged  in  collecting  the  wines,  the  liquors,  and 
ail  the  gold  and  silver  articles  they  could  find, 
and  despised  every  othcr  considération. 

"  This  unexpected  abundance,  which  was 
owing  to  the  indefatigable  researches  of  the 
troops,  was  attended  with  a  bad  efFect  on  their 
discipline  and  on  the  health  of  those  who  were 
intemperate.  That  motive  alone  ought  to  hâve 
made  us  hasten  our  departure  for  Poland.  Mos- 
cow  became  a  new  Capua  to  our  arniy.  Tlie 
enemy's  gênerais  flattered  ours  with  the  hopcs  of 
peace  ;  the  preliminaries  v.cre  to  be  signed  ircnn 
day  to  day.  Clouds  of  cosacks,  however,  covered 
our  cantonnients  and  carried  off  every  day  a  great 
nuniber  of  our  foragers.  General  Kutusoff  was 
collecting  the  wreck  of  his  army  and  strengthening 
himselfwith  the  recruits,  that  joined  him  from  ail 
parts.  Imperceptibly  and  under  varions  preten- 
ces  of  pacification,  his  advanced  posts  drew  near 
to  ours.  Finally,  the  period  of  négociation  had 
arrived,  and  it  was  at  the  moment  in  which  the 
French  ambassador  was  to  obtain  a  first  décision, 
that  Prince  Joachim's  corps  d'armée  was  sur- 
rounded.  It  was  with  difficulty  that  our  gênerai, 
the  ambassador,  surmounted  the  obstacles  which 
were  o^  posed  to  his  return  to  Moscow.     Se -eral 


1816]  TIIE    EMPEUOR    XAPOLEOX.  281 

parties  of  our  troops  aiid  some  pièces  of  cannou 
had  beeii  already  carried  off.  The  différent  corps 
of  this  advanced  guard,  whicli  were  at  first  dis- 
persed,  were,  notwithstandino-,  rallied,  broke  tlie 
Russian  column  that  liemmed  them  in,  took  up  a 
lavourable  position  and  charged  successively  tlic 
enemy's  numerous  cavalry,  which  tlicy  repulsed 
with  vigour,  retaking  part  of  tlie  artillery  and 
some  of  tlie  soldiers  made  prisoners  in  the  first 
onset.  At  length  the  arrivai  of  General  Lauriston 
and  of  the  wounded,  was  to  us,  at  head  qiiarters, 
a  confirmation,  that  hostilities  would  be  resumed. 
Orders  were  immediately  given  for  the  sudden 
departnre  of  the  army  ;  the  driim  beat  to  arms, 
and  ail  the  corps  prepared  to  exécute  that  preci- 
pitate  movement.  Some  })rovision,s  were  hastily 
collected  and  the  march  commenced  on  the  19th 
of  October." 

On  the  Coronation,  ^-c. — Decrees  of  Berlin  and  Milan. — 
The  Grand  Cans-c  of  the  Hatred  of  îhe  English. 

25th. — The  weather  has  become  fine  in  every 
respect.  The  Emperor  breakfasted  in  the  tent  and 
sent  for  us  ail.  The  conversation  turned  upon 
the  cérémonies  of  the  coronation.  He  asked  for 
information  from  one  of  us,  who  had  been  présent, 
but  was  unable  to  satisfy  him.  He  made  the 
same  inquiries  of  another,  but  the  latter  had  not 
seen  it  ?     "  Where  were  you  then  at  that  time?" 


«82  MY    RKSIDENCE    WITH  [Aug. 

asked  the  Empcror — "at  Paris,  Sire."  "Howthen  ! 
"  yoii  did  not  see  the  coronation!" — "  no,  Sire." 

TheEmperor  then  castinu'  aside  glance  at  him, 
and  taking  him  by  the  ear,  said  ;  "  Were  you  so 
*'  absurd  as  to  carry  yoiir  aristocracy  to  that 
"  point  ?" — "  But  Sire,  my  hour  was  not  corne." — 
*'  But  at  least  you  saw  the  retinue  ?  " — "Ah! 
"  Sire,  had  my  curiosity  prevailed,  I  should  hâve 
**  hastened  to  witness  what  was  most  worthy 
"  and  most  intere»ting  to  be  seen.  I  had,  how- 
"  ever,  a  ticket  of  admission,  and  I  prefcrred  pre- 
"  senting  it  to  the  Englisli  lady,  whom  I  lately 
"  mentioned  to  your  Majesty,  and  who,  by  way 
"  of  parenthesis,  caught  a  cold  therc,  that  nearly 
"  killed  her.  For  my  own  part  I  remained  quiet- 
"  ly  at  home".  "  Ah,  that  is  too  much  for  me  to 
"  put  up  with,"  said  the  Emperor,  "  the  viHan- 
*'  ous  aristocrat  !  How  !  And  you  were  really 
"  guilty  of  such  an  absurdity  ?"  "  Alas!  I  was," 
replied  the  accused,  "and  yet  liere  I  am  near 
"  you,  and  at  Saint  Ilelena."  The  Emperor 
smiled,  and  let  go  the  ear. 

After  breakfast,  a  captain  of  the  English  ar- 
tillery,  who  had  been  six  years  at  the  Isle  of 
France,  called  upon  me.  He  was  to  sail  for 
Europe  the  next  day.  Ile  entreated  me  in  a 
thousand  ways  to  procure  him  the  happiness  of 
seeing  the  Emperor.  He  would,  he  said,  give  ail 
lie  had  in  the  world  for  such  a  favoiir  ;  his  gra- 
titude would  be  bouiidless,  &c. 


1816.]  THE    El^IPFROR    NAPOLEON.  283 

Wc  conversed  to^sfether  for  a  long-  timc  ;  the 
Eiiiperor  Avas  taking  his  round  in  the  calash.  On 
lîis  retnrn,  I  was  happy  enough  to 'realize  the 
English  officer's  wishes.  The  Empcror  received 
him  for  upwards  of  a  quarter  of  an  hour  ;  his  joy 
was  extrême,  as  he  was  aware  that  the  favonr 
becanie  every  day  more  rare.  Every  thing  about 
the  Emperor  liad  struck  him,  he  declared,  in  a 
most  extraordinary  manner  ;  his  features,  his  af- 
fability,  the  sound  of  his  voice,  his  expressions, 
the  questions  he  had  askcd  ;  he  was,  he  ex- 
claimed,  a  hero,  a  god! 

The  weather  was  delightful,  The  Emperor 
continued  to  walk  in  the  garden  in  the  midst  of 
us.  He  entered  into  the  considération  of  the 
failure  of  a  négociation,  undertaken  by  one  of 
us;  a  business  which  the  Emperor  had  judged 
very  easy,  but  which  turned  ont  to  be  of  the 
most  délicate  nature  for  the  person  entrusted 
with  it.  The  object  of  it  was  to  prevail  upon 
some  English  officers  to  publish  a  certain  paper 
in  England. 

The  Emperor  expressed  his  disapprobation  of 
the  failure  in  his  usual  mode  of  reasoning,  and 
with  the  intelligence  and  point  that  are  familiar 
to  him  ;  he  was,  however,  very  much  disappointed 
at  it  ;  his  observations  were  rather  strong  ;  he 
pushed  them  to  a  degree  of  ill  humour,  of  which 
the  per.^on  he  fbund  iault  with,  had  never,  perha])s, 
before,  received  any  proofs.     At  length,  he  con- 


284  MY    RESIDENCE    MTriI  [Aug. 

cluded  with  saying;  "  After  ail,  Sir,  would  yoii 
**  not  liave  accepted  yourself,  v/liat  you  proposed 
"  to  others^i  liad  you  been  in  their  place?"  "  No, 
**  Sire."—"  Why  not?  Well  tlien,"  lie  added,  in 
a  tone  of  reproof,  "  you  sliould  not  be  my  mi- 
*'  nister  of  police."  "  And  your  Majesty  would 
*'  be  in  the  right,"  quickly  replied  the  otlier,  who 
felt  himseir  vexed  in  his  turn  ;  "I  feel  no  in- 
*'  clination  whatcver  for  .sacli  an  office."  The 
Emperor  seeing  hiiii  enter  the  saloon,  a  little 
before  dinner,  said  ;  "Ah  !  there  is  our  little 
"  otficer  of  police!  Corne,  approach,  my  little 
*'  officer  of  police  ;"  and  he  pinchcd  his  car.  Al- 
thougli  lioLirs  had  passcd  ^^incc  the  wann  convers- 
ation took  place,  the  Enipcror  recoUcctcd  it  ;  he 
knevv  the.  j)*M-.-^on,  vn  lio,  had  been  the  object  of  it 
was  fiill  of  sensibility,  and  it  was  évident,  that  he 
wisiied  to  efface  the  impression  it  had  made  upon 
hitn.  Thèse  are  characteristic  shades,  and  those 
which  arise  from  the  most  trifling  causes,  are  the 
most  natural  and  the  most  marked. 

After  dinner,  the  Emperor  was  induced,  l)y 
the  turn  which  the  conversation  took,  to  review 
the  s])ecial  subject  of  his  maritime  dispnte  with 
England.  "  Her  pre tensions  to  blockade  on 
**  paper,"  he  observed,  "  produced  my  famous 
**  Berlin  decree.  The  British  council,  in  a  fit 
**  of  passion,  issued  its  ordcrs;  it  established  a 
''  right  of  toU  on  the  seas.  I  instantly  replied 
*'  by  the  celcbrated  ?ililan  decrees,   which  de- 


1S16\]  TilE    KM  PEROU    NA1H)LK0X.  285 

*'  national izccl  cvery  flag  ihat  yiclded  obédience 
"  to  the  Eng'lisli  acts  ;  and  it  was  then  tliat  thc  war 
"  became,  in  England,  truly  personal.  Every 
"  one  connected  witli  trade  was  enraLced  ao'ainst 
"  me.  England  v/as  exasperated  at  a  struggle 
"  and  energy,  of  whicli  slie  had  no  example.  She 
"  had  uniformly  fonnd  those,  who  had  preccded 
*'  me,  more  complaisant." 

The  Emperor  explained,  on  a  later  occasion, 
the  means,  by  which  he  had  forced  the  Americans 
to  make  war  against  the  English.  He  had,  he 
said,  discovered  the  way  of  Connecting  their  in- 
terests  with  their  rights  ;  for  people,  he  remarked, 
fight  much  more  readily  for  the  former  than  for 
the  latter. 

At  présent,  the  Emperor  was  in  expectation, 
he  said,  of  some  approaching  attempt  on  the  part 
of  the  English,  on  the  sovereignty  of  the  seas,  for 
the  establishment  of  the  right  of  universal  toll, 
Sic.  kc.  "  It  is,"  said  he,  "  one  of  the  principal 
"  resources  left  them  for  clischarging  their  debts, 
"  for  extricating  themselves  from  the  abyss  into 
"  which  they  are  plnnged  ;  in  a  word,  of  getting 
"  rid  of  their  embarassments.  If  they  hâve 
**  among  them  an  enterprizing  genius,  a  man  of 
"  a  strong  intellect,  they  will  certainly  undertake 
"  something  of  that  kind.  Nobody  is  powerfnl 
"  enongli  to  oppose  it  and  they  set  up  their  claim 
"  with  a  species  of  justice.  They  may  plead  in 
"  its  justification,  that  it  was  for  the  safety  of 


286  MV    RKSIDKNCE    WlTll  [Aug. 

"  Europe  tliey  involved  themselves  in  difficiilties; 
"  that  they  siicceeded,  and  tliat  they  are  entitled 
*'  to  some  compensation.  And  then,  the  only 
"  sUij).^  ot'war  in  Europe  are  theirs.  Tliey  reign, 
"  in  l'act,  at  présent,  over  the  seas.  There  is  an 
•'  end  to  the  existence  of  public  rights,  when  the 
"  bakmce  is  broken,  Sec.  Sic. 

"  The  English  may  now  be  omnipotent,  if  they 
"  will  but  confine  themselves  to  their  navy.  But 
"  they  v»'iH  endanoer  their  superiority,  compli- 
"  cate  their  aftairs,  and  insensibly  lose  their  im- 
*'  portance,  if  they  persévère  in  keeping  soldiers 
**  on  tlie  continent." 

AccounI  of  the  Campaigtt  of  Waierloo  d'ictatedhy  Napoléon. 

2Gth. — The  Emperor  went  ont  early  in  the 
morning,  even  before  seven  o'clock  ;  he  did  not 
wish  to  disturb  any  of  us.  He  was  occupied 
with  his  work  in  the  garden  and  in  the  tent,  where 
he  sent  for  us  ail  to  breakfast  with  him.  He  con- 
tinued  there  until  two  o'clock. 

At  dinner  he  conversed  a  great  deal  about  our 
situation  in  tlie  island.  He  would  not,  he  said, 
leave  Longwood  ;  he  did  not  care  for  any  visitors  ; 
but  he  was  désirons  we  should  take  some  diver^ 
sion,  and  find  out  some  means  of  amusement.  It 
would,  he  said,  be  a  pleasure  to  him  to  see  us 
more  lively  in  our  motions  and  indulge  more 
freely  in  our  enjoyments,  S<.c. 

The  relation  of  the  battlc  of  Waterloo,  which 


1816.J  THE    E.MPEROR    NAPOLEON'.  287 

the  Emperor  had  dictated  to  General  Gourgaud, 
was  read  by  bis  désire,  What  pages  !  They  are 
sickening.  .  .  .  The  destiiiies  of  France  sus- 
pended  by  so  slight  a  thread  !  !  !  ... 

Tins  production  was  published  in  Europe  in 
1820.  The  measures  contrived  to  transmit  it 
clandestinely  from  Saint  Helena  proved  success- 
ful,  in  spite  of  every  kind  of  vii^ilance.  The 
instant,  this  relation  of  Waterloo  appeared  in  the 
world,  nobody  was  deceived  with  regard  to  its 
author.  An  exclamation  burst  from  every  quarter, 
that  JVapoleon  alone  was  capable  of  describing  in 
that  manner,  and  it  is  confidently  stated,  that  his 
antagonist  expressed  himself  precisely  in  that 
way.  AVhat  noble  chapters  !  It  woiild  be  impos- 
sible to  attempt  an  analysis  of  them,  or  to  prétend 
to  convey  their  excellence  in  terms  adéquate  to 
their  merits.  We  literally  transcribe,  however, 
in  this  place,  the  last  pages,  containing,  in  the 
shape  of  a  summary,  nine  observations  of  Napo- 
léon, on  the  faults,  with  which  he  lias  been 
reproached  in  that  campaign. 

They  are  points,  which  will  possess  classical 
duration,  and  we  hâve  been  of  opinion,  that  our 
readers  would  not  be  displeased  at  again  finding 
hère  objects,  which  become,  every  time  the  occa- 
sion présents  itself,  the  subject  of  earnest  and 
important  discussions. 

We  shall  préface  thèse  observations  with  a 
description,  also  of  Napoleon's  dictation,  of  the 


288  MY    RESIDENCE    WITII  [Ailg 

resoiirces  which  France  still  possessed  after  the 
loss  of  the  battle. 

**  The  situation  of  France  was  critical,  but  not 
desperate,  after  the  battle  of  Waterloo.  Every 
preparatory  measure  had  been  taken,  on  the 
supposition  of  the  failure  of  the  attack  upon 
Belgium.  70,000  men  were  rallied  on  the  27th, 
between  Paris  and  Laon  ;  from  25  to  30,000, 
including  the  dépôts  of  the  guard,  were  on  their 
mardi  from  Paris  and  the  dépôts  ;  General  Rapp, 
with  25,000  men,  chosen  troops,  was  expected 
on  the  Marne,  in  the  beginning  of  July  ;  ail  the 
losses  sustained  in  the  matériel  of  the  artillery 
had  been  repaircd.  Paris,  alone,  contained  500 
pièces  of  fieid  artillery,  and  only  170  ha<l  been 
lost.  Thus  an  army  of  120,000  men,  equal 
to  that  which  had  passed  the  Sombre  on  the 
15th,  with  a  train  of  artillery,  consisting  of  .350 
pièces  of  cannon,  would  cover  Paris  by  tlie  Ist 
of  July.  That  capital  possessed,  independently 
of  thèse  mcans,  for  its  defence,  3G,00()  men  of 
tlîc  national  guard,  30,000  marksmen,  GOOO  can- 
noniers,  GOO  battering  cannon,  formidable  en- 
trenchments  on  the  riglit  bank  of  the  Seine,  and, 
in  a  few  days,  those  of  the  left  bank  would  hâve 
been  entirely  completed.  The  Anglo-Dutch  and 
Prusso-Saxon  armies  weakened,  however,  by  the 
loss  of  80,000  men,  and  no  longer  excecding 
140,000,  could  not  cross  the  Somme  with  more 
than  90,000  men  ;    they  would   hâve   to   wait, 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR   NAPOLEON.  289 

there  for  the  co-operation  of  the  Austriaii  and 
Russian  armies,  wliich  coulcl  net  be  on  the 
Marne  before  the  15th  of  July.  Paris  had,  con- 
sequently,  five-and-twenty  days  to  prépare  for 
its  defence,  to  complète  the  arming  of  its  in- 
habitants, its  fortifications,  its  supplies  of  pro- 
visions, and  to  draw  troops  from  every  point  of 
France.  Even  by  the  15th  of  July,  not  more 
than  30  or  40,000  men  could  hâve  arrived  on  the 
Rhine.  The  mass  of  the  Russian  and  Austrian 
armies  could  not  take  the  field  before  a  later 
period.  Neither  arms,  nor  ammunition,  nor 
officers  were  wanting  in  the  capital  ;  the  number 
of  men  carrying  musquets  might  be  easily  aug- 
mented  to  80,000,  and  the  field  artillery  could 
be  increased  to  600  pièces. 

*'  Marshal  Suchet,  in  conjunction  with  General 
Lécourbe,  would  hâve  had,  at  the  same  time,  up- 
wardsof  30,000  men,  before  Lyons,  independently 
of  the  garrison  of  that  city,  which  would  hâve  been 
well  armed,  well  supplied  with  provisions,  and 
well  protected  by  entrenchments.  The  defence 
of  ail  the  strong  places  was  secured  ;  they  were 
commanded  by  chosen  officers,  and  garrisoned 
by  faithful  troops.  Every  thing  rnigh:  be  re- 
paired,  but  décision,  energy,  and  firmness,  on 
the  part  of  the  officers,  of  the  government,  of  the 
chambers,  and  of  the  whole  nation,  were  neces- 
sary  !  !  !  It  was  requisite,  that  she  should  be 
animated  by  the  sentiment  of  honour,  of  glory, 

Vol.  III.  Part  V.  v 


290  MY    RESIDENCE    WITII  [Aug. 

of  national  indepenclence  ;  that  she  shoiild  fix  her 
eyes  iipon  Rome,  after  the  battle  of  Cannœ,  and 
not  upon  Carthage,  after  that  of  Zama  !  !  !  If 
France  had  elevated  herself  to  that  height,  she 
would  hâve  been  invincible.  Her  people  contained 
more  of  the  military  éléments  than  any  other 
people  in  the  world.  The  matériel  of  war  existed 
in  abundance,  and  was  adéquate  to  every  want. 

"■  On  the  21st  of  June,  Marshal  Bhicher  and 
the  Duke  of  Wellington  entered  the  French  ter- 
ritory  at  the  head  of  two  columns.  On  the  22d, 
the  powder  magazine  took  fire  at  Avesne,  and 
the  place  surrendered.  On  the  24th,  the  Prus- 
sians  entered  Guise,  and  the  Duke  of  Wellington 
was  at  Cambray.  He  was  at  Peronne  on  the 
26th.  During  the  whole  of  this  time,  the  places 
on  the  first,  second,  and  third  line  of  Flanders 
vv^ere  invested.  The  two  gênerais  learned,  how- 
ever,  on  the  25th,  the  Emperor's  abdication, 
which  had  taken  place  the  22d,  the  insurrection 
of  the  chambers,  the  discouragement  occasioned 
by  thèse  circumstances  in  the  army,  and  the 
hopes  excited  among  our  internai  enemies.  From 
that  moment,  they  thought  only  of  marching 
upon  the  capital,  under  the  walls  of  which  they 
arrived  at  the  latter  end  of  June,  with  less  than 
90,000  men  ;  an  enterprize  that  would  hâve 
proved  fatal  to  them,  and  drawn  on  their  total 
ruin,  had  they  hazarded  it  in  the  présence  of 
Napoléon  ;    but  that  Prince  had  abdicated  !  !  ! 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEOX.  391 

The  troops  of  the  line  at  Paris,  consisting  of  more 
thaii  6000  meii  of  the  dépôts  of  the  guard,  the 
fusiliers  of  the  national  guard,  chosen  from 
among  the  people  of  that  great  capital,  were 
devoted  to  him  ;  they  had  it  in  their  power  to 
exterminate  the  domestic  enemy  !  !  !  But  in  order 
to  explain  the  motives  which  regulated  his  con- 
duct,  in  that  important  crisis,  which  was  attended 
with  such  fatal  results,  both  for  him  and  for 
France,  the  relation  must  be  resumed  from  an 
earlier  period. 

First  Observation. — "  The  Emperor  has  been 
reproached,  Ist,  With  having  resigned  the  dic- 
tatorship,  at  the  moment,  when  France  stood 
most  in  need  of  a  dictator  ;  2d,  With  having 
altered  the  constitutions  of  the  empire,  at  a  mo- 
ment, when  it  was  necessary  to  think  only  of 
preserving  it  from  invasion  ;  3d,  With  having 
permitted  the  Vendeans  to  be  alarmed,  who  had, 
at  first,  refused  to  take  arms  against  the  impérial 
government  ;  4th,  With  having  assembled  the 
chambers,  when  lie  ought  to  hâve  assembled  the 
army  ;  5th,  With  having  abdicated  and  left  France 
at  the  mercy  of  a  divided  and  inexperienced 
assembly  ;  for,  in  fine,  if  it  l)e  true,  that  it  was 
impossible  for  the  Prince  to  save  the  country 
without  the  confidence  of  the  nation,  it  is  not  less 
true,  that  the  nation  could  not,  in  thèse  critical 
circumstances,  préserve  either  its  happiness  or  its 
independence  without  Napoléon. 

u  2 


«292  MY    RESIDENCE    M'ITH  [Aug. 

*•  \Ve  shall  make  no  reflections  on  subjects 
which  hâve  been  minutely  canvassed,  and  treated 
of  at  length,  in  the  tentli  book. 

Second  Observation. — "  The  art,  with  which  the 
movements  of  the  différent  bodies  of  the  army 
were  concealed  from  the  enemy's  knowledge,  on 
the  opening  of  the  campaign,  cannot  be  too  at- 
tentively  remarked.  Marshal  Blucher  and  the 
Duke  of  Wellington  were  surprized  ;  they  saw 
nothing,  knew  nothing,  of  the  opérations  which 
were  carrying  on  near  their  advanced  posts. 

'*  In  order  to  attack  the  two  hostile  armies, 
the  French  mioht  hâve  out-flanked  their  rio-ht  or 
left,  or  penetrated  their  centre.  In  the  first  case, 
they  might  hâve  advanced  by  the  way  of  Lisle, 
and  fallen  in  with  the  Anglo-Dutch  army  ;  in  the 
second,  they  might  hâve  moved  forv/ard  by  Givet 
and  Charlemont,  and  hâve  fallen  in  with  the 
Prusso-Saxon  army.  Thèse  two  armies  would 
hâve  remained  united,  since  they  must  hâve  been 
pressed  the  one  upon  the  other,  from  the  right  to 
the  left,  and  from  the  left  to  the  right.  The  Em- 
peror  adopted  the  plan  of  covering  his  movements 
with  the  Sambre,  and  piercing  the  line  of  the  two 
armies  at  Charleroi,  their  point  of  junction,  exe- 
cuting  his  manœuvres  with  rapidity  and  skill.  He 
thus  discovered  in  the  secrets  of  the  art  means  to 
supply  the  place  of  100,000  men,  of  whom  he 
stood  in  need.  The  plan  was  executed  with  bold- 
ness  and  prudence. 


ISIG]  THE    EMPEROR    .VAPOLEOX.  993 

TIlird  Observation. — "  The  characterof  several 
gênerais  had  been  affected  by  the  events  of  1814  ; 
they  had  lost  somewhat  of  that  spirit,  of  that  re- 
solution, and  that  confidence,  by  which  they  had 
gained  so  miich  glory,  and  so  much  contributed 
to  the  success  of  former  campaigns. 

**  Ist, — On  the  15th  of  June,  the  third  corps 
was  to  march  at  three  o'clock  in  the  morning, 
and  arrive  at  Charleroi  at  ten  ;  it  did  not  arrive 
until  three  o'clock  in  tlie  afternoon. 

**  2dly, — The  same  day  the  attack  on  the  ' 
woods  in  front  of  Fleurus,  which  had  been  or- 
dered  at  four  in  the  afternoon,  did  not  take  place 
until  seven.  Night  came  on  before  the  troops 
could  enter  Fleurus,  where  the  commander  in 
chief  had  intended  to  establish  his  head  quarters 
the  same  day.  The  loss  of  seven  hours  was  very 
vexations  on  the  opening  of  a  campaign. 

"  3dly, — Ney  received  orders  to  advance  on 
the  IGth  with  43,000  men,  who  composed  the 
left  under  his  command,  in  front  of  Quatre-Bras, 
to  take  up  a  position  there  at  the  break  of  day, 
and  even  to  entrench  himself  ;  he  hesitated,  and 
lost  eiglit  hours.  The  Prince  of  Orange,  with  onl}»- 
9000  men,  retained,  on  the  IGth  until  three 
o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  that  important  posi- 
tion. When  at  length,  the  Marshal  received 
at  twelve  o'clock  at  noon  the  order  dated  from 
Fleurus,  and  saw,  that  the  Emperor  was  on 
the   point    qf   attacking   the  Prussians,  he  ad--  / 


294  MY    RESIDENCE    WITH  [Aug. 

vanced  against  Qiiatre-Bras,  but  only  with  half 
his  force,  leaving  the  other  half  to  cover  his 
retreat  at  the  distance  of  two  leagues  in  the 
rear  ;  he  forgot  it  iintil  six  in  the  evening,  when 
he  felt  the  want  of  it  for  his  own  defence.  In  the 
other  campa igns,  that  General  woiild  hâve  made 
himself  master  of  the  position  in  front  of  Quatre- 
Bras  at  six  o'clock  in  the  morning  ;  he  would 
hâve  routed  and  captured  the  whole  of  the  Belgic 
division,  and  either  turned  the  Prussian  army  by 
sending  a  detachment  by  the  road  of  Nanuir  to  fall 
on  the  rear  of  their  line  of  battle,  or  by  the  rapidity 
of  his  movements  on  the  road  of  Gennapes,  he 
would  hâve  surprized  and  destroyed  the  Bruns- 
wick division  on  its  march,  and  the  fifth  English 
division  as  it  advanced  from  Brussels.  He  would 
hâve  afterwards  marched  to  meet  the  third  and 
fourth  English  divisions,  which  were  advancing  by 
the  way  of  Nivelles,  and  were  both  destitute  of 
cavalry  and  artillery,  and  overwhelmed  with  fa- 
tigue. Ney,  who  M'as  always  first  in  the  beat  of 
battle,  forgot  the  troops  that  were  not  directly 
engaged.  The  courage  which  a  commander  in 
chief  should  display  is  différent  from  that  of  a 
gênerai  of  division,  as  that  of  the  latter  is  marked 
by  a  distinct  shade  from  the  bravery  of  a  captain 
of  grenadiers.. 

•*  4thly, — The  advanced  guard  of  the  French 
army  did  not  arrive  on  the  IGtli,  in  front  of  Water- 
loo, until  six  o'clock  in  the  evening  ;  it  would  hâve 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON.  295 

arrived  at  three  but  for  some  vexations  hésita- 
tions. The  Emperor  was  very  much  mortitied  at 
the  delay,  and,  pointing  at  the  sun,  exclaimed, 
"  what  would  I  not  now  give  to  hâve  the  power 
of  Joshua,  and  stop  its  movement  for  two  hours  !" 
Fourth  Observation.—''  The  French  soldier  never 
displayed  more  bravery,  cheerfulness,  and  enthii- 
siasm  ;  he  was  animated  w^ith  the  sentiment  of 
his  superiority  over  ail  the  soldiers  of  Europe. 
His  confidence  in  the  Emperor  was  altogether 
unabated,  it  had,  perhaps,  increased;  but  he 
was  suspicions  and  distrustful  of  his  other  com- 
manders.  The  treasons  of  1814  were  always  in 
his  thoughts,  and  he  was  uneasy  at  every  move- 
ment, which  he  did  not  understand  ;  he  thought 
he  was  betrayed.  At  the  moment,  when  the  first 
cannon  shots  were  firing  near  Saint  Amand,  an 
old  corporal  approached  the  Emperor  and  said  ; 
"  Sire,  beware  of  General  Soult  ;  be  assured  that 
*'  he  is  a  traitor." — •**  Fear  nothing,"  replied  the 
Emperor,  *'  I  can  answer  for  him  as  for  myself." 
In  the  middle  of  the  battle,  an  officer  informed 
Marshal  Soult,  that  General  Vandamme  had  gone 
over  to  the  enemy,  and  that  his  soldiers  demanded 
with  loud  cries,  that  the  Emperor  should  be  made 
acquainted  with  it.  At  the  close  of  the  battle, 
a  dragoon,  with  his  sabre  covered  with  blood, 
galloped  up  to  him  crying,  **Sire,  come  instantly 
*'  to  the  division,  General  Dhénin  is  haranguing 
**  the  dragoons  to  go  over  to  the  enemy."     "  Did 


296"  M  Y    RESIDEXCE    M'ITII  [Aiig. 

**  you  liear  him?"  **  No,  Sire,  but  an  officer, 
*'  who  is  looking  for  y  ou,  saw  him  and  ordered 
•'  me  to  tell  your  Majesty."  During  this  time, 
the  gallant  General  Dhénin,  received  a  cannon 
shot  which  carried  oft'  one  of  his  thighs,  after  he 
had  repulsed  the  enemy's  charge. 

**  On  the  14th  in  the  evening,  Lieutenant-Gé- 
néral B  . . . .  ,  Colonel  C. . . .  ,  and  V ,  an 

officer  of  the  staff,  deserted  and  went  over  to  the 
enemy.  Their  names  will  be  held  in  exécration 
as  long  as  the  French  people  shall  constitute  a 
nation.  The  uneasy  feelings  of  the  troops  had 
been  considerably  aggravated  by  that  désertion. 
It  ajipears  nearly  certain,  that  the  cry  of  .sffurc  (jui 
peut  was  raised  among  the  soldiers  of  tlie  lourth 
division  of  the  first  corps  the  evening  of  the  battle 
of  Waterloo,  when  Marshal  Blucher  attacked  the 
village  of  La  Haye.  That  village  was  not  defended 
as  it  ought  to  hâve  been.  It  is  equally  probable, 
that  several  officers,  charged  with  the  communi- 
cation of  orders,  disappeared.  But  if  some  officers 
deserted,  not  a  single  private  was  guilty  of  that 
crime.  Several  killed  themselves  on  the  field  of 
battle  where  they  lay  wounded,  when  they  learned 
the  defeat  of  the  army. 

Fifth  Ohacrvation.—''  In  the  battle  of  the  17th, 
the  French  army  was  divided  into  three  bodies  ; 
09,000  men  under  the  Emperor's  command, 
marched  against  Brussels  by  the  way  of  Charle- 
roi;    34,000,    under  the   command   of  Marshal 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON.  297 

Grouchy,  directed  their  opérations  against  that 
capital  by  the  way  of  Wavres,  in  piirsuit  of  the 
Prussians  ;  7  or  8000  men  remained  on  the  field 
of  battle  at  Ligny,  of  whom  3000  belonging  to 
Girard's  division  were  employed  in  assisting  the 
woiinded,  and  in  forming  a  reserve  for  any  un- 
expected  casualty  at  Quatre-Bras,  and  4  or  5000 
continued  with  the  forces  of  reserve  at  Fleurus 
and  at  Charleroi.  The  34,000  men  under  the 
command  of  Marshal  Grouchy,  with  108  pièces  of 
cannon,  were  sufficient  to  drive  the  Prussian  rear- 
guard  from  any  position  it  might  take  up  to  press 
iipon  the  retreat  of  the  conquered  army,  and  to 
keep  it  in  check.  It  was  a  glorious  resuit  of  the 
victory  of  Ligny,  to  be  thus  enabled  to  oppose 
34,000  men  to  an  army,  which  had  consisted  of 
120,000.  The  69,000  men,  under  the  Emperor's 
command  were  sufficient  to  beat  the  Anglo-Dutch 
army,  composed  of  90,000.  The  disproportion, 
which  existed  on  the  15th  between  the  two  belli- 
gerent  masses  in  the  relation  of  one  to  two,  was 
materially  changed,  and  it  no  longer  exceeded 
three  to  four.  Had  the  Anglo-Dutch  army  de- 
feated  the  69,000  men  opposed  to  it.  Napoléon 
might  hâve  been  reproached  with  having  ill-cal- 
culated  his  measures;  but  it  is  undeniable,  even 
from  the  enemy's  admission,  that  unless  General 
Blucher  had  arrived,  the  Anglo-Dutch  army  would 
hâve  been  driven  from  the  field  of  battle  between 
eight  and  nine  o'clock  at  niglit,  If  Marshal  Blucher 


._,**»-  .vtxvt  ***xtv^  w   ^.iv/v  »>   «Av  *"0' 


298  MY    RESIDENCE    WITH  [Aug, 

had  not  arrived  at  eight  witli  his  first  and  second 
corps,  the  mardi  on  Brussels,  with  two  columns, 
during  the  battle  of  the  17th,  would  hâve  been 
attended  with  several  advantao^es.  The  left  would 
hâve  pressed  iipon  and  kept  in  check  the  Anglo- 
Dutch  army  ;  the  right,  iinder  the  command  of 
Marshal  Grouchy,  would  hâve  pursucd  and  re- 
strained  the  opérations  of  the  Prusso-Saxon  army; 
and  in  the  evening,  the  whole  of  the  French  army 
would  hâve  eftected  its  junction  on  a  line  of  less 
than  five  leagues  from  Mont  Saint  Jean  to  Wavres, 
with  its  advanced  posts  on  the  edge  of  the  forest. 
But  the  fault  conunitted  by  IMarshal  Grouchy,  in 
stopping  on  the  17th,  at  Gembloux,  havingmarch- 
ed  scarcely  two  leagues  in  the  course  of  the  day, 
instead  of  pushing  on  three  leagues  more  in  front 
of  Wavres,  was  aggravated  and  rendered  irrépar- 
able by  that  wliich  he  committed  the  following 
day,  the  18th,  in  losing  twelve  hours,  and  arriving 
at  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  in  front  of  Wavres, 
when  he  should  hâve  been  there  at  six  in  the 
morning. 

"  Ist, — Grouchy,  charged  with  the  pursuit  of 
Marshal  Blucher,  lost  sight  of  him  for  tw^enty- 
four  hours,  from  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  of 
the  17th,  until  a  quarter  past  twelve  at  noon  on 
the  18th. 

*'  2dly, — The  movement  of  the  cavalry  on  the 
plain,  while  General  Bulow's  attack  M^as  not 
yet  repulsed,  proved  a  distressing  accident.     It 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEON'.  299 

was  the  intention  of  the  Commander  in  chief  to 
order  that  movement,  but  not  until  an  hour  later, 
and  thon  it  was  to  hâve  been  sustained  by  the 
sixteen  battalions  of  infantry  belonging  to  the 
guard,  with  one  hundred  pièces  of  cannon. 

"  3dly, — The  horse  grenadiers  and  the  dragoons 
of  the  guard,  under  the  comniand  of  General 
Giiyot,  engaged  without  orders.  Thus  at  five  in 
the  afternoon,  the  army  foiuid  itself  without  a  re- 
serve of  cavalry.  If  at  half  past  eight,  that  re- 
serve had  been  in  existence,  the  storm  which 
swept  ail  before  it  on  the  field  of  battle  would 
hâve  been  dispersed,  the  encmy's  charges  of  ca- 
valry driven  back,  and  the  two  armies  would  hâve 
slept  on  the  field,  notwithstanding  the  successive 
arrivais  of  General  Bulow  and  Marshal  Blucher  ; 
the  advantage  would  also  hâve  been  in  favour  of 
the  French  army,  as  Marshal  Grouchy's  34,000 
men,  with  108  pièces  of  cannon,  were  fresh  troops 
bivouacked  on  the  field  of  battle.  The  enemy's 
two  armies  would  hâve  placed  themselves  in  the 
night  under  cover  of  the  forest  of  Soignes.  The 
constant  practice  in  every  battle  was  for  the  horse 
grenadiers  and  the  dragoons  of  the  guard  never 
to  lose  sight  of  the  Emperor,  and  never  to  make  a 
charge  but  in  conséquence  of  an  order  verbally 
given  by  that  Prince  to  the  General,  who  com- 
manded  them. 

"  Marshal  Mortier,  who  was  Commander  in 
chief  of  the  guards,  gave  up  the  comniand  on  the 


300  MY    RESIDENCE    WITII  [Aug. 

15th,  at  Beaiimont,  just  as  hostilities  were  on  the 
point  of  commencing,  and  no  one  was  appointée! 
in  his  stead,  which  was  attended  with  several  in- 
convénient results. 

S/jih  Observation. —  *'  Ist,  The  Frencli  army 
manœnvred  on  the  right  of  the  Sambre,  on  thé 
13th  and  14th.  It  encamped,  the  night  between 
the  14th  and  15th,  within  half  a  league  of  the 
Prnssian  advanced  posts;  and  yet  Marshal  Blucher 
had  no  knowledge  of  it,  and  when  on  the  morning 
of  the  15th,  he  learned  at  his  head-quarters  at 
Namur,  that  the  Emperor  had  entered  Charleroi, 
the  Prusso-Saxon  army  was  still  cantoned  over 
an  extent  of  thirty  leagues  ;  two  days  were  neces- 
sary  for  him  to  eifect  the  junction  of  his  troops. 
It  was  his  dnty,  from  the  15th  of  May,  to  advance 
his  head  qnarters  to  Flenrus,  to  concentrate  the 
cantonments  of  his  army  within  a  radius  of  eight 
leagues  with  his  advanced  posts  on  the  Meuse 
and  Sambre.  His  army  might  then  hâve  been 
assembled  at  Ligny  on  the  15th  at  noon,  to  await 
in  that  position  the  attack  of  the  French  army, 
or  to  march  against  it  in  the  evening  of  the  15th, 
for  the  purpose  of  driving  it  into  the  Sambre. 

"  2dly, — Yet,  notwithstanding  this  surprise  of 
Marshal  Blucher,  he  persisted  in  the  project  of 
collecting  his  troops  on  the  heights  of  Ligny, 
behind  Fleurus,  exposing  himself  to  the  hazard 
of  being  attacked  before  the  arrivai  of  his  army. 
On  the  morning  of  the  lOth  he  had  collected  but 


1S16.]  THK    EMPEROU    XAPOLEON.  30l 

tvvo  corps  d'armée,  and  the  Frencli  arniy  was 
already  at  Fleurus.  The  third  corps  joined  in 
the  course  of  the  day,  but  the  fourth,  commanded 
by  General  Bulow,  was  unable  to  présent  itself  in 
time  for  the  battle.  Marshal  Blucher,  the  instant 
he  learned  the  arrivai  of  the  French  at  Charleroi, 
that  is  to  say,  on  the  evening  of  the  15th,  ought 
to  hâve  assigned  as  a  point  of  junction  for  his 
troops,  neither  Fleurus  nor  Ligny,  which  were 
under  the  enemy's  cannon,  but  Wavres,  which 
the  French  could  not  hâve  reached  until  the  17th. 
He  would  hâve  also  had  the  whole  of  the  16th, 
and  the  night  between  the  IGth  and  17th,  to  effect 
the  total  junction  of  his  army. 

"  3dly, — After  having  lost  the  battle  of  Ligny, 
the  Prussian  General  instead  of  making  his  re- 
treat  on  Wavres,  ought  to  hâve  effected  it  upon 
the  army  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  whether  at 
Quatre- Bras  where  the  latter  had  maintained 
himself,  or  at  Waterloo.  The  whole  of  Marshal 
Blucher's  retreat  on  the  morning  of  the  17th,  was 
contrary  to  common  sensé,  since  the  two  armies, 
which  were,  on  the  evening  of  the  16th,  little 
more  than  three  miles  from  each  other,  and  had 
a  fine  road  for  their  point  of  communication,  in 
conséquence  of  which  their  junction  might  hâve 
been  considered  as  effected,  found  themselves,  on 
the  evening  of  the  17th,  separated  by  a  distance  of 
nearly  twelve  miles,  and  intercepted  by  défiles 
and  impassable  ways. 


302  MY    RESIDENCE    WITH  [Aug. 

"  The  Prussian  Général  was  giiilty  of  a  breach 
of  the  tliree  grand  rules  of  war;  Ist,  To  maintain 
his  cantonments  near  eacli  other;  2dly,  To  as- 
sign  a  point  of  junetion  where  his  troops  can  ail 
assemble  before  those  of  the  enemy  ;  3dly,  To 
operate  his  retreat  upon  his  reinforcements. 

Sevcuth  Observation. — "  Ist,  The  Duke  of  Wel- 
lington was  surprised  in  his  cantonments  ;  lie  oiight 
tohaveconcentrated  them  the  15th  of  May,  at  eight 
leagues  about  Brussels,  and  maintained  advanced 
guards  on  the  roads  opening  from  Flanders.  The 
French  army  was  for  three  days  manœuvring  close 
upon  his  advanced  posts  ;  it  had  commehced  hos- 
tilities  four  and  twenty  hours  ;  its  head  quarters 
had  been  twelve  hours  at  Charleroi,  and  yet  the 
English  General  was  at  Brussels,  ignorant  of  what 
was  passing,  and  ail  the  cantonments  of  his  army 
were  still  in  fuU  security,  extended  over  a  space 
of  more  than  tv>^enty  leagues. 

"  2dly, — The  Prince  of  Saxe-Weimar,  who  be- 
longed  to  the  Anglo-Dutch  army,  was  on  the 
lOth,  at  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  in  position 
before  Frasne,  and  knew  that  the  French  army 
was  at  Charleroi.  If  he  had  immediately  des- 
patched  an  aide-de-camp  to  Brussels,  he  would 
hâve  arrived  there  at  six  in  the  evening  ;  and  yet 
the  Duke  of  Wellington  was  not  informed,  that 
the  French  army  was  at  Charleroi  until  eleven  at 
night.  He  thus  lost  five  hours  in  a  crisis,  and 
against  a  man,  wliich  rendered  the  loss  of  a  single 
hour  highly  important. 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEOr.  808 

"  3dly, — The  infantry,  cavalry,  and  artillery  of 
that  army,  were  in  cantonments  so  remote  from 
each  other,  that  the  infantry  was  engaged  at 
Waterloo  without  cavalry  or  artillery,  which  ex- 
posed  it  to  considérable  loss,  since  it  was  oblig-ed 
to  form  in  close  columns  to  make  head  against 
the  charges  of  the  cuirassiers,  iinder  the  fire  of 
fifty  pièces  of  cannon.  Thèse  brave  men  were 
slaughtered  without  cavalry  to  protect,  or  artil- 
lery to  avenge  them.  As  the  three  branches  of 
an  army  cannot,  for  an  instant,  dispense  with 
each  other's  assistance,  they  should  be  always 
cantoned  and  placed  in  a  way  to  be  of  mutual  ser- 
vice to  each  other. 

"  4thly, — The  English  General,  although  sur- 
prized,  assigned  Quatre-Bras,  which  had  been, 
for  the  last  four  and  twenty  liours  in  possession  of 
the  French,  as  the  rallying  point  of  his  army. 
He  exposed  his  troops  to  partial  defeats  as  they 
gradually  arrived  ;  the  danger  which  they  incur- 
red,  was  still  more  considérable  since  they  pre- 
sented  themselves,  without  artillery  and  without 
cavalry  ;  he  delivered  up  his  infantry  to  his  enemy 
piece-meal,  and  destitute  of  the  assistance  of  the 
two  other  branches.  He  should  hâve  fixed  upon 
Waterloo  for  his  point  of  junction;  he  would 
thenhave  had  the  day  of  the  16th,  and  the  night 
between  the  IGth  and  17th,  aninterval  quite  suffi- 
cient,  to  coUect  the  whole  of  his  army,  infantry, 
cavalry,  and  artillery.      The  French  could   not 


304  MY    RESIDENCE    M'ITII  [Aug. 

have  arrived  until  the  17th,  and  would  hâve  found 
ail  his  troops  in  position. 

FJghth  Observation. — '*  Ist,  The  English  Ge- 
neral fought  the  battle  of  Waterloo  on  the  18th, 
that  measure  was  contrary  to  the  interests  of  his 
nation,  to  the  gênerai  system  of  war  adopted 
by  the  allies,  and  to  ail  the  rules  of  war.  It 
was  not  the  interest  of  England,  who  wants  so 
many  men  to  recruit  her  armies  of  India,  of  lier 
American  colonies,  and  her  vast  establishments, 
to  expose  herself,  wdth  a  gênerons  vivacity,  to  a 
sanguinary  contest  in  which  she  might  lose  the 
only  army  she  had,  and  expend,  at  the  very  least, 
her  purest  blood.  The  plan  of  the  allies  con- 
sisted  in  operating  in  a  mass  and  in  avoiding  ail 
partial  actions.  Nothing  was  more  contrary  to 
their  interests  and  their  plan,  than  to  expose  the 
success  of  their  cause  in  a  doubtful  battle  with 
a  nearly  equal  force,  in  which  ail  the  probabili- 
ties  were  against  them.  If  the  Anglo-Dutch 
army  had  been  destroyed  at  Waterloo,  of  v/hat 
nse  to  the  allies  would  have  been  the  great  num- 
ber  of  armies,  that  were  preparing  to  cross  the 
Rhine,  the  Alps,  and  the  Pyrénées, 

*'  2dly, — The  English  General  in  accepting  the 
battle  of  Waterloo,  placed  his  reliance  on  the 
co-operation  of  the  Prussians,  but  that  co-oper- 
ation  could  not  be  carried  into  effect  until  the 
afternoon  ;  he  therefore  continued  exposed  alone 
from  four  o'clock  in  the  morning  until  five  in  the 


1S16.]  THE    EMPEROil    NAPOLEON.  S05 

afternoon,  that  is  to  say,  for  thirteen  hours  ;  no 
battle  lasts  generally  more  than  six  hours  ;  that 
co-operation  was  therefore  an  illusion. 

**  But,  if  lie  relied  upon  the  co-operation  of  the 
Prussians,  he  must  hâve  supposed,  that  the  wliole  of 
the  French  army  was  opposed  to  him,  and  he  must 
consequently  hâve  undertaken  to  défend  his  field 
of  battle,  during  thirteen  hours,  with  90,000  men 
of  différent  nations,  against  an  army  of  104,000 
French.  That  calculation  was  evidently  false  ;  he 
could  not  hâve  maintained  himself  three  hours  ;  the 
battle  would  hâve  been  decided  by  eight  o'clock 
in  the  morning,  and  the  Prussians  would  hâve 
arrived  only  to  be  taken  in  flank.  Both  armies 
would  hâve  been  destroyed  in  one  battle.  If  he 
calculated,  that  a  part  of  the  French  army  had, 
conformably  to  the  rules  of  war,  pursued  the 
Prussian  army,  he  ought,  in  that  case,  to  be  con- 
vinced  that  he  could  receive  no  assistance  from  it, 
and  that  the  Prussians,  beaten  at  Lintz,  with  the 
loss  of  from  25,  to  30,000  men  on  the  field  of 
battle,  and  20,000  scattered  and  dispersed  over 
the  country,  and  pursued  by  from  35,  to  40,000 
victorious  French,  would  not  hâve  risked  any 
fresh  opération,  and  would  hâve  considered  them- 
selves  scarcely  sufïicient  to  maintain  a  défensive 
position.  In  that  case,  the  Anglo-Dutch  army 
alone  would  hâve  to  sustain  the  shock  of  69,000 
French  during  the  whole  of  the  18th,  and  there 
is  no  Englishman  who  will  not  agrée,  that  the 

Vol.  III.  Part  V,  x 


306  MY    RESIDENCE    WITH  [Aug. 

resiilt  of  that  struggle  could  not  be  doubtful, 
and  that  their  army  was  not  constituted  so  as  to 
be  capable  of  sustaining  the  attack  of  the  im- 
périal army  for  four  hours. 

*'  During  the  whole  of  the  night  bètweèn  thê 
17th  and  18th,  the  weather  was  horrible,  and 
the  roads  were  impassable  until  nine  o'clock  in 
the  morning.  This  loss  of  six  hours  from  the 
break  of  day  was  entirely  in  the  enemy's  favour  ; 
but  could  the  English  General  stake  the  fate 
of  such  a  struggle  upon  the  weather  which 
happened  in  the  night  between  the  I7th  and 
18th?  Marshal  Grouchy,  with  34,000  men,  and 
180  pièces  of  cannon  found  the  secret,  which 
one  would  suppose,  was  not  to  be  found,  of  not 
being  in  the  engagement  of  the  18th,  either  on 
the  iield  of  battle  of  Mont  Saint  Jean  or  on 
Wavres.  But  had  that  Marshal  pledged  himself 
to  the  English  General  to  be  led  astray  in  so 
strange  a  manner?  The  conduct  of  Marshal 
Grouchy  was  as  unexpected,  as  that  his  army 
should,  on  its  march,  be  swallowed  up  by  an 
earthquake.  Let  us  recapitulate.  If  Marshal 
Grouchy  had  been  on  the  field  of  battle  of  Mont 
Saint  Jean,  as  he  was  supposed  to  be  by  the 
English  General  and  the  Prussian  General,  during 
the  whole  night  between  the  17th  and  18th,  and 
ail  the  morning  of  the  18th,  and  the  weather  had 
allowed  the  French  army  to  be  drawn  up  in  order 
of  battle  at  four  o'clock  in  the  morning,   the 


1816.J  THE    EMPEROR    NAPOLEOX.  SOf 

Anglo-Diitch  army  would  hâve  been  dispersed  and 
eut  to  pièces  before  seven;  its  ruin  would  hâve 
been  complète  ;  and  if  the  weather  had  not  al- 
lowed  the  French  army  to  range  itself  in  order 
of  battle  imtil  ten,  the  fate  of  the  Anglo-Dutch 
army  w^oiild  hâve  been  decided  before  one  o'clock 
at  noon  ;  the  remains  of  it  would  hâve  been 
driven  either  beyond  the  forest  or  in  the  direction 
of  Hal,  and  there  would  hâve  been  quite  time 
enough  in  the  afternoon  to  go  and  meet  Marshal 
Blucher,  and  treat  him  in  a  similar  manner. 
If  Marshal  Grouchy  had  encamped  in  front  of 
Wavres  in  the  night  between  the  17th  and  ISth, 
no  detachment  could  hâve  been  sent  by  the  Prus- 
sians  to  save  the  English  army,  which  must  hâve 
been  completely  beaten  by  the  69,000  French 
opposed  to  it. 

'*  3dly. — The  position  of  Mont  Saint  Jean  was 
ill  chosen.  The  first  requisite  of  a  field  of  battle 
is  to  be  without  défiles  in  its  rear.  The  English 
General  derived  no  advantage,  during  the  battle, 
from  his  numeroas  cavalry;  he  did  not  think, 
that  he  ought  to  be  and  would  be  attacked  on 
the  left;  he  believed  that  the  attack  would  be 
made  on  his  right.  Notwithstanding  the  diver- 
sion operated  in  his  favour  by  General  Bulow's 
30,000  Prussians,  he  would  hâve  twice  effected 
his  retreat,  during  the  battle,  had  that  measure 
been  possible.  Thus,  in  reality,  how  strange  and 
capricious  are  human  events  !    the  bad  choice  of 

x2 


308  MY    RESIDENCE    WITH  [Aug. 

his  field  of  battle,  which  prevented  ail  possibility 
of  retreat,  was  the  cause  of  his  success  !  !  ! 

Nintli  Ohscrvatiofi. — "  It  inay  be  asked,  what 
tlien  should  hâve  been  the  conduct  of  the  English 
General  after  the  battle  of  Ligny,  and  the  en- 
gagement of  Quatre  Bras?  On  this  point,  pos- 
terity  will  not  entertain  two  opinions  ;  he  ought, 
in  the  night  between  the  17th  and  18th,  to  hâve 
crossed  the  forest  of  Soignes,  by  the  road  of 
Charleroi  ;  the  Prussian  army  ought  also  to  hâve 
crossed  it  by  the  road  of  Wavres;  the  armies 
would  hâve  eifected  a  junction  by  break  of  day 
in  Brussels  ;  left  their  rear  guards  for  the  defence 
of  the  forest,  gained  some  days  in  order  to  give 
time  to  the  Prussians,  dispersed  after  the  battle 
of  Ligny,  tojoin  their  army;  reinforced  themselves 
with  fourteen  English  régiments,  which  were  in 
garrison  in  the  fortresses  of  Belgium,  or  had  been 
just  landed  at  Ostend  on  their  return  from  Ame- 
rica, and  let  the  Emperor  of  the  French  manœuvre 
as  he  pleased. 

*'  Would  he,  with  an  army  of  100,000  men  hâve 
traversed  the  forest  of  Soignes  to  attack  in  an 
open  country  the  two  united  armies,  consisting  of 
more  than  200,000  men,  and  in  position  ?  It  would 
hâve  certainly  been  the  most  advantageous  thing 
that  could  hâve  happened  to  the  allies.  Would 
he  hâve  been  contented  with  taking  up  a  position 
himself  ?  He  could  not  hâve  long  remained  in  an 
inactive  state,  since  300,000  Russians,  Austrians, 


1816.]  THE    EMPEROll    NAPOLEON.  30?. 

Bavarians,  &c.  were  on  their  mardi  to  theRhine 
they  would  hâve  been  in  a  few  weeks  on  the 
Marne,  which  would  hâve  compelled  him  to 
hasten  to  the  assistance  of  his  capital.  It  was 
then,  that  the  Anglo-Prussian  army  oiight  to 
niarch  and  effect  its  junction  with  the  allies, 
under  the  walls  of  Paris.  It  would  hâve  exposed 
itself  to  no  risk,  suffered  no  loss,  and  hâve  acted 
conformably  to  the  interests  of  the  English  na- 
tion, and  the  gênerai  plan  of  carrying  on  the  war 
adopted  by  the  allies,  and  sanctioned  by  the  rules 
of  the  military  art.  From  the  15th  to  the  18th 
the  Duke  of  Wellington  invariably  manœuvred, 
as  his  enemy  wished  ;  he  executed  nothing  which 
the  latter  apprehended  he  would,  The  English 
infantry  was  firm  and  solid  ;  the  cavalry  might 
hâve  conducted  itself  better;  the  Anglo-Dutch 
army  was  twice  saved,  in  the  course  of  the  day, 
by  the  Prussians,  the  first  time  before  tliree 
o'clock,  by  the  arrivai  of  General  Bulow  with 
30,000  men,  and  the  second  time  by  the  arrivai 
of  Marshal  Blucher  with  31,000  men.  In  that 
battle,  69,000  French  beat  120,000  men;  the 
victory  was  wrested  from  them,  between  eight 
and  nine,  by  150,000  men. 

**  Let  the  feelings  of  the  people  of  London  be 
imagined,  had  they  been  doomed  to  hear  of  the 
destruction  of  their  army,  and  the  prodigal  waste 
of  their  purest  blood,  in  support  of  the  cause  of 


510         RESIDENCE   WITH   NAPOtEOX,        [Aug.  1810, 

kings  against  that  of  the  people,  of  privilèges 
against  equality,  of  the  oligarchs  against  the 
libérais,  and  of  the  principles  of  the  holy  alliance 
against  those  of  the  sovereignty  of  the  people  !  !  !  " 


INDEX 


THE    FIFTH    PART. 


AuGUST.  Account  of  the  disturbances  of  the  tenth  of  August, 
related  by  the  Emperor,  who  had  witnessed  them,  144. 

B.  .  .  .   {Madame  de.)   Tlie  Emperor  iniagined  her  to  be  ma- 

-  lignant  :  he  is  completely  undeceived,  7^- — Anecdote  relating 
to  the  First  Consul,  74. 

Barral,  {De,  Archbishop  of  Tours.)  The  Emperor  described 
him  as  a  man  of  extensive  information,  89. — Is  addressed  by 
the  Emperor  at  one  of  his  Sunday  audiences,  on  the  transac- 
tions with  the  Pope,  216. 

BEALMARcnAis.  Napolcon  ahvavs  kent  him  at  a  distance, 
on  account  of  his  character,  notwithstanding  his  brilliant 
talents,  2. 

Beausset,  {De,  Bishop  of  Arles.)  The  Emperor's  opinion  of,  90. 

Bern'adottk.  Elected  in  Sweden,  on  account  of  his  wife,  sister 
to  Kmg  Joseph's  consort,  171- — One  of  the  main  causes  of 
our  misfortunes,  by  giving  the   enemy  the  key  to   our  policy 

and  to  the  tactics   of  our  armies,  &c. On    returning 

amongst  us,  perceived  that  public  opinion  was  justly  unfavor- 
able  to  him,  172. — Letter  addressed  to  him  by  Napoléon,  on 
the  continental  System,  175. 

Brrthier,  {Prince  of  Nenfchatel.)  His  private  life.     Napoléon 

pressed  him  to  marry  ;  Madame  V induced  him  to  marry 

a  princess  of  Bavaria,  21. — Berthier's  despair,  22. 

BoisoELiN,  {Cardinal.)  The  Emperor  described  him  as  a  man 
of  talent  and  probity,  89. 

Calonxe,  {M.  de.)  Ône  of  the  causes  of  the  émigration,  96. — 
The  financial  oracle  of  the  emigrants,  Q9. 

Campaigns  of  Iïaly  and  Egypt.  According  to  the  Emperor, 
the  chaptersrelatingthereto  would  be  highly  agreeable  to  the 
French  and  Italians,  165. — They  would  immortalize  thenames 
of  his  companions  in  glory,  166". 

Catherine  II,  {E/npress  of  Russia.)  Described  by  the  Em- 
peror as  a  commanding  woman,  worthy  of  a  beard,  184. 

Cazales,  {M.  de.)     His  arrivai  at  Coblentz,  109. — Judicious  ob 
servations  on  the  passage  of  the  Prussians  through  Coblentz, 

lis. 


312  INDEX. 

CnERROURG.     Account  of  the  works  at  that  port,  2, 

Clkkgy.  The  Emperor  was  satislied  with  the  old  clergy,  69. — 
None  of  the  ancient  bishops  betrayed  his  confidence. — Had 
to  compUiin  onl}'  of  those  whom  he  had  himself  appointed,  90. 

CoNVENTs.  Xuns  and  INIonks. — Tlie  taking  of  the  veil,  a  cere- 
mony  formerly  niuch  attended  by  youni;  ofhcers,  &c.  87. — 
The  Emperor  unfavorable  to  convents. — Admitted,  neverthe- 
less,  that  an  empire  like  France  miglit  and  ought  to  hâve  a 
few  l)Ospitals  for  hinatics  called  trappistes,  88. — Called  the 
nionks  of  mount  Cenis  cxtreniely  iiseful,  and  even  heroic. — 
Thought  that  monks  woiiUl  be  by  far  the  best  teachers  of 
youth,  if  they  could  be  withdrawn  froni  a  foreign  jurisdicMon, 
and  attached  to  the  government,  89. 

Diderot's  Père  de  Famille.     The  Emperor's  remarks  on,  93. 

Du  Belloy,  (Cardinal)     The  Emperor's  opinion  of,  90. 

Egvpt.  Remark  by  the  Emperor  on  St.  Jean  d'Acre,  59. — 
\'olney's  errors. — A  handful  of  Frenchmen  had  proved  sutTi- 
cient  to  conquer  that  fine  country,  60. — The  English  trembled 
on  seeing  us  in  possession  of  Egypt  ;  it  was  the  true  way  to 
deprive  them  of  India. — If  forty  or  tifty  thousand  European 
families  shouhl  ever  establish  their  industry,  laws,  and  adnu- 
nistration  in  Egvpt.  India  would  thenccforth  be  h)st  to  the 
Enghsh,  aiorc  by  the  force  of  circimistanecs  than  by  that  of 
arins,  61. 

E.MiGKATiox.  The  Emperor  retiuests  an  historical  sketch  of  that 
of  Coblentz. — Its  origin,  95. — Assemblages  at  Worms  and 
Coblentz,  9<j. — One  called  the  camp,  the  other  the  toiiUy  and 
tlie  court,  98. — From  twcnly  to  twenty-tive  thousand  emi- 
grants  in  armsare  parcelled  out  into  three  corps  ;  si.-v.  thousand 
under  the  Prince  de  Condé  against  Alsace;  four  thousand  under 
the  Duke  de  Bourbon,  in  Flanders  ;  and  iVom  twelve  to  fifteen 
thousand,  under  the  king's  bruthers,  against  Champagne,  119. 
— Plans  for  tlie  commencement  of  the  campaign,  120. — The 
emigrants  sent  to  the  rear  of  the  Prussian  army. — Set  to  be- 
siege  Tliionville. — Curious  particulars^  125. — Pleasantries, 
anecdotes,  8cc.  127- 

E.vGMSH.  Their  attentions  to  the  emigrants,  255. — Enraged  at 
the  Berlin  and  ■Milan  decrees.  Xot  accustomed  to  such  energy. 
285. — Napoléon  decUued  the  English  might  now  be  pre-emi- 
nent,  if  they  would  confine  themselves  to  their  ships,  280". 

Eriyi  ETTE.  That  of  St.  Helena.  30 — At  the  Tuileries  the  Em- 
j)er()r  said  lie  was  the  first  that  liad  soparated  the  service  of 
hoixiur  from  that  of  ncccssity. — "  A  king,"  he  said,  "  doesnot 
cxist  in  nature,  but  only  in  civilisation  ;  there  are  no  naked 
kings  ;    tliere  can  be  none  but  dressed  ones,"  81. 

FAUiufLKG,  St.  (teu.main'.  The  Emperor  said  he  had  arranged 
matters  ill  with  this  Faubourg:  he  had  donc  either  too  n)uch 
or  too  iittle,  24. — Anecdotes^  2.J5. 


INDEX.  313 

Fontainebleau,  (Palace  of.)  The  Emperor's  opinion,  who 
thought  highly  of  it,  156. 

G.-LL.     His  System  exposed  by  Napoléon,  68. 

Grassini,  [Tlte  bemttiful  Madame.)     Anecdote,  20. 

GuARD,  National,  of  Paris.  Constantly  cvinced  the  virtues'of 
its  station  ;  the  love  of  order,  dévotion  to  authority,  the  fear 
of  pillage,  and  the  luitred  of  amirchy,  144. 

Glstavcs  III.  {Kitig  of  Siveden.)  Was  to  hâve  been  the  ge- 
neralissimo  of  ihe  troops  intended  to  supi)ort  the  emigrants. — 
Declared  his  désire  of  fighting  in  person. — His  expressions  on 
taking  leave  of  tlie  Princess  de  Laniballe,  113. — Lived  as  a 
private  individualat  Aix-la-Chapelle,  under  the  nanie  of  Count 
Haga,  166. 

Gustavls  IV'.  {King  of  Stceden.)  The  Emperor  said  he  had  at 
the  commencement  of  his  career,  given  himself  out  fora  hero, 
but  had  ended  it  like  a  madman. — Had  insulted  Catherine  the 
Great  when  a  youth,  and  the  Eni|>eror  Alexander  at  a  subsé- 
quent period,  167. — Beclared  himself  the  great  antagonist  of 
the  En)peror. — Dethroned  by  his  subjects,  168. — After  the 
battle  of  Leipsic,  oft'ered  his  services  to  Naiioleon  as  an  aide- 
de-camp,  and  requested  an  asyluni  in  France,  169. 

Illyria.  It  never  was  Napoleon's  intention  to  keep  it. — It  was, 
when  in  our  hands,  a  vanguard  in  the  heart  of  Austria  ;  a  sen- 
tinel  at  the  gales  of  \  ienna,  to  force  its  cabinel  toact  honestly. 
The  Emperor  only  took  it  as  a  pledge,  and  had  several  plans 
respecting  itj  he  tliought  of  restoring  it  in  exchange  for  Gal- 
licia,  30. 

JosKPniNE,  (The  Empress.)  Witnessed  the  commencement  of 
the  campaign  against  VVurmser. — Wept  inuch  on  leaving  lier 
husband,  who  einbiaced  lier,  saying,  as  if  by  inspiration, 
"  Wurniser  shall  pay  dearly  for  those  tears." — Obliged  to  pass 
near  Mantua,  and  iired  on  from  the  walls. — Received  at  Lucca 
by  the  senate,  and  treated  like  a  great  princess,  182. 

JouBERT,  (General.)  Had  a  profound  vénération  for  Napoléon. 
Took  him  for  his  niodel. — His  death. — His  portrait  by  Napo- 
léon, 2.59. 

La  Harpe.  The  Emperor  considered  his  Mclunieill  conceived  : 
vicions  institutions  are  not  to  be  attacked  with  -\  icious  wea« 
pons,  86. 

Las  Casf.s,  (Count.)  His  mission  concerning  the  dépôts  of 
mendicity,  39. — Prosperity  of  France,  41. — Depuis  of  mendi- 
city,  43. — Hospitals,  4.5. — Pri.sons,  47 — Historical  sketcli  of 
Col)lentz,  9.5. — Found  liimself  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  in 
the  custody  of  an  iniiabitant  of  Coblentz,  117. 

Lavaticr.     Tiie  falsehood  of  his  system,  69. 

Louis  XVI.  According  to  Napoléon  the  most  exemplary  of 
private  individuals,  but  a  very  poor  king,  92. 

Lowe,  (Sif  IIudaoH,  Govemor  of  ♦V.'.  lleltm.)     The  Empçror 


914  INDEX. 

tells  him,  he  thinks  him  capable  of  any  thingj  thfit  he  îs  a 
greater  affliction  to  the  ca|)tives  than  ail  the  miseries  of  their 
barren  rock,  18. — Withholds  a  book  sent  to  the  Emperor  by 
an  English  Member  of  Parliameni,  because  it  was  addressed, 
in  gold  letters,  to  Napoléon  the  Great,  83. — Had  never  com- 
manded  any  but  foreign  deserters,  the  dregs  and  scum  of 
Europe,  2'20. — Very  harshly  treated  by  the  Emperor  on  his 
last  visit,  '111. 

M.'VRiE  Antoinktte.  Napolcon  says  she  would  hâve  been  at 
any  time  the  ornament  of  private  society  ;  but  her  levity,  in- 
consistency,  and  limited  eapacity,  had  contributed,  not  a  little, 
to  accelerate  the  catastrophe  of  the  monarchy,  9'i. — Anecdote^ 
93, 

Mec.rigny,  (Madame  de.)  Teazed  by  the  Emperor  at  a 
masked  bail,  146". 

Mksmer.     His  System  exposed,  6*. 

Mexdicity.  Remarks  ou  dépôts,  43. — Much  less  common  in 
poor  and  barren  provinces  than  in  rich  abundant  countries. — 
The  Emperor's  observations,  4  4. — Benevolent  establish- 
ments, 45. 

IMoLiERE.     ïhe  Emperor's  opinion  of  the  Tartufe,  119. 

Moscow.  His  expressions  on  the  burning  of  Moscow,  161. — 
Said  the  fictions  on  the  burning  of  Troy  were  far  from  coming 
up  to  the  reality  of  that  of  Moscow,  263. — Description  of 
Moscow,  and  the  conflagration,  1GS. 

Napoléon, — His  ideas  respecting  Cherbourg,  8. — Scheme  of  a 
maritime  war. — Thought  to  end  it  by  a  battle  of  Actium,  10. 
— Felt  no  répugnance  towards  the  Commissioners  of  the  Allies 
at  St.  Helena  ;  not  even  toward  the  French  Commissioner  j 
he  was  French,  an  indestnictible  claim,  in  his  sight,  19. — On 
his  début  in  Italy,  excited  an  universal  enthusiasm  and  ambi- 
tion.— His  fortune  lay  in   his  prudence. — Madame  Grassini, 

20. — Madame  V ,  21. — Said  he  had  arranged  matters  ill 

with  the  Faubourg  St.  Germain  :  that  he  had  donc  too  much 
or  too  little,  24. — Collected  ancient  names  about  him  ;  those 
which  figured  in  French  history,  as  a  meansof  speedily  giving 
the  sanction  of  antiquity  to  modem  institutions. — His  first 
idea  had  been  to  marry  a  French  woman,  which  his  ministers 
prevented,  by  urging  motives  of  policy,  16. — Reasons  for  his 
resumption  of  monarchial  forms,  crosses,  ribbons,  &c.  28. — 
Etiquette  at  Longwood,  29. — Convinced  that  the  extirpation 
of  mendicity  was  possible,  32. — His  intentions  respecting 
Illyria,  36. — Fatalities  accumulated  against  him  towards  the 
end  of  his  career,  37- — His  own  observations  on  his  law  of 
the  State  prisons,  54. — Fositiveiy  asserted  that  the  French 
were  in  his  time  the  freest  nation  in  ail  Europe. — AU  the  na- 
tions separated  from  the  em])ire  regret  the  loss  of  the  la\rs  by 
which  he  formerly  govcrned  them,  57. — In  his  expédition  to 


INDEX.  815 

Egypt,  if  lie  had  been  master  of  the  sea,  he  would  hâve  been 
niastcr  of  the  East,  59. — Had  gainerl  such  an  iufhieiice  over 
his  soldiers,  that  a  inere  order  of  tlie  day  would  hâve  sufliced 
to  induce  them  ail  to  turn  Mahonietans,  61. — The  désert  had 
ahvays  possessed  charms  to  liim. — The  word  Napoléon  sig- 
TiiHes  Lion  of  the  Désert,  C'2. — Anecdote  of  a.  Chineac,  63. — 
Says  to  those  about  hini  that  on  returning  into  theworld,  they 
wcre  destined  to  become  brothcrs  for  his  sake,  64. — C)n 
dreams  and  prescntiinents  ;  Cagliostro,  Mesmer,  Gall,  Lava- 
ter,  &c.  66. — Accumuiated  vexations,  70 — Conversation  with 
Admirai  Malcolm.  Ought  not  sovcreigns  to  possess  hearts  ? 
In  defendinç  his  title  of  Eniperor,  he  was  defending  the 
honour  of  other  sovereigns,  /S. — His  court  the  most  magnifi- 
cent  ever  seen,  SO. — Expenscs  of  his  hunt  ;  table;  stable  de- 
partnient  ;  pages,  81. — Convents  ;  nuns  :  trappists  ;  monks, 
86. — Said  he  had  never  done  any  thing  for  the  clergy  but 
they  had  given  him  cause  to  rcpent  if,  S9. — Had  met  with 
reason  fo  cou)plain  of  the  bi^hop,?  he  had  hitn'îelf  appointed, 
only  ;  and  not  of  tlie  ancient  bi^hops,  OO — Thought  that  aftcr 
his  tiuie,  conscriptions  of  prie^ts  aiid  nuns  would  perhaps  be 
seen  in  France  instead  of  those  of  soldiers  ;  and  the  barracks 
would  be  turned  into  convents  and  seminarics,  91. — Histori- 
cal  sketch  of  the  émigration,  9.5. — Things  were  ascribed  to 
niere  préjudices,  personal  inclinations,  and  littleness  in  the 
Emperor,  which  arose  in  reality  only  from  profound  views, 
grand  conceptions,  and  state  niaxims  of  the  most  elevated 
description,  134. — His  conversation  with  Count  S  .  .  . .  on  the 
émigrés,  135. — Sentimental  journey  to  Nuitz,  139. — Before 
the  oath  to  the  nation,  the  law,  and  tlie  king,  if  he  had  re- 
ceived  orders  to  turn  his  cannon  against  the  people,  lie  had  no 
doubt  but  that  he  should  hâve  obeyed  ;  but  when  he  had  once 
taken  the  national  oath,  he  would  hâve  regarded  the  people 
only,  14'2. — Au  eye  witness  of  the  teiith  of  August, — Particu- 
lars  thereof,  143. — ^"ery  fond  of  masked  balls. — Addressed  at 
one  every  year  by  the  same  niask,  who  reiiiinded  him  of 
former  iatimacies,  145. — Liked  to  get  himself  affronted  ihere. 
Anecdotes,  14G. — Favours  conferred  by  him  on  several  private 
familles,  147- — ^^'hen  any  useful,  curious  or  interesting  idea 
occurred  to  him,  a  ciuestion  was  proposed  to  the  niembers  of 
the  mstitute,  who  adopted  or  rejected  it,  149. — Had  construct- 
ed  a  great  number  of  canals  ;  and  projected  many  more,  1.50, 
— Wished  to  bave  made  Paris  the  capital  of  Euro[)e,  1.5^  — 
Had  Heaven  permitted  him  to  reign  twenty  years  longer,  and 
allowed  him  a  little  leisurc,  he  would  bave  changed  the  face 
of  France. — A  world  might  be  created  by  means  of  budgets, 
153. — Often  refused  the  fêtes  which  the  city  of  Paris  wished 
to  give  him  ;  proved  that  this  useless  expenditure  would  sufRce 
to  erect  magnificeut  durable  monuments.     AU  his  power  was 


31G  KNDEX. 

requisite  to  enable  him  to  do  good.     Expended  as  much  as 
tliirty  millions  in  sewers  for  whicli  no  one  will  give  him  any 
crédit,  154. — At  the  foot  as  well  as  at  the  summit  of  the  Alps, 
on  the  sands  of  liolhind,  and  on  the  ijanks  of  the  Rhine,  Na- 
poléon appears  on  every  side. — Thought  of  draining  the  Pon- 
tine    marshes,    155. — intended  only    to    hâve    prepared   the 
ground  for  tlie  |)alace  of  the  king  of  Rome,  and  would  hâve 
proceeded   no   farther. — Anecdoie. — Had   found   it  extremely 
ditticult  to  make  his  systeni  of  budgets  understood,  158. — 
On  his  journies  to  Fontainebleau  from  iwelveto  fifteen  hundred 
posons  were  invited  and  acconmiodated  with  lodgings  and 
furniturej  above  three  thousand   people  dined  tliere,  159. — 
Regrettcd  that  he  had  not  had  the  historiés  of  ail  the  nations 
in  Europe,  from  the  time  of  Louis  XIV.,  drawn  up  from  the 
original   documents  in   the   foreign    office. — Once  wrote   to 
Selim,   161. — His  answer,  16'2. — Had  he  been  able,  when  in 
Egypt,  to  unité  the  Mamelukes  Avith  his  French  troops,  he 
would  hâve  looked  upon  himself  as  master  of  the  world,  16*2. 
— The  Regency  one  of  the  most  hideous  periods  of  our  an- 
nals,  163. — (îustavus  IV .  offcrs   himself  to  Naj)oleon   as   his 
aide-de-camp,  169. — The  Swedes  request  him  to  give  them  a 
king,   170. — Had    over-rated    the   imjiortance    of    having    a 
Frenchnian  on  the  thrnne  of  Sweden,  IJl. — Fclt   an  inslinc- 
ti\e  presentimcnt  nhich  reiulere<l  Bernadotte's   tlecti(m  dis- 
jigTeeablc  to  him,  IJ'l- — Had  found  a  due  to  the  characler  of 
the  Emperor  Paul,  1/4. — Letter  to  Bcrnadotte  on  his  conti- 
nental  System,    l/o- — His  patrimonial  vinej   disposed  of  it 
in  favour  of  his  nurse,  179. — Gave  his  patrimonial   house  to 
the   Romalino  familv,  ISO. — His  nurse  3   slie  came  to  Paris  ; 
charmed  the  whole  family,  and  had  a  long  interview  with  the 
Pope,  181. — The   soldiers  of  a  palace  terrible  and  dangerous. 
During  tlie  consulate,  Paul  l'recjuently  wrote  to  him,  184. — 
Often    repeated   tbat  he  had  i;ever  felt  either  his   head  or 
stonuich,  185. — Fatalities  of  the  campaign  of  Russia,  188. — 
Addressed  by  Madame  de  Staël.  The  tirst  womanin  the  world 
is  she  who  bas  had  the  most  children,  192. — On  religion,  199. 
— Had  met  with  great  résistance  in   his  endeavours  to  restore 
the   Catholic  worsbip  ;   would  bave   been  more  willingly  fol- 
lowed  if  he  had  raised  the  protestant  banner,  201. — Francis  I. 
well  situated  for  a(io[)ting  Prote.-^tantism,  203. — Remarks  on 
tlie  Pope,  207. — Drew  the  famous  Concordat  of  Fontainebleau 
from  him,merely  Ijy  the  force  of  bis  conversation,  210. — Tries 
to  persuade  the  Pope  by  arguments,  but    in  vain,  212. — His 
intentions  with  regard  to  religion  and  the  Pope,  in  case  he  had 
returned   a  ictorious   from    Moscow  ;   would    bave  re-instated 
tlie  Pope,  surrounded  him  \\ith  honours  and   splendour,  and 
made  Paris   the  cajiital  of  the  Christian    world,  214. — Tiie 
légal  directions  of  ecclesiastical  alfairs  had  always  been  the 


INDEX.  317 

objeot  of  his  méditation  and  wishes,  216. — Warm  convers- 
ation vith  theGovernor,  ^219. — Said  thutshould  he  be  hungry, 
he  would  go  aiid  take  his  seat  at  the  table  of  the  l)rave  53d., 
221. — Napoléon  will  remain  the  subject  ot"  histoiy  and  the 
star  of  eivilized  nations,  222. — Said  tbat  the  mo.«>t  infamous 
libels  never  hurt  him,  but  when  there  was  any  thing  ap- 
proaching  to  truth  he  instantly  felt  the  désire  to  défend  him- 
self,  225. — His  protest  against  the  treaty  of  the  second  of 
August. — Had  purposely  omitted  to  mention  the  treaty  of 
Fontainebleau. — Said  he  disclaimed  that  treaty,  and  why. — 
Called  himself  a  pièce  of  rock  launched  into  spnce,  226  — 

On  gênerai  S n's  work,  228. — Opinion    of  the  Tartufe, 

229. — Did  not  remember  having  once  taken  medicine  at 
the  Tuileries. — Had  no  faith  in  medicine. — Not  so  with  re- 
spect to  surgery. — Had  thrice  commenced  courses  of  anatomy, 
but  business  and  disgust  had  interrupted  them,  234. — Officiai 
answer  to  the  Governor  concerning  the  Commissioners  of  the 
Allies,  and  the  embarrassments  of  his  budget,  241. — On  the 
burning  of  Moscow,  262. — What  he  would  bave  done  if 
Moscow  had  not  been  burnt,  263. — A  peace  made  in  Moscow 
would  bave  completed  and  terminated  his  warlike  opérations. 
He  would  then  hâve  had  his  congress  and  his  holt/  alliance. 
Would  hâve  become  the  natural  mediator  between  the  old 
and  new  orders  of  things,  264. — Would  bave  placed  his  glory 
in  his  equity. — Would  hâve  desiredan  European  code,  a  court 
of  cassation  for  ail  Euroj)e,  the  sanie  money,  the  same  weights 
and  measures,  the  same  laws. — Europe  would  thus  hâve  be- 
come but  one  peuple,  265. —  His  dictatorship  would  hâve  ter- 
minated, and  the  constitutional  reign  of  his  son  would  bave 
commenced. — Would  bave  associated  him  with  himself  in  the 
empire. — Paris  would  bave  been  the  capital  of  the  world,  and 
the  French  the  envy  of  ail  nations. — His  leisure  would  bave 
been  spent  in  visiting  every  corner  of  the  empire,  with  the 
empress,  and  by  easy  journies,  like  a  true  country  couple, 
scattering  benefits  and  creating  monuments  in  every  direction, 
267. — His  maritime  quarrel  with  England,  284. — Had  forced 
the  Americans  to  fight  the  English,  by  Connecting  their  in- 
terest  with  their  rights,  285. — Observations  on  the  battle  of 
Waterloo,  286. 

Navy.  Napoleon's  ideas  and  intentions  with  respect  to  the 
ports  of  France,  and  to  the  Navy  in  gênerai,  12. 

Paris.  The  Emperor  wished  to  bave  made  it  the  true  capital 
of  Europe  ;  something  fabulons,  colossal,  unknown  before 
our  times,  152. 

Paul  I.  (Emperor  of  Russia.)  His  fury  occasioned  by  the  dis- 
honorable conduct  of  the  English  ministry. — His  indignation 
ou  the  déniai  of  the  English  that  tliey  had  proraised  him 


318  INDEX. 

Malta. — Thrust  his  sword  through  the  despatches  of  the  Eng- 
lish  ministry. — The  English  refusing  to  include  in  their  ex- 
change, the  llussian  prisoners  taken  in  Hollaïul,  in  their  ser- 
vice, Napoléon  takes  advantage  of  the  circunistanca,  new 
clothes  theni,  and  sends  theiii  back  to  Paul,  who  iVom  that 
moment  is  entirely  devoted  to  him,  174. — It  has  been 
thouglit,  observed  the  Empcror,  that  this  attachaient  was 
fatal  to  him,  1/5. — Often  wrote  to  tlie  First  Consul,  184. 

Plus  \TI.  Wasdesirous  of  oi)taining  from  Napoléon,  as  a  re- 
compense for  his  coraing  to  France  and  crowning  him,  his 
signature  to  the  déclaration  by  whicli  Louis  XIV.  (iisajjproved 
of  the  famous  articles  of  l(>b2,  the  foundation  of  the  iil>erties 
of  the  Gallican  church,  207. — It  was  by  the  mère  power  of 
his  private  conversation  tliat  Napoléon  drew  from  him  the 
celebrated  Concordat  of  FontaipiCblean. — The  Em])eror  con- 
sidered  him  a  lamb,  a  really  worthy  man,  ^\hom  he  greatly 
loved  and  esteemed,  210. — ilis  change  of  proceedings,  21Si. 
— Causes  of  his  last  journey  to  France,  213. 

PiEDMoxTESK.  Thc  Empcror  said  he  had  a  particular  affection 
for  that  province. — That  the  Piedmontese  did  not  like  to  be 
a  small  state,  148. 

Frisons.  Comforts  of  those  of  England. — Différence  of  ours 
which  are  dreadful  abodes. — Persons  merely  suspected  placed 
there  amongst  the  greatest  criminals,  47. — State  prisoners, 
54. — Napoleon's  observations  on  his  law  of  the  state  prisons, 
55. — At  the  tinie  of  his  fall  they  containcd  only  two  hundred 
and  fifty  individuals.  He  found  nine  thousand  state  prisoners, 
w  hen  he  became  Consul,  5G. 

PiYSKGUR.  Attacked  by  the  Emperor  at  one  of  his  public  au- 
diences ;  réfutation  of  magnetism  and  somnambulism,  67. 

RoQCEL.WRE,  (Jrchùishop.)     The  Emperor's  opinion  of,  ÎX). 

Ru8SiA.  Napoléon  askh  whether  Peter  the  Great  acted  wisely 
in  founding  a  capital  at  Petersburg.  Arguments  on  the  sub- 
ject,  261. 

Santinï,  {Csher  nf  the  Emperor  s  chambei.)  Wanted  to  kill  the 
Governor,  and  liimself  afterwards. — The  Emperor  could  not, 
he  said,  divert  him  from  his  resolution  without  employing  his 
whole  authority,  impérial  and  pontifical,  84. 

S N,    {(Jencrul.)     Tiie   Emjieror's   remarks    on  his  work. — 

Ile  had  deserted  from  the  camp  at  Boulogne,  carrying  ail 
Napoleon's  .secrets  to  the  English  — On  Napoleon's  returning 
to  the  isle  of  Elba,  wrote  to  the  Emperor  with  a  tender  of  his 
services  ;   but  was  arrested  and  ought  to  hâve  been  shot,  228. 

S.. . .,  (C'oun^)  Conversation  with  the  Emperor,  13.5. — Proof 
he  eives  of  the  great  and  excellent  qualities  and  heart  of  Nu- 
{W)leon,  137. — Anecdote  of  a  crowd  of  kings,  138. 

Semm  III,  {Emperor  of  the  Turks.)  The  Emperor  once  wrote 
to  him,  lOT. — His  ansuer,  1G2. 


INDEX.  319 

SouLTj  {Marshal)  Described  by  the  Einperor  as  an  excellent 
director,  a  good  war-niinister,  li'28. 

SïAKL,  {Madame  de.)  Has  described  herself  too  faitlifully  in 
her  Corinna. — The  Einperor  displeased  with  lier  for  liaving 
decried  the  French  in  her  romance,  190. — Ardent  in  her  pas- 
sions— Letter  read  by  the  police,  191. — lianislied. — Foiiglit 
\vith  one  hand  and  solicited  with  the  other — The  First  Consul 
causes  her  to  be  inforiiied,  that  he  leaves  her  the  whole  uiii- 
verse  to  carrv  on  her  opérations  in,  with  the  exception  of 
Paris,  which  he  reserves  to  hiniself,  and  l'orbids  her  to  approach. 
— \\'ished,  during  the  impérial  reign^  to  be  a  lady  of  the 
bedchambcr,  194. 

S. . . .,  (Baroness.)  A  Frenchwoman,  wife  to  the  Austrian  Com- 
missioner  at  St.  Helena,  2iiO. 

Tat.lkyram),  (Prince.)  Urgently  pressed  the  Emperor  to  make 
peace  aftcr  his  return  frotn  Leipsic. — Blamed  Napoleon's 
speech  to  the  senate. — Approved  that  to  the  législative  body. 
— Constantly  repeated  to  Napoléon  that  he  deceived  hiniself 
with  regard  to  the  energy  of  the  nation  ;  that  it  would  not 
second  his  efforts,  but  désert  him,  189. — Tenth  of  August, 
account  of  the  disturbances  of  that  day,  by  the  Emperor, 
ivho  liad  witnessed  them,  144. 

Vkrsailles.  The  Emperor  says  it  was  an  error  of  Louis  XIV. 
to  undertake  the  érection  of  Versailles,  155. — Napoléon  blam- 
ed himself  for  the  sums  he  had  lavished  on  that  palace,  157. 
— In  his  gigantic  ideas  with  respect  to  Paris,  thonght  to  make 
some  use  of  it,  to  bring  it  in  as  a  kind  of  suburb  to  the  great 
capital. — Instead  of  the  nymphs  of  its  groves,  he  would  hâve 
substituted  panoramas  of  ail  the  capitals  which  had  been  en- 
tered  by  our  victorious  troops,  and  of  ail  the  celebrated  battles 
which  hâve  added  glory  to  the  French  amis,  160. 

Voisins,  (de,  hishop  of  Nantes.)  Had  rendered  the  Emperor 
a  true  Catholic,  through  the  prudence  of  his  reasoning,  his  ex- 
cellent morality,  and  his  enlightened  tolérance. — His  answer 
to  Marie  Louise,  who  consulted  him  with  respect  to  the  ne- 
cessily  of  fasting  on  Fridays,  and  on  a  jiublic  communion  at 
Easter,  204.' — Had  been  the  firniest  support  of  the  liherties 
of  the  Gallican  church. — "  He  was  my  oracle,  niy  light," 
said  the  Emperor  ;  "  he  possessed  my  implicit  confidence  in 
religions  matters,"  206'. 

Waterloo.  Observations  on  that  battle^  dictatcd  by  Napoléon, 
286\ 


END   OF   THE    FIFTH    PART. 


B.   BENSLEV,   BOLT    COURT,    FLEET    STREET, 


4^7 


'fi«fc^l««vi      'k^w.%^  •  •  IflrAI      ''    ^^    ««rw^ 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


DC  Las  Cases,   Emmanuel 

211  Mémorial  de  Sainte  Hélène 

L31^ 

1823 

V.3 

pt.l 

cop.2 


39- 


I 


