This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 
to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 
to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 
are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  marginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 
publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  have  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 

We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  from  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attribution  The  Google  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liability  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.  Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 


at|http  :  //books  .  google  .  com/ 


^irJlt)^ui>cand&Dam&<0ar.*il(r.4iS. 


m^m._ 


t 
Xi 


HISTORY 

OP 

THE  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON 

AT  ST.  HELENA; 

FBOM  THE  LETTEES  AND  JOURNALS 


OF  THE  LATE 


LIEUT.-GEN.   SIR  HUDSON  LOWE, 


OFFICIAL  DOCUMENTS  NOT  BEFORE  MADE  PUBLIC. 


By   WILLIAM    FORSYTH,    M.A., 

ADTBOB  or  '  aOKTENUDB'   AKD  <  mStORI  OF  TKIAL  M  JCBT.' 
LATE  TBLLOW  OP  TBUHTX  OOLLEQX,  CAHBUDCK. 


IN  THREE  VOLUMES— Vol.  III. 


mai!  $orttmt  ^  piait. 


LONDON: 

JOHN  MURRAY,   ALBEMARLE  STREET. 

1853. 

77ie  Author  reserves  to  kunsclf  ike  right  of  authorising  a  Translation  of  this  Work, 


<^c-^"' 


^ 


•  •••••••    ^-^       •    •• 

•  •  •*••••  •••     •  •  •••  •     • 


LONDOM  ;   PBINTBD  BT  W.  CLOWES  AND  SONS,  STAMPOaO  8TIIBET. 


(    iii    ) 


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  III. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

Paob 

Complaints  at  Longwood  against  the  Purveyor  —  Command  of  funds 
by  Napoleon  —  Considerate  conduct  of  Lord  Bathurst  —  Change 
in  the  purveyorship  —  O'Meara  and  the  affair  of  the  snuff-box  — 
He  is  subjected  to  the  same  restrictions  as  the  French  at  Long- 
wood  —  Second  "  Apostille  *'  written  by  Bonaparte  —  O'Meara's 
misstatements .        .        .        1 


CHAPTER  XX. 

O'Meara  interrogated  by  the  Governor  —  AUegefi  dumpnftgg  of 
Napoleon*a  apartments — Expulsion  of  O'Meara  from  the  mess  of 
the  66th  regiment  —  Departure  of  the  Austrian  Commissioner  — 
Count  Bertrand  challenged  by  Colonel  Lyster — Despatches  from 
the  Colonial  Office  relative  to  information  given  by  General 
Gourgaud  —  Clandestine  correspondence  carried  on  at  Longwood       21 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

Removal  of  O'Meara  from  St.  Helena  — Plans  for  the  construction  of 
a  new  residence  for  Bonaparte — Unfavourable  influence  exercised 
by  Count  Bertrand  —  Sir  Hudson  Lowe's  measures  for  the 
extinction  of  slavery  in  the  island  —  Good  effects  of  G'Meara's 
departure  —  Discovery  of  clandestine  correspondence  implicating 
O'Meara,  Mr.  Balcombe,  and  others 47 


CHAPTER  XXII. 

Difficulties  caused  by  Bonaparte's  refusal  to  show  himself  to  the 
orderly  officer  —  Interviews  and  ^nvnimdinnH  botwrnn  the 
Governor  and  Count  M^tholon  —  Alleged  grievances  —  Orderly 
officer's  reports  —  C4WlIlill  I'WOh's  application  —  Caliunnious 
remarks  of  O'Meara  at  Ascension  Island  —  Suspicious  letter  from 

the  Cape 65 

a   2 


IV  CONTENTS  OP  VOL.  III. 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 


Paob 


Bonai)arte*8  refusal  to  be  seen  —  Attack  of  vertigo  —  Mr.  Stokoe 
summoned  to  Longwood— Incurs  the  displeasure  of  the  Governor 

—  Napoleon's  'Notes'  on  Lord  Bathurst's  letter  —  O'Meara's 
letter  to  the  Admiralty,  and  his  dismissal  from  the  Navy  — 
Kefutation  of  the  charges  against  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  contained 
in  that  letter  —  Lord  Charles  Somerset's  opinion  of  Las  Cases' 
Journal 102 

CHAPTER  XXIV. 

iiumours  of  plans  for  escape  —  Dr.  Verling's  account  of  proposal 
made  to  him  by  Count  Montholon  —  Napoleon's  statement  of 
grievances  to  Mr,  Ricketts  —  Sir  Hudson  Lowe's  explanation  of 
his  refusal  to  communicate  with  Count  Bertrand  —  Difficulties 
thrown  in  the  way  of  the  orderly  officer  —  Departure  of  Madame 
Montholon  from  St.  Helena — Bribe  ofifered  to  Captain  Ripley 
to  convey  a  letter  from  Longwood  to  Europe  —  Departure  of  Sir 
George  Bingham .        .        .    150 

CHAPTER  XXV. 

Obstinate  refusal  of  Bonaparte  to  show  himself  to  the  orderly  officer 

—  Difficulties  respecting  medical  attendance  —  Court-martial  on 
Mr.  15tokoe  —  Theodore  Hook's  *  Facts  from  St.  Helena '  — 
Arrival  of  Dr.  Antommarchi  and  two  priests  —  Count  Bertrand's 
behaviour  —  O'Meara's  *  Exposition ' 169 


CHAPTER  XXVL 

Nai)oleon  ceases  to  seclude  himself  in  his  apartments  —  His  fondn^ 
for  gardening — Dr.  Antommarchi  —  Enlargement  of  the  limits 

—  Instructions  from  Earl  Bathurst  —  Orderly  officer's  re[x>rt8  — 
Napoleon  takes  to  goat-shooting  —  Playing  at  soldiers  —  Ball 
practice 188 

CHAPTER  XXVII. 

Ofl'ence  taken  by  Napoleon  at  the  iron  railing  of  the  new  house  — 
Recal  of  the  Russian  Commissioner — A  bullock  shot  by  Bonaparte 

—  News  of  the  assassination  of  the  Due  de  Bern  —  Its  reception 
at  Longwood  —  Conversiition  between  Count  Montholon  and  the 
French  Commissioner  —  Napoleon's  opinion  of  events  in  France 

y  — He  commences  horse-exercise  —  Secret  corrcbpondence  with 
England  —  Count  Montholon's  remarks  on  the  possibility  of 
escape  —  Abb^  Vignali  personating  Napoleon     ....     214 


CONTENTS  OP  VOL.  III. 


CHAPTER  XXVIII. 


Paok 


Application  for  extension  of  limits  —  Despatch  from  Earl  Bathurst 
—  Letter  to  Lord  Liverpool  —  The  French  Commissioner,  the 
Marquis  de  Montchenu  —  Napoleon  at  a  picm'c  —  Captain 
Spencer's  conversations  with  Bertrand  and  Montholon  —  Change 
for  the  worse  in  2^ap(>1flnri'«  hfiAlth  —  Apprehensions  of  the 
Engfish  Government  as  to  a  meditated  escape    ....    235 


CHAPTER  XXIX. 

Progress  of  Napoleon*s  fatal  illness  — Long  conversation  V^tween 
the  "nflvftmnr 'fl,T^|!  Ci^iint  Montholon — Bonaparte's  opinion  of 
Antommarchi  — Notes  dictated  \yy  him  for  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  — 
The  new  house  and  iron  railing  —  Bonaparte's  objection  to 
medicine  —  Novel,  mode  of  taking  exercise  —  Sir  Hudson  Lowe 
insisir^hat  the  orderly  ofiBcer  shall  Tsee  Napoleon  —  The  latter 
consents  to  be  visited  by  Dr.  Amott — Dr.  Antommarchi  applies 
for  leave  to  return  to  Europe  —  Present  of  books  by  Napoleon 
to  the  20th  regiment  —  Increase  of  his  malady  ....    253 


CHAPTER  XXX 

D^JhjrfJJapolepn  —  His  funeral  —  His  character  and  conduct  at 

St.  Helena 281 


CHAPTER  XXXI. 

Conclusion  of  the  Memoir  of  Sir  Hudson  Low^e        ....    313 

CHAPTER  XXXU. 

Review  of  the  evidence  as  affecting  the  British  Government  and  Sir 
Hudson  Lowe 337 

LETTERS    and  DOCUMENTS,  in   the  nature  of  Proofs   and 
Illustrations 359 


(  vi  ) 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS. 


PoRTBAiT frontispiece  Vol.  I. 

Map  of  St.  Helena end  qf  Vol.  I. 

LoNGWOOD,  Napoleon's  Residence      .        .     frontispiece  Vol.  II. 
House  built  by  the  British  Government  .  do.      Vol.  HI. 


ERRATA— VOL.  I. 


Page   69,  line  2,  for  sailor  read  soldier. 
„     105,    „  11,  for  Finland  read  Friedland. 
„     107,    „  22,  for  quarter-general  read  head-quarters. 
tt     347,    „  20,  for  Bautgen  read  Bautzen. 

Note. — ^Atpage  96  of  vol.  i.  it  is  stated  that  the  Maltese  regiment  at  Cspn 
behared  with  pusillanimity,  and  were  taken  prisoners ;  but  it  ought  to  have  been 
added,  that  Major  Hammill,  who  commanded  that  r^'ment,  refiised  to  deliver  up 
his  sword  to  the  enemy,  and  was  killed,  preferring  death  to  dishonour. 


HISTORY 


OF  THE 


CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

COMPLAINTS  AT  LONGWOOD  AGAINST  THE  PURVEYOR  —  COMMAND 
OF  FUNDS  BY  NAPOLEON  —  CONSIDERATE  CONDUCT  OF  LORD 
BATHURST—  CHANGE  IN  THE  PURVEYORSHIP  —  O'MEARA  AND 
THE  AFFAIR  OF  THE  SNUFF-BOX  —  HE  IS  SUBJECTED  TO  THE 
SAME  RESTRICTIONS  AS  THE  FRENCH  AT  LONGWOOD  —  SECOND 
"  APOSTILLE"  written  BY  BONAPARTE  —  O'mEARA'S  MIS- 
STATEMENTS. 

Eault  in  March  this  year  Major  Qorrequer  had  some 
long  conversations  with  Count  Montholon  on  the  sub- 
ject of  the  expenses  of  the  table  at  Longwood,  and 
found  him  reasonable  and  accommodating.  He  blamed 
Cipriani  for  having  been  rather  extravagant  in  the 
wine,  and  said  that  the  Emperor  had  desired  them  all, 
not  only  to  observe  the  strictest  economy,  but  to  do 
with  the  smallest  quantity  possible  of  necessaries,  and 
had  observed  to  him  that,  because  they  thought  proper 
to  keep  separate  tables,  that  was  no  reason  why  they 
should  burthen  the  British  Government  with  a  greater 
expense.  Major  Gtorrequer  remarked  that  it  was  and 
always  would  be  the  Governor's  wish  that  their  wants 
should  be  amply  supplied  in  every  respect ;  all  that 
he  desired  was  to  avoid  waste :  upon  which  Montholon 
acknowledged  the  care  the  Governor  had  taken  that 
they  should  be  well  provided. 

VOL.  in.  B 


2>'.:  ;••;  >;  :\;  ^APTnrcrY*X)F  napoleon.  Chap.  xix. 
*  •  •.• 

In  the  course  of  the  same  conversation  the  Count 
said  that  the  oil,  Cape  butter,  lard,  cheese,  hams, 
vinegar,  rice,  and  flour  were  frequently  so  much 
damaged  they  could  not  make  use  of  them,  but  gave 
them  to  the  servants ;  eggs  also  were  frequently  rot- 
ten. He  then  pointed  out  among  the  articles  charged 
in  the  bills  a  quantity  which  they  had  been  obliged 
to  buy  in  consequence  of  the  bad  quality  of  those  sent 
by  the  purveyors,  and  these  came  to  a  high  amount. 
He  observed  that  if  they  were  furnished  with  all  the 
articles  of  a  good  quality  they  would  now  have  little 
to  buy ;  and  he  more  than  once  assured  Major  Ck)rre- 
quer  that  it  was  not  his  intention  to  cast  any  re- 
proaches or  to  find  fault  with  anything ;  they  knew 
the  difficulty  which  existed  in  procuring  things  of  a 
good  quality,  and  they  were  all  aware  it  was  not  the 
Governor's  fault  if  they  did  not  get  them  good. 

In  a  despatch  from  the  Ck)vemor  to  Earl  Bathurst, 
dated  the  31st  of  March,  1818,  he  said  that  O'Meara 
had  been  repeating  in  public,  and  enforcing  himself, 
the  remarks  made  by  Count  Bertrand  in  disparage- 
ment of  General  Gourgaud,  and  that  the  two  points 
on  which  unfavourable  observations  were  made  were 
the  pension  alleged  to  have  been  granted  to  General 
G^urgaud,  and  his  demand  for  money  firom  Napoleon 
Bonaparte,  after  having  before  refused  to  accept  it. 
Sir  Hudson  Lowe  said,  "  General  Gourgaud  himself 
can  best  explain  the  aflFair  of  the  pension ;  ^  but,  with 
respect  to  the  demand  for  money,  it  is  right  to  ob- 
serve, none  was  made  by  General  Gourgaud  to  Napo- 
leon Bonaparte ;  for  the  sum  forwarded  since  his  de- 
parture was  obtained  fi^om  Count  Bertrand  upon  an 
application  from  Mr.  Cole  in  the  name  of  the  pur- 

*  See  vol.  ii.  p.  265. 


Habch,  1818.     STATEMENTS  CONCERNING  GOURGAUD.        3 

veyor,  in  order  to  enable  him  to  execute  an  order 
before  given,  and  was  not  applied  for  by  (General 
CU)urgaud  himself."  Sir  Hudson  added, — "Subse- 
quently to  being  made  acquainted  Mr.  O'Meara  had 
held  the  conversations  above  referred  to,  I  interro- 
gated him  as  to  the  line  of  conduct  which  had  been 
observe  by  General  Qourgaud  during  the  whole  time 
he  had  been  at  Longwood,  and  was  told,  as  will 
appear  by  an  accompanying  memorandum  of  a  con- 
versation with  him,  he  had  not,  to  Mr.  O'Meara's 
knowledge,  committed  any  act  of  impropriety,  been 
guilty  of  any  breach  of  regulation,  or  done  anything 
whatever  to  draw  forth  an  injurious  comment  upon 
him ;  so  that  it  is  only  in  consequence  of  and  since 
his  rupture  with  the  persons  at  Longwood  these  re- 
flections have  been  endeavoured  to  be  cast  upon  him, 
in  precise  conformity  to  the  obvious  views  and  designs 
which  General  Gt)urgaud  anticipated  on  the  part  of 
Nj^leon  Bonaparte,  and  the  persons  acting  under  his 
influence  at  Longwood,  when  he  separated  from  them." 

About  this  time  Count  Bertrand  wrote  to  Cardinal 
Fesch,  Napoleon's  uncle,  and  informed  him  of  Cipri- 
ani's death.  He  said  that  the  Emperor's  health  was 
very  unsatisfactory,  and  mentioned  that  a  child  of  one 
of  Count  Montholon's  servants,  and  also  a  femme'de' 
chambre^  had  recently  died  of  the  same  complaint  as 
Cipriani,  which  he  attributed  to  the  evil  eflFect  of  the 
climate  at  St.  Helena,  "where,"  he  said,  "very  few 
men  grow  old."  He  requested  that  a  minister  of  re- 
ligion mi^ht  be  sent  out  to  them,^  and  also  another 

'  See  a  translation  of  this  letter  printed  in  O'Meara's  •  Voice,'  vol.  ii. 
p.  478.  Speaking  of  Cipriani's  death  and  the  absence  of  a  Roman  Catholic 
priest,  Bertrand  said  in  this  letter,  'Ml  a  paru  ne  pas  se  soucier  d'un 
ministre  d'nne  autre  religion ;"  upon  which  passage  Sir  Hu48on  Lowe, 
writing  to  Lord  Bathurst,  remarked,  *'  It  is  only  for  the  sake  of  truth  I 

B   2 


4  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XEX. 

viaitre-d'hdtel  and  a  cook.  In  consequence  of  tliis 
letter  the  Governor  interrogated  O'Meara,  who  said 
that  if  he  were  called  upon  to  give  an  opinion  as  to 
the  nature  of  the  malady  with  which  Napoleon  was 
affected,  he  would  call  it  an  incipient  hepatitis.  Ad- 
verting to  Bertrand's  letter,  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  when 
he  wrote  to  Lord  Bathurst,  said  that  he  should  prefer 
having  foreign  domestics,  of  good  character,  and  un- 
acquainted with  the  English  language,  at  Longwood,- 
so  long  as  Bertrand  and  Montholon,  with  their  fomilies, 
remained  near  Bonaparte,  rather  than  English  servants, 
not  subject  to  the  rules  of  military  discipline  or  the 
same  regulations  as  the  French  persons  then  there 
were  under.  He  added, — "  These  opinions  are  solely 
the  result  of  the  inconvenience  I  have  experienced 
from  Mr.  O'Meara's  line  of  proceeding;  conceiving 
the  attendance  near  the  person  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte 
of  a  man  of  his  doubtful  character  a  greater  evil  than 
that  of  any  foreigner  whatever,  on  the  ground  that  a 
person  suspected  or  capable  of  acting  a  treacherous 
part  is  more  dangerous  than  a  declared  enemy,  and 
that  more* is  to  be  apprehended  from  the  eflfects  of 
conversation  and  example  among  those  around." 

That  the  English  Government,  or  rather  Lord 
Bathurst  and  Mr.  Goulburn,  were  not  wanting  in 
attention  and  delicacy  towards  the  exiles  at  Long- 
wood,  whenever  they  could  so  act  consistently  with 
their  duty,  must  have  been  already  apparent.  And 
in  this  spirit  were  written  by  Mr.  Goulbum  some 
private  letters  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  which  he  received 
at  the  end  of  this  month,  two  of  which  are  here  given 
at  length : — 

feel  it  necessary  to  mention  that  the  person  in  question  was  noted  for  his 
infidelity^ and  manifested  no  change  in  these  sentiments  to  the  last ; 
expressions  of  impiety  and  blasphemy  were  familiar  to  him." 


Mabch,  1818.     CONSIDERATENESS  OF  GOVERNMENT.  5 

«'  (Private.) 
"  My  dear  Sir,  "  Downing  street,  Nov.  4, 1817. 

"  I  enclose  you  two  letters  from  the  father  of 
Greneral  Bertrand  to  his  son.  The  one  enclosed  in 
the  letter  to  you  announces  the  death  of  Madame 
DiUon,  the  mother  of  Madame  Bertrand.  I  know  that 
you  will  be  desirous  to  do  all  in  your  power  to  pre- 
vent any  aggravation  of  the  distress  which  this  event 
will  occasion  in  the  family  of  General  Bertrand,  and 
I  am  sure  therefore  that  it  will  be  a  relief  to  you  to 
know  that  Lord  Bathurst  entirely  approves  of  your 
exercising  your  own  discretion  as  to  forbearing  to  act 
upon  the  instructions  with  reference  to  General  Ber- 
trand which  are  conveyed  to  you  by  the  present  op- 
portunity.   I  have  the  honour  to  be,  &c. 

"  Henry  Goulburn. 

"  P.S.  Among  the  letters  for  General  Buonaparte 
sent  by  the  present  conveyance  is  one  from  Cardinal 
Fesch,  oflfering  him  money.  Lord  Bathurst  is  not 
aware  of  any  objection  to  his  receiving  the  money, 
drawing  for  it  under  the  established  regulations. 

"  H.  G." 


"(Private.) 

"  My  dear  Sir, 

"  I  send  you  by  the  present  opportunity  a  num- 
ber of  French  publications,  which  I  have  just  received 
from  Paris.  They  were  ordered  as  part  of  those 
which  it  was  Lord  Bathurst*s  intention  to  provide  for 
General  Bertrand,  but  as,  on  looking  them  over,  it 
appears  to  me  that  some  of  them  are  of  a  nature  to 
give  oflFence  to  General  Buonaparte,  and  that  he  may 
construe  sending  them  to  Longwood  as  intended  to 
insult  him,  I  have  to  request  that  you  would  in  the 


6  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XIK. 

first  instance  look  them  over,  and  use  your  own  dis- 
cretion as  to  sending  or  retaining  them.  I  would  not 
have  imposed  this  task  upon  you  had  the  time  be- 
tween their  arrival  and  the  despatch  of  the  ship  for 
St.  Helena  admitted  of  my  doing  it  myself. 

"  I  will  take  care  that  you  shall  receive  by  the 
next  the  books  which  you  requested  me  to  procure 
from  the  French  booksellers  in  Marlborough  Street. 
I  ought  to  add  that  I  should  be  obliged  to  you  to 
send  me  a  list  of  the  books  which  you  may  ultimately 
send  to  General  Bertrand,  in  order  that  a  memoran- 
dum may  be  kept  of  their  value.    Tours,  &c. 

"  Henry  (Jotjlburn. 

"  Downing  Street,  Nov.  17,  1817." 

In  another  letter  Mr.  Goulbum  said,  "I  send  at 
Lord  Bathurst*s  directions  a  file  of  the  *  Morning 
Chronicle,'  in  order  that  you  may  send  it  to  Long- 
wood  for  the  information  and  amusement  of  the 
residents  there." 

At  the  same  time  that  General  GU)urgaud  left  St. 
Helena,  Mr.  Balcombe,  who  had  been  the  purveyor 
for  the  e^ablishment  at  Longwood  ever  since  the 
arrival  of  the  French,  sailed  for  England.  Although 
Sir  Hudson  Lowe  had  no  tangible  cause  of  complaint 
against  him,  he  was  not  without  strong  suspicion  that 
his  relations  with  Longwood  were  not  limited  to  the 
ostensible  duties  of  his  office,  and  the  sequel  showed 
that  this  idea  was  by  no  means  at  variance  with  the 
fact.  His  close  intimacy  with  O'Meara,  with  whose 
conduct  the  Governor  was  becoming  daily  more  dis- 
satisfied, of  itself  justified  some  jealousy  of  his 
actions.  When,  therefore,  he  quitted  the  island.  Sir 
Hudson  determined  not  to  continue  the  purveyorship 
in  the  hands  of  his  firm,  but  appointed  Mr.  Ibbetson 
to  act  in  his  stead.     And  in  order  that  some  vouchers 


Mabch,  1816.  HIS  COMMAND  OF  FUNDS.  7 

might  be  forthcoming  to  show  the  expenditure,  and 
he  might  be  able  to  give  to  his  Qt)vemment  an  accu^ 
rate  account  of  the  sums  actually  spent  upon  the 
maintenance  of  the  French  at  Longwood,  he  proposed 
that  in  future,  instead  of  a  certain  amount  of  cash 
being  placed  in  their  hands  monthly  for  disburse^ 
ment,  the  payments  that  were  required  should  be 
made  by  cheques  or  "  horn  '*  drawn  on  Mr,  Ibbetson, 
This  irritated  Bonaparte  extremely,  and  Count  Ber* 
trand  declared  that  the  Emperor  said  that,  rather  than 
submit  to  such  a  change,  he  would  receive  nothing, 
and  would  prefer  wearing  his  shirt  as  long  as  it  would 
last  without  washing  {il  aimera  mieux  porter  sa  che^ 
mise  tant  qu'elle  dureray  sans  blanchissage).  All  these 
details  were  gone  into  at  great  length  in  some  con- 
versations between  M^jor  Qt)rrequer  and  Bertrand, 
with  which  we  shall  not  weary  the  reader,  for  nothing 
can  be  more  uninteresting  than  the  minutiae  of  petty 
household  details,  and  they  are  only  alluded  to  here  for 
the  sake  of  mentioning  a  remark  of  Bertrand's  when 
he  ridiculed  the  notion  of  any  improper  use  being 
made  by  Bonaparte  of  any  money  which  might  come 
into  his  hands  for  the  expenses  of  the  table,  *'  The 
Emperor,"  he  exclaimed,  **  has  only  to  speak  to  have 
millions.  He  has  only  to  give  a  bit  of  paper  of  the 
size  of  this,"  showing  a  scrap  of  paper  of  the  size  of 
an  inch,  "  which  would  be  worth  a  million/'  If  this 
assertion  on  the  part  of  Bertrand  was  true,  we  require 
no  stronger  proof  of  the  necessity  there  existed  for 
not  allowing  sealed  communications  to  pass  between 
LoBgwood  and  Europe. 

But  we  now  turn  to  a  matter  of  more  importance, 
and  have  to  mention  an  instance  of  O'Meara's  mis- 
conduct, which,  coming  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe's  know- 
ledge, induced  him  to  adopt  towards  the  offender  the 


8  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XIX. 

strongest  measure  in  his  power,  short  of  placing  him 
under  arrest,  or  sending  him  oflf  the  island.  For 
obvious  reasons,  there  was  no  act  more  strictly  for- 
bidden than  the  giving  or  receiving  presents  from 
Napoleon  without  the  Grovemor's  permission.  In  de- 
fiance of  this  well-known  rule,  O'Meara  informed  the 
Rev.  Mr.  Yemon  and  the  Rev.  Mr.  Boys,  two  clergy- 
men at  St.  Helena,  that  Bonaparte  intended  to  give 
each  of  them  a  snuflF-box,  in  acknowledgment  of  their 
services  to  Cipriani.  Mr.  Boys  was  then  about  to 
proceed  to  England,  and  on  the  2nd  of  April,  the  day 
before  he  embarked,  O'Meara  brought  him  a  silver 
snuflF-box  from  Napoleon,  which  Mr.  Boys  at  first 
accepted,  but,  being  convinced  by  Mr.  Vernon  of  the 
impropriety  of  the  act,  he  caused  it  to  be  returned  to 
0*Meara  after  he  had  sailed,  accompanied  by  a  note, 
in  which  he  said*  that  he  should  be  very  happy  to  have 
it  transmitted-to  him  through  the  proper  channel. 

In  consequence  of  this  direct  violation  of  the' 
rules,  the  Governor  determined  to  subject  0*Meara 
to  the  same  restrictions  as  were  imposed  upon  the 
French,  and  on  the  10th  of  April  Sir  Thomas  Reade 
wrote  to  him  and  i^^formed  him  that,  except  in  the 
event  of  anything  extraordinary  occurring,  which  he 
might  feel  it  his  duty  to  report  immediately  in  person 
to  the  Governor,  or  in  case  of  being  summoned  to  give 
medical  aid  where  other  medical  attendance  could  not 
be  procured,  he  was  not  to  quit  Longwood  without 
permission  of  the  Governor.  In  his  *  Voice '  O'Meara 
says  that  in  this  letter^  no  reasons  were  assigned  for 
the  order,  and  he  tries  to  make  it  appear  that  it  was 

*  This  letter  was  inserted  in  the  *  Morning  Chronicle '  after  O'Meara's 
letter  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  of  the  23rd  of  December,  1817,  as  if  it  were  the 
answer  to  it,  instead  of  the  actual  reply  to  that  letter,  which  was  dated  the 
19th  of  January,  1818.  See  the  Letters  and  Documents  at  the  end  of  the 
seoond  voliune,  No.  114. 


Apbil,  1818.         THE  AFFAIR  OF  THE  SNUFF-BOX.  9 

an  expedient  of  the  Governor  to  induce  him  if  possible 
to  disobey  the  commands  of  the  latter,  and  thus 
aflford  a  pretext  for  removing  him  from  St.  Helena. 
It  is  quite  true  that  the  letter  contains  no  allusion  to 
the  present  of  the  snuflF-box,  nor  can  I  explain  the 
reason.  Probably  Sir  Hudson  thought  that  O'Meara 
must  be  sufficiently  conscious  of  his  own  improper 
act,  and  did  not  require  to  be  told  why  he  was  thus 
openly  mistrusted. 

Before  replying  to  Sir  Thomas  Eeade's  letter, 
O'Meara  wrote  to  Count  Bertrand,  and  informed  him 
that,  as  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  sacrifice  his 
character  and  his  rights  as  a  British  subject  to  the 
desire  he  had  of  being  of  service  to  "  the  chief  person- 
age at  Longwood,"  he  had  formed  the  resolution  to 
quit  the  island.  He  then  despatched  a  letter  to  Sir 
Hudson  Lowe,  in  which  he  tendered  his  resignation, 
and  demanded  permission  to  return  to  England. 
Although  the  order  against  his  quitting  Longwood 
without  leave  was  positive,  he  immediately  disobeyed 
it  by  going  to  the  Briars,  where  Admiral  Plampin 
was  residing,  for  the  purpose  of  having  an  interview 
with  him ;  but  the  Admiral  desired  his  secretary  to 
acquaint  him  that  he  could  not  sanction  his  disobedi- 
ence by  receiving  him ;  but  that,  if  he  had  any  com- 
munication to  make,  he  must  write  and  obtain  his  (the 
Admiral's)  direction  to  wait  upon  him.  O'Meara  s 
answer  to  this  was,  that  he  considered  himself  a 
naval  officer,  and  not  amenable  to  the  orders  of  the 
Governor,  much  less  obliged  to  obey  an  illegal  one. 

On  the  same  day  Bertrand  sent  for  Major  Gorre- 
quer,  and  in  the  course  of  conversation  bitterly  com- 
plained of  the  act  of  Sir  Hudson  Lowe.  He  said  that 
in  driving  away  the  physician  of  the  Emperor  might 
be  recognised  the  design  which  the  Gk)vemor  had 


10  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XIX. 

long  manifested  of  assassinating  him.  On  hearing 
these  words  Major  Gorrequer  rose  from  his  seat, 
saying  that  he  could  not  tolerate  such  language ;  and 
Bertrand  added,  "At  all  events  you  will  repeat  to 
the  Grovernor  what  I  have  just  said :"  on  which  the 
Major  at  once  withdrew.  Count  Bertrand  then  ad- 
dressed a  letter  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  in  which  he 
made  the  same  insinuation ;  and  on  the  21st  the  latter 
replied  with  calmness  and  dignity,  saying  that  O'Meara 
had  tendered  his  resignation,  and  if  his  removal  had 
not  already  taken  place  it  had  been  solely  out  of  con- 
sideration for  the  arguments  employed  by  Bertrand, 
and  owing  to  the  difficulty  of  supplying  his  place  by 
any  other  person  on  the  island  not  objectionable  to 
Napoleon  himself. 

With  reference  to  the  question  of  providing  another 
medical  attendant  for  Napoleon,  it  is  right  here  to 
mention  that  some  time  previous  to  this  Count  Ber- 
trand informed  Mr.  Baxter  that  Bonaparte  had  formed 
a  favourable  opinion  of  him,  and  said  he  was  an  ho- 
nourable and  enlightened  man,  and  that  there  was  no 
one  there  in  whom  he  should  have  more  confidence, 
but  that  he  would  not  then  see  him,  as  he  was  certain 
that  bulletins  of  his  health  would  be  shown  to  the  Gkh 
vernor,  to  which  he  was  averse.  There  is  no  doubt, 
however,  that  afterwards  he  took  a  dislike  to  Mr. 
Baxter,  simply  because  he  was  the  medical  officer 
recommended  and  confided  in  by  the  Grovemor. 

On  the  27th  Bertrand  transmitted  to  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe  another  **  apostille,"  written  by  Napoleon,  which 
the  latter  called  upon  him  to  forward  to  the  Prince 
Regent,  using  the  expression,  **  If  he  does  not  do  so  I 
leave  Hie  opprobrium  of  my  death  as  a  legacy  to  the 
reigning  House  of  England  (je  l^e  Topprobre  de  ma 
mort  a  la  maison  regnante  d^Angleterre)."    It  is  need- 


Apbil,  1818.     O'MEARA'S  BESIGNATION  ACCEPTED.  11 

less  to  give  the  contents  of  this  document,  or  Sir  Hud- 
son Lowe's  remarks  upon  it,  for  it  would  be  only  going 
over  the  same  ground  of  complaint  and  justification 
which  we  have  already  so  often  travelled.  It  will  be 
sufficient  to  say  that  in  it  Napoleon  called  the  Go- 
vernor his  assassin  (mon  assassin)^  and  desired  that 
what  he  then  wrote  might  be  communicated  to  the 
Prince  Regent,  in  order  that  public  punishment  might 
fidl  on  Sir  Hudson  Lowe. 

The  Governor  formally  accepted  0'Meara*s  resigna* 
tion,  and  informed  him  through  Sir  Thomas  Reade 
tiiat  if  Bonaparte  was  willing  to  receive  advice  from 
any  other  medical  person  in  the  island  he  would  con- 
sent to  his  (O'Meara's)  quitting  Longwood  immedi- 
ately, but  if  Bonaparte  refused  to  consent  to  this  he 
said  it  would  be  proper  that  O'Meara  should  remain 
in  his  present  situation  until  his  resignation  had  been 
received  in  England,  or  some  arrangement  could  be 
made  for  supplying  his  place.  At  the  same  time  Sir 
Hudson  Lowe  instructed  Sir  Thomas  Reade  to  write 
to  Bertrand,  and  acquaint  him  again  officially  (as  had 
become  necessary  in  consequence  of  his  pertinacious 
violation  of  the  rule)  that  he  would  not  thenceforward 
receive  any  letter  or  communication  whatever  from 
any  person  in  attendance  upon  Bonaparte  where  the 
tide  of  "  Emperor  "  should  be  given  to  him,  and  that 
if  any  such  letter  or  communication  were  sent  it 
would  be  returned,  in  conformity  with  Lord  Bathurst's 
instructions* 

It  would  useleasly  weary  the  reader  to  give  the 
tedious  correspondence  that  ensued  between  O'Meara 
and  the  Gt)vemor  this  month,  in  which,  however,  it  is 
very  remarkable  that  no  allusion  whatever  is  made  on 
either  side  to  the  affiiir  of  the  snuflF-box,  about  which 
Sir  Hudson  Lowe  wrote  fully  to  Lord  Bathurst  on 


12  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XDC. 

the  9th  of  April.  And  in  another  letter  on  the  19th 
he  said,  speaking  of  Bonaparte,  "  The  mortification 
has  been  the  greater  because  neither  he  nor  Mr. 
O'Meara  himself  can  controvert  the  &ct  of  ihepresenty 
though  they  are  both  ready  to  defend  it,  on  the  ground 
of  the  Act  of  Parliament  not  granting  any  authority 
to  prevent  it."  ^ 

In  one  of  O'Meara's  letters,  however,  addressed  at 
this  period  to  Major  Grorrequer,  he  relates  a  conver- 
sation which  he  had  with  Napoleon,  and  which  is  in- 
teresting enough  to  quote.  He  says,*  "  I  asked  him 
how  his  health  was,  and,  according  to  my  general  cus- 
tom, attempted  to  take  his  arm  in  order  to  feel  his  pulse. 
He,  however,  drew  back  his  hand,  and,  without  answer- 
ing my  question,  said,  *  Well,  Doctor,  you  are  going 
to  quit  us.  The  world  will  scarcely  believe  that  la 
IdchetS  (Tattenter  at  my  physician  has  been  put  in  prac- 
tice. You  have  no  longer  the  independence  necessary 
to  render  your  services  useful  to  me.  Quit  this  abode 
of  darkness  and  crime  as  soon  as  you  can.  I  will 
expire  upon  a  grabat^  gnawed  by  disease  and  without 
any  assistance.'  He  then  took  me  by  the  hand, 
which  he  squeezed,  and  appeared  to  experience  some 
emotion.  I  took  advantage  of  this  in  order  to  again 
ask  him  about  the  state  of  his  health ;  but  he  replied 
by  sending  me  away,  saying,  *  Farewell  for  ever, 
Doctor!'  Since  that  time  he  has  not  again  sent  for 
me,  and  I  have  not  spoken  to  him." 

The  first  intimation  of  the  charge  respecting  the 
snuflF-box  seems  to  have  been  conveyed  to  O'Meara  in 
a  letter  fi*om  Colonel  Wynyard  on  the  3rd  of  May, 
written  by  the  command  of  the  Governor,  in  which 

*  Sir  Hudfloft  Lowe  means  that  the  Act  gave  the  Governor  no  authority 
to  prevent  p^resents  being  made. 
"  See  *  Voice,'  vol.  ii.  p.  399. 


May,  1818.  THE  SNUFF-BOX.  13 

he  spoke  of  him  as  having  rendered  himself  "  a  chan- 
nel for  presents,  and  the  bearer  of  private  and  unau- 
thorised communications  in  regard  to  them.'* 

To  this  letter  0*Meara  replied  on  the  14th,  and  gave 
his  version  of  the  story  of  the  snuflF-box.  It  is  well 
worthy  of  our  attention  as  an  instance  of  the  delibe- 
rate falsehoods  to  which  the  writer  did  not  scruple  to 
resort  when  he  saw.no  other  mode  of  justifying  his  con- 
duct. Happily  in  this  case  detection  and  confutation 
both  followed  close  at  hand,  and  his  exposure  may  be 
of  use  in  diminishing  the  credit  that  has  been  given  to 
some  of  his  other  statements  not  so  capable  of  direct 
and  positive  disproof.  He  said,  **You  assert  that  I  have 
served  as  a  distributor  of  presents.  If  you  allude  to 
what  took  place  with  the  Reverend  Mr.  Boys  as  having 
given  umbrage  to  the  Governor,  why  has  it  not  been 
communicated  to  me  until  the  3rd  of  May,  twenty- 
three  days  after  the  order  of  the  10th  of  April  ?^ 
Mr.  Cipriani,  mattre-d* hotels  died  on  the  27th  of  Fe- 
bruary last.  The  Reverend  Messrs.  Boys  and  Vernon 
attended  his  ftmeral,  and,  although  he  died  in  the 
Roman  Catholic  persuasion,  buried  his  corpse  in  con- 
secrated ground,  and  read  the  funeral  service  over  it 
according  to  the  rites  of  the  Protestant  Church.  This 
conduct  appeared  liberal  and  noble;  and  General 
Montholon  asked  Mr.  Boys  in  what  manner  he  could 
manifest  to  the  clergymen  the  satisfaction  which  their 
conduct  had  given ;  to  which  a  reply  was  made  re- 
fusing any  retribution  [recompence  ?]  for  them,  and 
observing  that  a  donation  for  the  poor  would  be 
acceptable.    This  decided  General  Montholon  to  give 

'  There  certainly  seems  to  be  some  reasonableness  in  this  oomplaint 
of  0*Meara.  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  wrote  to  Lord  Bathurst  on  the  19th  of 
Aprils  and  said  that  neither  Bonaparte  nor  O'Meara  could  controvert  the 
fact  of  the  present  of  the  snufif-box,  though  they  were  both  ready  to  defend 
it.  But  it  does  not  appear  that  O'Meara  had  at  that  time  been  taxed  with 
the  offence,  or  that  Bonaparte  knew  the  cause  of  his  disgrace. 


14  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XIX. 

to  each  of  these  gentlemen  a  Chinese  snuff-box  of 
trifling  value,  and  25Z.  for  the  poor.  Some  days  after^ 
Mr.  BoySy  having  breakfasted  with  General  MorUholon^ 
received  251  and  the  box;  and  a  few  days  subsequent, 
departing  for  England,  he  sent  the  box  to  me,  asking 
me  to  beg  of  General  Montholon  to  send  it  to  him 
through  the  channel  of  the  Governor,  in  order  that  he 
might  be  able,  without  any  scruple,  to  show  it  in 
England.  When  I  received  the  letter  and  the  box 
Mr.  Boys  was  gone,  which  obliged  me  to  return  the 
box  on  the  spot  to  General  Montholon,  to  whom  I 
made  known  Mr.  Boys's  desires.  This,  Sir,  is  the  his- 
tory of  my  conduct ; — and  I  have  reason  to  believe 
that  the  251.  was  deposited  in  the  hands  of  Mr.  Boys 
for  the  use  of  the  poor.  There  is  no  man  whose 
actions,  even  praiseworthy,  are  not  liable  to  be 
denigrated  and  perverted  by  the  breath  of  calumny, 
which,  however,  is  easily  confounded  amongst  just 
and  sagacious  persons." 

Here  then  we  find  O'Meara  asserting  that  Mr.  Boys 
received  the  snuflF-box  at  the  breakfast-table  direct 
from  Count  Montholon^  and  that  all  he  himself  had  to 
do  with  the  matter  was  that  he  innocently  received  it 
with  the  accompanying  note  from  Mr.  Boys,  and  re- 
turned it  as  requested  to  the  Count.  Now  let  the 
reader  contrast  this  statement  with  the  account  of  the 
transaction  given  by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Yemon,  every  par- 
ticular of  which  is  confirmed  by  the  testimony  of  Mr. 
Boys.  The  former  made  a  deposition  on  oath,  on  the 
28th  of  April,  relative  to  the  facts  of  the  case,  and 
declared  that  the  snuflF-box  was  given  by  O'Meara,  as 
has  been  already  related :  and,  subsequently,  on  the 
19  th  of  May,  in  answer  to  further  inquiries,  he  wrote 
the  subjoined  letter  to  the  Military  Secretary.  No 
contradiction  can  be  more  complete,  and  no  conduct 


May,  1818.  THE  SNUFF-BOX.  15 

conld  be  more  mean  and  miserable  than  the  attempt 
of  0*Meara  to  shift  the  blame  from  himself,  and  in- 
duce Mr.  Yemen  to  be  his  accomplice  in  a  ftdsehood. 
The  letter  was  as  follows . — 

"Sir, 

"  Having  been  desired  by  the  Governor  to  give 
him  the  copy  of  the  letter  addressed  by  Mr.  Boys  to 
Mr.  OTMeara,*  which  he  (Mr.  Boys)  had  left  on  the 
morning  of  his  departure  for  England,  I  proceeded 
with  the  said  copy  in  my  pocket  to  James  Town.  Be- 
fore an  opportunity  occurred,  however,  of  giving  the 
paper  to  the  Grovemor,  I  was  accosted  by  Mr. 
O'Meara.  After  the  usual  salutations  I  asked  him  if  the 
(Governor  had  said  anything  to  him  concerning  the 
snuflf-box  which  he  had  given  to  Mr.  Boys?  He 
answered,  *  No ;  does  he  know  it  V  I  replied  in  the 
aflBrmative,  adding  that  I  had  been  interrogated  by 
the  Governor  and  had  related  all  that  I  knew  of  the 
transaction.  Moreover,  I  told  him  (Mr.  O'Meara)  that 
a  copy  of  Mr.  Boys's  letter  to  him  had  been  left  with 
me ;  whereupon  he  said,  *  Do  not  let  the  Governor 
know  that.*  I  replied,  that  the  Governor  was  aware  of 
it,  and  had  desired  to  see  it ;  that  I  had  it  then  in  my 

*  The  letter  was  as  follows : — 

''  Mr.  G'MsABAy  Longwood. 
•«  My  dear  Sir, 

<*  I  find  by  a  reference  to  the  laws  that  I  may  subject  myself  to  very 
heavy  penalties  and  troubles  by  receiving  through  your  hands  alone  the 
box  80  handsomely  presented,  and  which  on  all  accoimts  I  should  most 
highly  value.  I  have  therefore  deemed  it  prudent  and  safe,  both  on  your 
account  and  my  own,  to  request  you  will  take  charge  of  it  through 
L.  Solomcm  [the  shopkeeper  from  whom  it  was  originally  bought],  in 
whose  care  I  leave  it,  and  endeavour  to  secure  it  to  me  by  sending  it  with 
Mr.  Vemon*8  through  the  uriobjtctumahle  channel.  I  have  not  the  slightest 
doubt  of  the  entire  concurrence  of  Sir  H.,  nor  that  you  will  endeavour  to 
accomplish  the  cordial  wishes  of  ««  Yours  very  faithfully, 

"R.  BoTS." 


16  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Qhap.  XIX. 

pocket,  having  brought  it  for  the  purpose  of  giving  it 
to  the  Qt)vemor  as  I  had  promised.  Mr.  0*Meara 
exclaimed,  *  Boys  could  not  have  taken  a  more  eflFec- 
tual  method  to  ruin  me.'   He  (Mr.  O'Meara)  also  said, 

*  You  have  no  idea  what  serious  consequences  may- 
result  from  this :  I  am  not  a  man  likely  to  be  frightened 
at  trifles  neither.' 

**  I  expressed  my  regret  that  I  should  be  at  all  con- 
cerned in  an  affair  which  threatened  to  bring  him  into 
so  serious  a  scrape.  *If  so,'  said  he,  *give  me  that 
paper,'  pomting  to  the  copy  of  Mr.  Boys's  letter  to 
him  which  I  held  in  my  hand;  and  remarking  the 
expression  contained  in  it,  *  by  receiving  through  your 
hands  alone,'  observed  that  those  words  completely 
implicated  him.  I  answered,  *  I  cannot  give  you  the 
paper,  having  passed  my  word  to  Sir  H.  Lowe  that  I 
would  bring  it  to  him :  however,'  I  continued,  *  if  you 
can  point  out  any  line  of  conduct  consistent  with  my 
duty  which  may  be  of  service  to  you,  I  shall  be  happy 
to  follow  it.'  *  No,'  said  he,  *  you  can  do  no  good  un- 
less by  giving  me  that  letter.'  I  replied,  that  I  could 
not  see  how  that  would  serve  him,  having  already  told 
the  Governor  the  contents  of  it.  He  continued,  *  Never 
mind  that ;  I  do  not  care  for  what  is  said^  but  what  is 
tcritten  remains  against  me.  If  you  give  me  that  letter 
I  will  destroy  it  before  your  face.'  I  answered,  *  What 
could  I  then  say  to  the  Governor  ?'     *  Why,'  said  he, 

*  tell  him  that  it  has  been  destroyed.*  I  replied,  *  That 
would  be  a  lie,  and  I  cannot  tell  a  lie.'    *  No,'  said  he, 

*  it  would  not ;  you  shall  see  me  do  it  before  your 
face.'  I  argued  that  it  would  be  a  gross  prevarica- 
tion, that  my  honour  was  concerned,  and  that  I  could 
not  do  it.  I  also  added  that  I  could  not  understand 
how  the  destruction  of  the  paper  in  question  would 
clear  him  from  the  charge  of  having  been  the  bearer 


Mat,  1818.  THE  SNUFF-BOX.  17 

of  the  snuflF-box  to  Mr.  Boys ;  asking  at  the  same  time 
what  he  (Mr.  O'Meara)  would  do  if  it  were  destroyed. 
He  replied,  he  would  then  assert  that  he  had  nothing 
to  do  in  the  business,  that  Mr.  Boys  had  received  the 
box  from  General  Montholon,  and,  being  afraid  to  re- 
tain it,  had  returned  it  through  his  (Mr.  O'Meara's) 
hands,  as  the  only  means  of  getting  it  back  to  Long- 
wood. 

"  In  the  course  of  the  conversation  Mr.  O'Meara 
repeatedly  expressed  his  disapprobation  of  Mr.  Boys*s 
conduct  in  having  returned  the  box,  adding,  that  he 
(Mr.  Boys)  had  expressed  himself  in  his  letter  as  if 
tite  matter  was  the  most  heinous  crime  possible, — that 
he  (Mr.  0*Meara)  had  met  with  a  pretty  return  for  his 
endeavours  to  serve  Mr,  Boys, — that  he  had  procured 
the  box  for  him  at  his  earnest  and  repeated  request. 

"  To  the  best  of  my  recollection,  knowledge,  and 
belief,  the  above  is  a  faithful  repetition  of  the  con- 
versation which  took  place  between  Mr.  O'Meara  and 
myself  upon  this  aflfair. 

"  BowATER  James  Vernon." 

The  truth  of  this  account  as  to  O'Meara  being  the 
party  who  handed  over  the  snuflF-box  was  fully  con- 
firmed by  Mr.  Boys  himself,  who  wrote  to  Mr.  Vernon 
on  the  6th  of  August,  and  said  that  his  statements 
were  perfectly  correct,  and  exactly  what  he  must  have 
made  himself  had  he  been  on  the  spot.  He  added, 
**But  although  not  the  less  obliged  to  you,  yet  you 
will  allow  me  to  say,  that,  excepting  the  dishonour 
which  O'Meara's  erroneous  statements  have  done  to 
him,  when  so  ably  and  correctly  refuted  by  you,  the 
whole  business  from  beginning  to  end  will  be  deemed 
by  everybody  in  England  a  complete  bagatelle." 

In  his  *  Voice  from  St.  Helena'  O'Meara  has  repre- 

VOL.  III.  c 


18  CAPTTVITT  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XIX. 

sented  that  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  of  his  own  accord, 
released  him  from  the  restrictions  which  had  been 
imposed,  because  Napoleon  refused  to  see  another 
surgeon,  and  on  account  of  the  remonstrances  of  the 
foreign  Commissioners,*  This  is  as  usual  untrue.  It 
was  O'Meara  himself  who  suggested  the  removal  of 
the  restrictions  on  account  of  what  he  called  "  the  ap- 
palling state"  of  Napoleon's  health  ;  and  the  Commis- 
sioners did  not  interfere  in  the  matter  in  the  slightest 
degree.*  On  the  5th  of  May  he  thus  wrote  to  the 
Gk)vemor : — 

"As  Napoleon  Bonaparte  has  declined  seeing  me 
since  the  14th  of  April  last,  and  I  fear  that  some  dan- 
gerous effects  may  follow,  I  beg  leave  to  propose 
putting  matters  upon  the  footing  they  formerly  were 
until  the  arrival  of  an  answer  from  England.  I  am 
inclined  to  think  that  if  he  was  informed  that  His 
Excellency  considered  me  as  his  surgeon,  as  holding 
the  place  of  a  French  surgeon  not  being  subordinate  to 
military  discipline,  but  to  civil  obedience,  that  things 
were  put  upon  the  footing  they  were  since  my  arrival, 
at  least  until  the  receipt  of  an  answer  from  Govern- 
ment, that  he  would  renew  the  confidence  he  formerly 
manifested.  The  actual  stjite  of  matters  now  is  ap- 
palling, and  will  probably  produce  very  unpleasant 

•  Voice,  vol.  il  p.  401. 

'  0*Meara  says  in  his  '  Voice,*  vol.  ii.  p.  401,  that  he  had  been  infonned 
that  during  an  animated  discussion  on  the  subject  the  Governor,  while 
debating  with  Baron  Stiirmer,  burst  forth  into  a  paroxysm  of  anger,  and 
the  Baron  *'very  coolly  made  his  Excellency  stop  opposite  to  a  large 
looking-glass,  in  which  he  begged  of  him  to  contemplate  his  own  features.** 
Upon  this  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  has  written  the  following  note : — "  There  was 
no  looking-glass  in  the  room. — H.  L."  The  discussion  alluded  to  had 
reference  entirely  to  the  unauthorised  communications  which  the  Commis- 
sioners kept  up  with  the  French,  and,  according  to  Major  Gorrequer,  "  the 
Governor  spoke  with  perfect  coolness  during  the  time  that  the  Baron 
expressed  himself  with  great  irritation  and  in  a  loud  tone  of  voice." 


Mat,  1818.  RESTRICTIONS  ON  OHEARA.  19 

sensations  both  in  England  and  Europe.  His  Excel- 
lency may  perhaps  reflect  upon  the  terrible  responsi- 
bility which  weighs  upon  him  if  (as  is  possible  and 
very  probable)  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  deprived  of 
assistance,  was  to  die  before  the  expiration  of  the  five 
or  six  months  required  to  obtain  an  answer  from 
England." 

In  consequence  of  this  application,  the  Governor 
determined  not  to  enforce  his  order  of  the  10th  of 
April,  and  caused  O'Meara  to  be  informed  that  he 
would  be  permitted  to  exercise  his  medical  duties  in 
the  same  manner  as  he  had  hitherto  performed  them 
untU  the  instructions  of  Government  were  received 
respecting  him ;  continuing,  however,  to  be  considered 
as  an  officer  employed  and  paid  by  the  British 
Grovemment,  and  subject  to  the  Governor's  authority 
and  control.  But  in  the  mean  time,  while  he  re- 
mained in  the  island,  or  until  the  orders  of  Govern- 
ment were  received,  he  might  consider  himself  as  a 
surgeon  attached  solely  to  the  person  and  femily  of 
Bonaparte,  and  "  in  fact  as  his  domestic  surgeon." 

On  the  10th  of  May,  after  O'Meara  had  resumed 
his  duties  as  usual  at  Longwood,  he  made  a  report  of 
Bonaparte's  health,  which  was  far  from  favourable. 
He  said,  —  "The  complaint  is  evidently  hepatitis 
in  a  chronic  and  insidious  form."  That  he  was  mis- 
taken in  this  opinion  was  proved  by  the  autopsy  of 
Napoleon's  body  after  his  death.  His  liver  in  fact  was 
healthy,  and  it  was  his  stomach  which  was  diseased. 
And  though  Bonaparte's  health  was  represented  by 
O'Meara  at  this  time  to  be  in  so  unsatisfactory  a 
state,  this  account  by  no  means  tallied  with  the  ob- 
servation of  others.  On  the  17th  the  orderly  officer 
reported,  "I  saw  General  Bonaparte  in  the  garden 

c  2 


20  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XIX. 

on  the  evening  of  the  15  th  instant,  walking  about  as 
usual.  I  have  been  also  informed  by  the  English 
gardener,  who  sees  him  oftener  and  nearer  than  I  do, 
that  he  does  not  observe  any  alteration  in  the  appear- 
ance of  General  Bonaparte  since  first  he  was  employed 
at  Longwood,  and  which  is  now  a  period  of  nearly 
nine  months." 

In  the  latter  part  of  the  month  of  May  Bonaparte 
caused  the  whole  of  the  English  servants  at  Longwood 
to  be  discharged,  because  the  orderly  officer  had  by  the 
directions  of  Sir  Thomas  Reade  read  to  them  a  public 
notice  issued  by  the  Governor  respecting  communica- 
tions from  or  to  the  persons  detained  there,  instead 
of  allowing  the  contents  to  be  made  known  to  them 
by  him,  their  master,  and  they  were  replaced  by  two 
Chinese.  On  the  same  day  he  dismissed  Le  Page 
the  cook,  and  his  wife  Jeannette,  as  the  former  had 
expressed  a  wish  to  leave  Longwood  some  time  before. 


JuOT,  1818.  O'MEARA  INTERROGATED.  21 


CHAPTER  XX. 

O'bIEABA  interrogated  by  the  governor  —  ALLEGED  DAMP- 
NESS OF  napoleon's  apartments  —  EXPULSION  OF  o'MEARA 
FROM  THE  MESS  OF  THE  66tH  REGIMENT  —  DEPARTURE  OF  THE 
AUSTRIAN  COMMISSIONER  —  COUNT  BERTRAND  CHALLENGED 
BY  COLONEL  LYSTER  —  DESPATCHES  FROM  THE  COLONIAL 
OFFICE  RELATIVE  TO  INFORB£ATION  GIVEN  BY  GENERAL  GOUR- 
QAUD  —  CLANDESTINE  CORRESPONDENCE  CARRIED  ON  AT 
LONGWOOD. 

On  the  12th  of  June  the  Gk)venior  had  a  long  con- 
versation with  O'Meara,  at  which  Major  Gorrequer 
was  present,  and  which  aflFords  another  proof,  if 
proof  were  wanting,  of  the  surgeon's  reckless  dis- 
regard of  truth,  and  his  readiness  to  screen  himself 
by  fidsehood  whenever  he  dared  not  to  avow  and 
justify  his  acts.  Sir  Hudson,  having  called  his  atten- 
tion to  the  fisM^t  of  a  sealed  letter  from  Napoleon  to  the 
Earl  of  Liverpool  having  been  sent  to  him  which  he 
forwarded  to  England  unopened,  said,  that  a  copy 
of  this  letter  had  been  conveyed  to  England  in  a 
clandestine  manner,  and  published  in  the  newspapers ; 
and  he  then  addressed  O'Meara  as  follows: — "I, 
as  the  person  charged  with  the  custody  of  Napo- 
leon Bonaparte's  person,  ask  of  you,  as  a  British 
officer  paid  and  employed  by  the  British  Government, 
on  duty  near  him,  if  you  know  anything  respecting 
the  mode  of  its  transmission,  or  by  whom  this  letter  was 
conveyed  to  England  ?"  "  iVo,  Sir,''  was  the  answer, 
^^  I  know  nothing  whatever  about  it"  "  Do  you  know 
any  means  or  channel  by  which  it  might  have  been  thus 
sent  ?"     "  No,  I  do  not,  I  can  smpect  no  one!'     "  Then 


22  CAPTIYITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XX. 

you  mean  to  say,  you  do  not  know  to  whom  this  letter 
was  given  to  be  conveyed  out  of  the  island,  by  what 
mode  or  through  what  channel  it  was  thus  clandes- 
tinely transmitted  to  England,  and  that  you  do  not 
know  any  person  by  whom  it  was  likely  to  have 
been  sent ;  in  fact,  that  you  know  nothing  about  it  ?" 
"  Yes,  Sir,  Ida  mean  to  say  so ;  I  know  nothing  about 
it:'  "  Will  you  state  this  upon  your  oath  ?"  "  It  is 
an  insult,**  replied  Mr.  O'Meara,  after  a  short  hesita- 
tion, "to  ask  me  to  take  my  oath,  after  what  I  have 
just  answered ;  a  person  whose  word  is  not  worthy  of 
belief  does  not  deserve  to  have  more  credit  given  to 
his  oath.  You  have  no  right  to  examine  me  upon 
oath  on  this  business ;  and  besides,  it  would  be 
establishing  a  precedent  I  do  not  wish  to  do  [make].** 
The  Governor  afterwards  asked  him  if  he  knew  of 
any  paper  having  been  sent  home  clandestinely  in 
June  last  year.  "No,**  he  answered,  "I  do  not; 
this  is  the  first  I  hear  of  any  being  sent  then"  "  Have 
you  any  knowledge  of  any  other  paper  having  been 
thus  sent  home  ?'*  "  No,  I  have  not, — none  whatever:* 
Changing  the  subject.  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  now  asked 
O'Meara  whether  Napoleon  Bonaparte  was  in  want 
of  any  personal  comiforts  which  might  be  aflForded 
him  ?  He  replied,  that  the  room  he  slept  in  was  very 
small,  sometimes  damp,  and  had  no  chimney  in  it, 
which  latter  was  necessary  in  so  small  a  room,  and 
besides  which,  it  was  low ;  and  he  added,  that  the 
billiard-room  was  the  only  good-sized  one  in  the  house. 
The  Gk)vemor  said  the  drawing-room  was  a  very 
good  one  also,  and  so  was  the  library.  But  if  Bona- 
parte had  not  a  new  house  built,  it  was  entirely  his 
own  fault,  for  when  it  was  proposed  to  build  him 
one,  he  would  not  give  an  answer.  He  thai  in- 
quired whether  there  was  anything  that  could  be  done 


JuHB,  1818.    ALLEGED  DAMPNESS  OF  HIS  BED-ROOM.        23 

for  his  comfort  with  regard  to  diet  ?  0*Meara  replied 
that  he  believed  there  was  no  want  in  that  respect ; 
he  had  not  heard  that  anything  was  required  beyond 
what  was  furnished. 

And  now,  after  this  deliberate  denial  of  all  know- 
ledge of  any  copy  of  the  letter  to  Lord  Liverpool 
having  been  sent  clandestinely  to  England,  what  will 
the  reader  think  of  the  credit  due  to  the  assertions  in 
his  book,  when  we  quote  the  first  paragraph  of  his 
letter  written  and  sent  to  Mr.  Finlaison  at  the 
Admiralty  in  the  month  of  November  1817,  six 
months  before  ?  He  there  said,  "  /  enclose  you  a  cor- 
rect copy  of  Bonaparte  s  answer  to  Lord  Bathurst's 
speechj  the  original  of  which  uhis  delivered  to  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe  on  the  7th  of  October^  sealed  and  directed  to  the 
Bight  Honourable  Lord  Liverpool.*'  And  as  to  his 
positive  statement  that  he  had  never  heard  of  any 
paper  having  been  clandestinely  sent  home  in  June 
of  the  preceding  year,  he  himself  secrectly  enclosed  a 
copy  of  Boni^)arte'8  observations  on  the  restrictions 
in  a  letter  to  Mr.  Finlaison  on  the  29th  of  that  month! 

Sir  Hudson  Lowe  lost  no  time  in  inquiring  as  to 
the  dampness  of  Bonaparte's  bed-room,  and  having 
called  before  him  Mr.  Darling,  an  upholsterer  charged 
with  the  repairs  and  furnishing  of  the  interior  of  Long- 
wood  House,  put  the  following  questions  to  him : — 

"  Have  you  been  lately  in  Napoleon  Bonaparte's 
bed-room  ?"  '*  About  five  weeks  since  I  went  there 
to  put  up  some  curtains." 

"  Did  you  observe  if  there  was  any  dampness  in 
the  room  ?"     "  None  at  all  that  I  could  see." 

"How  are  the  walls  covered?"  "They  we 
covered  with  nankeen  in  folds." 

"Do  you  think  you  would  have  observed  any 
dampness,  if  any  existed  there?"      "Yes,  I  think 


24  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XX* 

I  should ;  and  I  think  that  Marchand,  his  valet-de- 
chambre,  if  anything  of  that  kind  had  existed,  would 
have  informed  me  of  it,  as  he  always  does  of  every- 
thing that  is  wanting  for  his  master." 

"  Is  there  any  fireplace  in  the  room  ?"  "  Not  in 
the  bed-room,  but  one  in  the  room  through  which  one 
passes  to  go  into  the  bed-room,  the  door  of  which  is 
almost  constantly  left  open,  I  put  carpets  in  both 
these  rooms  latterly," 

"  Is  there  not  a  fireplace  at  the  back  of  the  apart- 
ments also?"  "  Not  immediately  at  the  back.  The 
bath-room  lies  at  the  back,  and  the  fireplace  at 
which  the  water  is  heated  is  on  the  outside." 

"  Did  you  ever  observe  any  dampness  in  the  house, 
or  anything  wanting  on  the  roof?"  "  I  observed  the 
roof  of  the  billiard-room  to  be  out  of  repair  at  one 
time,  but  it  has  been  repaired.  There  are  servants' 
rooms  above  the  lower  apartments,  and,  if  any  wet 
was  to  get  in,  it  would  naturally  be  perceived  there 
first.  General  Bonaparte  has  two  beds  in  his  bed- 
room, one  of  which  was  sent  out  here  for  him,  and 
the  other  he  brought  with  him.  The  large  one  he 
fixed  at  first  in  his  drawing-room,  but  only  slept 
there  one  night." 

Colonel  Wynyard  was  however  sent  to  Count 
Montholon  for  the  purpose  of  seeing  whether  by 
building  a  chimney  or  otherwise  the  alleged  damp- 
ness might  be  remedied,  and  the  Count's  statement 
was  at  striking  variance  with  that  of  Darling  the 
upholsterer,  /  He  said  that,  the  room  being  built  on 
the  ground,  ^^f^r?  ^^^  "^  mrnnlp^'^^  ^f  iiir.j^npj^th 
the  floor ;  that  the  whole  house  was  the  same  in,  this 
respect  (except  the  billiard-room,  the  floor  of  which 
being  raised  was  less  damp  than  any  other),  and  the 
rafters  and  floor  were  in  some  places  rotting,  in  conse- 


JuKB,  1818.  CMEARA  EXPELLED  THE  MESS.  25 

quence  of  resting  on  the  ground ;  that  the  bed-room 
in  particular  being  immediately  at  the  back  of  the 
bath-room,  with  a  cistern  at  tiie  outside  behind  it, 
the  water  soaked  through  underneath  it,  and,  unless 
the  windows  were  open  and  large  fires  kept  in  the 
adjoining  rooms,  it  was  like  entering  the  vaults 
beneath  a  church,  the  damp  was  so  striking  on  enter- 
ing the  room. 

Between  these  conflicting  assertions  the  reader 
must  decide  for  himseL^  according  to  the  credit  he 
thinks  due  to  Count  Montholon  or  Mr,  Darling.* 
But  it  may  assist  him  in  coming  to  a  right  conclusion 
to  be  told  that  Colonel  Wynyard,  in  his  oreport  to 
the  Governor  of  Count  Montholon*s  remarks,  stated, 
that,  having  been  since  his  arrival  at  St.  Helena 
charged  with  the  superintendence  of  the  repairs  at 
Longwood,  he  thought  it  right  to  mention,  that, 
although  Count  Montholon  had  been  in  the  habit  of 
making  known  to  him  complaints,  and  applying  for 
any  repairs  or  alterations  that  were  required,  this  was 
the  first  time  he  had  heard  a  complaint  from  himself 
or  any  individual  of  the  dampness  of  Napoleon  Bona- 
parte's bed-room. 

On  the  23rd  of  June  O'Meara  received  a  note  from 
Colonel  Lascelles,  the  commanding  officer  of  the  66th 
regiment,  shortly  telling  him  that  he  could  no  longer 
allow  him  to  be  an  honorary  member  of  their  mess. 
In  his  book  O'Meara  attributes  this  to  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe  having  employed  Sir  Thomas  Reade  to  fill  the 
mind  of  Colonel  Lascelles  with  the  most  insidious 


*  In  a  report  of  O'Meara  respecting  Bonaparte*8  health,  dated  the  29th 
of  June  this  year,  he  said  he  had  been  obliged  to  discontinue  the  use  of 
mercurial  preparations  in  consequence  of  a  severe  catarrhal  affection  of  his 
patient,  caused  by  the  extreme  humidity  of  his  rooms.  He  stated  also  that 
the  progress  of  hepatitis  had  increased. 


26  CAPTivrrY  of  napoleon.  chap.  xx. 

calumnies  against  him,  and  to  insinuate  that  his  ex- 
pulsion would  be  very  agreeable  to  the  Governor. 
These  alleged  calumnies  were  the  simple  statement  of 
proved  facts,  and  his  conduct  had  been  such  as  fully 
to  justify  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  in  suggesting  that  he 
should  not  be  allowed  to  continue  a  member  of  the 
mess.  0*Meara  wrote  to  the  officers  of  the  regiment, 
thanking  them  for  their  past  friendship  and  kindness, 
and  on  the  following  day  he  received  the  following 
reply,  ^  which  in  justness  and  fiedmess  to  him  is  here 
given  at  length : — 

**  Dear  Sir,  "  Deadwood,  June  26,  1818. 

"As  president  last  night  I  had  the  honour  of 
communicating  to  the  mess  the  contents  of  your  letter 
of  the  25th  instant,  and  am  directed  by  the  command- 
ing officer  and  officers  composing  it  to  say,  it  is  with 
much  regret  they  hear  of  your  departure  as  an  hono- 
rary member  of  the  mess,  and  to  assure  you  they 
always  conceived  your  conduct  while  with  them  to  be 
perfectly  consistent  in  every  respect  with  that  of  a 
gentleman.  I  am  also  directed  to  say,  the  mess  feel 
much  indebted  for  the  very  flattering  expressions  of 
esteem  contained  in  your  letter,  and  have  the  honour, 
&c.  "  Chas.  McCarthy, 

"Lieut.  66th Eegiment." 

That  O'Meara  possessed  many  agreeable  social 
qualities  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt,  and  very  pro- 
bably he  was  a  popular  member  of  the  mess ;  but  it 
is  not  to  be  supposed  that  the  gallant  officers  of  the 
66th  would  have  sanctioned  such  a  letter  as  the  above 
if  they  had  known,  as  toe  now  knoiCy  the  wilful  and  de- 
liberate falsehoods  of  which  the  subject  of  it  was  guilty. 

*  See  *  Voice,'  vol.  ii.  p.  411,  where  the  letter  is  printed. 


JcNB,  1818.      THE  OFFICERS  OF  THB  SIXTY-SIXTH.  27 

Let  US,  however,  hear  the  accoimt  given  by  an 
officer  who  was  at  the  time  assistant-snrgeon  of  the 
€6th,  and  well  acquainted  with  the  facts :  * — 

"About  this  time,  Mr,  0*Meara  having  been  dis- 
covered tampering  with  two  or  three  individuals  re- 
sident in  the  island,  with  the  object  of  prevailing  on 
them  to  accept  presents  clandestinely  from  Napoleon, 
in  violation  of  the  regulations  in  force ;  and  being 
also  accused  of  repeating  the  confidential  conversation 
of  our  mess — of  which  he  was  an  honorary  member — 
at  Longwood ;  the  Gk>vernor  stated  the  facts  of  the 
case  to  Sir  Gkorge  Bingham  and  the  commanding 
officer  of  the  66th,  intimating  to  the  latter  his  opinion 
that  Mr.  O'Meara  should  not  be  permitted  to  continue 
a  member  of  the  mess,  he  having  abused  the  privileges 
his  position  gave  him.  At  this  time  Colonel  Nicol 
had  gone  to  England,  and  another  offic^er,  whose  name 
I  do  not  mention,  commanded  the  regiment.  Without 
consulting  the  officers  of  the  mess,  or  submitting  for 
l^eir  consideration  the  facts  communicated  to  him  by 
the  Gk>vemor,  he  sent  a  written  intimation  to  Mr. 
O'Meara  that  his  society  was  no  longer  desired  by  the 
regiment,  which  pretty  strong  hint  the  Doctor  dis- 
regarded, came  to  dinner  the  same  day,  and  after- 
wards appealed  to  the  officers  of  the  mess  as  to  the 
prc^riety  of  his  conduct  whilst  mixing  with  them. 
Having  been  kept  in  the  dark  as  to  the  real  culpar 
bility  of  O'Meara,  and  being,  perhaps,  a  little  piqued 
at  the  proceedings  of  their  commanding  officer,  they 
readily  certified  to  the  gentlemanly  deportment  of  Mr. 
O'Meara  whilst  he  was  a  member  of  the  mess 

"It  is,  I  think,  much  to  be  regretted  that  the 
(^cers  of  the   66th  mess  should  have  given  Mr. 

»  Henry's  •Events  of  a  Military  Life,'  vol.  ii.  pp.  39-41. 


28  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XX. 

O'Meara  any  written  certificate  of  good  character 
whilst  a  member  of  their  mess.  However  correct 
his  behaviour  might  have  been  before,  the  gross  in- 
sult to  our  commanding  officer,  and  indirectly  to  our- 
selves, of  sitting  down  to  dinner  after  the  prohibitory 
note  he  had  received,  ought  to  have  prevented  any  ver- 
bal or  written  testimony  being  given  a  man  who  could 
act  with  such  effrontery.  As  it  turned  it,  our  cer- 
tificate eventually  became  one  chief  prop  to  the  credi- 
bility of  O'Meara's  *  Voice  from  St.  Helena,'  a  specious 
but  sophistical  book,  full  of  misrepresentations,  yet 
more  remarkable  for  the  mppressio  veri  than  the 
assertio  falsi.** 

That  this  statement  is  true  to  the  letter  is  fiilly 
proved  by  the  papers  in  the  possession  of  the  family 
of  Sir  Hudson  Lowe.  The  conduct  of  Colonel  Lascelles 
and  Lieutenant  Reardon  with  respect  to  O'Meara, 
and  the  correspondence  between  the  two  latter,  were 
deemed  by  the  Governor,  when  he  heard  of  it  in 
October,  so  unsatisfactory,  that  he  directed  Brigadier- 
General  Sir  George  Bingham  to  investigate  the  mat- 
ter, and  he  accordingly  examined  both  the  officers, 
but  nothing  material  was  elicited  beyond  what  has 
been  already  stated.  Considering,  however,  that 
Lieutenant  Reardon  was  the  professed  finend  of 
O'Meara,  and  that  he  afterwards,  in  1823,  came 
forward  as  his  supporter  and  made  an  affidavit  on 
his  behalf,  it  is  very  remarkable  that  in  reply  to  some 
interrogatories  put  to  him  by  Sir  George  Bingham 
during  the  inquiry  he  spoke  of  him  as  ^Uhat  villain 
O^Meardj**  and  said  that  he  (Lieutenant  Reardon) 
had  told  the  Bertrands  that  what  O'Meara  had  done 
at  St.  Helena  could  hang  him,  and  that  he  himself 
would  be  a  ruined  man  for  having  been  his  friend. 


JuNB,  1818.      THE  OFFICERS  OF  THE  SIXTY-SIXTH.  29 

Sir  Hudson  Lowe  determined  to  remove  both  Colonel 
Lascelles  and  Lieutenant  Eeardon  from  the  island, 
and  the  fonner  was  succeeded  in  the  command  of  the 
corps  of  the  66th  regiment  by  Major  Dodgin.  The 
new  Lieutenant-Colonel  assembled  a  general  meeting 
of  the  officers  early  in  November,  and  they  agreed 
upon  the  following  letter,  which  was  addressed  and 
forwarded  to  Sir  Greorge  Bingham : — 

"  Sir,  "  St.  Helena,  November  6,  1818. 

"  Lieut.-Colonel  Dodgin  having  called  a  meet- 
ing of  the  officers  of  the  regiment  relative  to  a  let- 
ter some  time  ago  written  to  Mr.  O'Meara,  the  late 
medical  attendant  at  Longwood,  in  name  of  the  com- 
manding officer  and  officers  composing  the  66th  mess, 
as  this  letter  was  written  without  our  knowledge, 
advice,  or  consent,  we,  the  undersigned  officers  of 
the  66th  regiment,  beg  leave  to  declare  to  you,  and 
request  you  will  please  to  make  known  the  same  to 
his  Excellency  the  Governor,  that  none  of  us  were 
ever  consulted  on  the  writing  of  any  letter  to  Mr. 
O'Meara ;  on  the  contrary,  it  was  not  till  some  time 
after  the  writing  of  the  above-mentioned  letter  that 
it  came  to  our  knowledge  that  any  correspondence 
whatever  had  taken  place  between  the  officers  at 
Deadwood  and  Mr.  0*Meara. 

"  We  make  this  public  declaration  to  you,  that,  in 
case  Mr.  O'Meara  should  think  proper  to  publish  the 
letter  above  referred  to,  his  Excellency  would  be  pos- 
sessed of  the  means  of  exculpating  tiie  body  of  the 
officers  of  the  regiment  from  any  blame  that  may 
attach  to  them  in  the  eyes  of  His  Royal  Highness  the 
Commander-in-Chief. 

"  We  beg  further  to  declare  that  no  meeting  of 
the  officers  of  the  regiment  was.  ever  held  to  con- 


30  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XX. 

suit  on  any  subject  in  which  Mr.  O'Meara  was  con- 

"  We  have  the  honour  to  be,  &c." 
[Here  follow  the  signatures  of  twenty-seven  officers.] 

At  the  same  time  the  following  letter  was  written 
to  Lieut-Colonel  Dodgin : — 

"  Sir,  "  Deadwood,  Nov.  6, 1818. 

"  Understanding  that  a  communication  is  about 
to  be  made  to  his  Excellency  the  Governor  by  the 
majority  of  the  officers  of  the  regiment,  respecting  a 
letter  addressed  by  Mr.  O'Meara  to  the  officers  of  the 
Deadwood  mess,  and  the  answer  thereto, — we,  who 
were  present  at  the  mess  when  that  letter  was  re- 
ceived, and  who  were  acquainted  with  the  answer,  beg 
leave  to  state  that,  at  tiie  time  when  Mr.  0*Meara 
ceased  being  an  honorary  member  of  our  mess,  we 
were  totally  ignorant  of  any  imputation  of  improper 
conduct  being  attached  to  his  character,  and  in  re- 
plying we  only  acted,  as  we  then  judged,  under  the 
influence  of  the  common  rules  of  politeness.  From 
circumstances  which  have  since  come  to  our  know- 
ledge, we  have  now  to  express  our  regret  that  an 
answer  should  have  been  sent,  and  to  repeat  that  we 
were  not  then  aware  of  any  impropriety  being  ascribed 

"  We  have  the  honour  to  be,  &c." 

[To  this  letter  were  attached  seven  signatures.] 

When  in  the  month  of  March,  1819,  some  extracts 
from  O'Meara's  letter  to  the  Admiralty,  dated  the 
28th  of  October,  1818  (which  will  be  particularly 
alluded  to  hereafter),  were  made  known  to  the  officers 
of  the  66th,  they  addressed  Sir  George  Bingham,  and 


JuLT,  1818.        DEPAETUBE^^OP  BARON  STUEMER.  31 

said,  with  reference  to  their  own  letter  to  O'Meara 
signed  by  Lieutenant  McCarthy, — 

•*  The  behaviour  of  Mr.  O'Meara  whilst  at  the  mess- 
table  was  alone  referred  to  in  that  letter,  a  copy  of 
which  has  been  transmitted  to  the  Governor,  and 
nothing  in  the  most  remote  degree  connected  with  Mr. 
O'Meara's  situation  or  conduct  on  the  Longwood  esta- 
blishment was  therein  adverted  to.  It  is  then  with 
feelings  of  the  greatest  surprise  and  indignation  we 
have  seen  the  false  and  scandalous  construction  put  by 
Mr.  O'Meara  on  a  letter  intended  merely  as  a  mark  of 
common  civility ;  and  we  now  beg  you.  Sir,  to  assure 
His  Excellency  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  that  the  whole  of 
the  assertions  and  implications  contained  in  the  latter 
part  of  the  extracts  are  wanton  and  malicious  false- 
hoods; and  that  the  publication  of  the  letter  from 
whence  those  extracts  have  been  taken  is  a  vain  at- 
tempt to  traduce  the  character  of  the  oflBcers  of  the 
66th  regiment." 

At  the  suggestion  of  the  British  Government  Baron 
Stiirmer,  the  Austrian  Commissioner,  was  removed 
from  St.  Helena  at  the  end  of  June,  in  consequence  of 
his  persisting  in  unauthorised  communications  with 
the  French  at  Longwood ;  but  the  unpleasantness  of 
dismissal  was  veiled  under  the  guise  of  an  appoint- 
ment as  Consul  Gkneral  for  Austria  to  the  United 
States  of  America. 

On  the  2nd  of  July  the  Governor  had  a  conver- 
sation with  O'Meara,  and,  after  suggesting  a  mode  of 
remedying  the  dampness  complained  of  in  Napoleon's 
bed-room,  said  that  he  had  frequently  offered  to 
build  a  house  for  Bonaparte,  but  had  never  obtained  a 
decisive  answer ;  that  he  had  even  oflFered  to  him  the 
choice  of  a  number  of  places  (in  the  pleasantest  and 


32  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XX. 

best  situations  he  could  find  in  the  island),  but  he  had 
not  thought  proper  to  fix  upon  any ;  it  was  not  his 
feult  therefore  if  he  was  not  better  lodged.  0*Meara 
answered,  he  understood  that  Napoleon  had  given 
an  answer  long  ago,  and  that  he  only  required  a  place 
where  there  was  shade  and  water.  The  Governor 
replied  that  he  had  not  given  any  answer  which  he 
could  act  upon. 

On  the  morning  of  the  10th  Bonaparte  was  so  ill, 
that  O'Meara  succeeded  in  obtaining  his  consent  to 
consult  Mr.  Stokoe,  the  surgeon  of  H.M.S.  Conqueror, 
who,  however,  declined  to  attend  him  unless  another 
professional  person  were  also  present,  on  the  ground 
of  the  extreme  responsibility  of  the  case.  O'Meara 
immediately  reported  the  circumstance  to  Major  Gor- 
requer  for  the  Governor's  information,  and  explained 
the  symptoms  of  Napoleon's  illness,  in  a  note  which 
would  not  be  worth  alluding  to  except  to  mention  that 
he  there  speaks  of  the  "  humidity  of  the  season''  as 
one  of  the  causes  of  his  patient's  malady,  and  that  in 
his  printed  work  he  makes  no  allusion  to  the  state  of 
the  weather,  but  attributes  a  severe  catarrhal  aflfection 
from  which  Napoleon  suffered  to  the  "  extreme  hu- 
midity of  his  rooms''^  Was  it  feir,  was  it  honest  to 
substitute  the  one  expression  for  the  other  for  the  pur- 
pose of  giving  effect  to  his  picture  of  discomfort  at 
Longwood  ? 

On  the  16th  Captain  Blakeney,  after  a  year's  service 
in  that  post,  was,  at  his  own  request,  removed  from  the 
situation  of  orderly  officer  at  Longwood,  and  Lieut.- 
Colonel  Lyster,  who  fifteen  years  before  had  served  in 
a  regiment  with  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  and  was  then  In- 
spector of  the  militia  force  at  St.  Helena,  with  the 

*  Voice,  vol.  il  p.  412. 


JiTLT,  1818.         COL.  LYSTER  ORDERLY  OFFICER.  33 

local  rank  of  Lieut.-Colonel,  succeeded  him,  assisted 
by  Lieutenant  (now  Lieut.-Colonel)  Basil  Jackson  of 
the  Royal  StaflF  Corps,  These  appointments  were 
immediately  notified  to  Count  Bertrand ;  and  no  ob- 
jection was  made  by  Napoleon  until  the  20th,  the  day 
on  which  the  two  officers  came  to  Longwood ;  though 
the  intention  to  send  them  was  made  known  to  him 
four  days  before.  As  soon  as  they  arrived,  however, 
a  strong  remonstrance  to  the  Governor  was  written  by 
Bertrand,  at  the  instigation  and  by  the  dictation  of 
Napoleon. 

The  chief  objections  urged  in  this  letter  were,  that 
Colonel  Lyster  had  commanded  a  Corsican  regiment 
at  Ajaccio,  and  was  considered  by  Napoleon  as  a  per- 
sonal enemy.*  It  stated  that  one  of  the  grievances  of 
which  he  had  a  right  to  complain  was  the  appointment 
of  a  person  like  "i/r.  Lyster,  whom  you  imposed  on 
us  as  orderly  officer,  who  is  no  longer  in  the  service,  and 
who  holds  no  other  commission  than  a  command  in  the 
militia.  A  person  who  forms  no  part  of  the  English 
army ;  who  belongs  to  no  corps ;  who  has  been  your 
creature  for  many  years,  and  is  altogether  dependent 
upon  you;  who  will  sign  whatever  you  dictate,  or 
conceive  whatever  you  require ;  will  say  whatever 
you  please,  having  no  other  will,  no  other  conscience, 
than  yours ;  that  is  to  say,  that  of  an  avowed  enemy  ; 
is  more  convenient  to  you,  no  doubt,  than  the  acknow- 
ledged probity  of  a  captain  who  belongs  to  a  regular 
regiment,  and  who  has  to  lose  a  reputation  and  a  con- 
science of  his  own." 

The  Governor  replied,  that  it  was  a  mistake  to 

*  •*  Nous  avons  reconnu  avec  surprise  que  le  Lieut-Colonel  Lyster  est 
le  m^me  qui  a  command^  k  Ajaccio,  ville  oii  est  situ^  la  maison  pater- 
nelle  de  TEmpereur.  H  a  des  raisons  pour  le  consid^rer  oomme  un  en« 
nemi  personnel.** 

VOL.  III.  D 


34  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON,  Chap.  XX. 

suppose  that  Colonel  Lyster  had  ever  commanded  at 
Ajaccio,  and  that  the  reasons  which  induced  Bonaparte 
to  consider  him  as  a  personal  enemy  were  entirely 
imaginary.  He  added,  that,  as  that  officer  had  already 
entered  upon  his  duties,  he  could  not  consent  to  his 
removal,  however  willing  he  might  have  been  not  to 
appoint  him  in  the  first  instance,  if  he  had  known  that 
there  was  a  prejudice  against  him.  But  there  was 
another  cause  of  offence:  O'Meara  had  been  in  the 
habit  of  messing  with  the  orderly  officer,  not  as  of 
right,  but  as  a  matter  of  mutual  arrangement  and  con- 
venience, and  for  some  time  past  Captain  Blakeney 
had  ceased  to  continue  this  practice.  When  Colonel 
Lyster  was  appointed  to  succeed  him  he  did  not  wish 
to  have  the  company  of  O'Meara,  and  declared  his 
intention  not  to  allow  him  to  mess  with  himself  and 
Lieutenant  Jackson.  O'Meara  called  on  the  Colonel 
and  asked  him  whether  it  was  by  the  Governor's  orders 
that  this  was  done.  He  answered.  No,  and  that  surely 
he  had  a  right  to  choose  his  own  society.  Almost  im- 
mediately afterwards  Count  Montholon  came  and  told 
Colonel  Lyster  that  the  Emperor  looked  upon  the  ex- 
clusion of  O'Meara  from  his  table  as  a  marked  insult 
to  himself,  that  gentleman  being  his  own  surgeon,  and 
that  he  had  commanded  all  the  French  officers  at  Long- 
wood,  under  pain  of  his  severest  displeasure,  never 
again  to  receive  as  a  visitor  an  English  officer  so  long 
as  O'Meara  was  not  allowed  to  dine  at  the  orderly's 
mess.  Colonel  Lyster  simply  replied  "  Vous  Stes  le 
mattrej  Monsieur ;'  and  the  Count  left  him.  But  he 
had  not  been  gone  half  an  hour  before  Bertrand  came, 
"  looking  pale  and  agitated  to  a  degree,"  and  told  the 
Colonel  that  the  Emperor  had  commanded  him  to  ask 
whether  he  was  the  officer  "  who  had  served  several 
years  in  a  Corsican  corps  raised  by  Sir  Hudson  Lowe," 


JuLT,  1818.    BERTRAND  CHALLENGED  BY  COL.  LTSTER.      35 

and  to  saythat  his  residence  at  Longwood  was  par- 
ticularly disagreeable.  Colonel  Lyster  answered,  that 
he  had  never  served  in  any  Corsican  regiment,  and 
that  he  greatly  regretted  the  prejudice  against  him, 
as  the  Governor's  instructions  to  him  were  to  do 
everything  in  his  power  to  conciliate  and  add  to  the 
comforts  of  the  exiles,  which  he  was  most  heartily 
disposed  to  do,  and  also  to  be  on  the  most  friendly 
footing  with  them  if  they  would  allow  him;  but 
that  as  to  not  establishing  himself  on  the  premises, 
it  was  entirely  out  of  the  question,  as  he  could  not 
possibly  quit  them  without  the  positive  orders  of  the 
Governor. 

Unfortunately  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  showed  Bertrand*s 
letter  to  Colonel  Lyster.  This  was  an  act  both  un- 
called for  and  indiscreet,  for  it  could  do  no  good,  and 
the  language  there  used  was  of  a  nature  greatly  to 
irritate  the  feelings  of  a  susceptible  soldier.  The 
result  was  even  worse  than  might  have  been  antici- 
pated. Colonel  Lyster  allowed  himself  to  be  hurried 
away  by  anger,  and  so  fer  forgot  the  relative  posi- 
tions of  himself  and  Count  Bertrand  at  St.  Helena, 
that  on  the  morning  of  the  24th  he  wrote  and  sent 
him,  by  Lieutenant  Jackson,  an  indignant  challenge, 
calling  upon  him,  if  he  had  the  smallest  spark  of 
honour  remaining,  to  give  him  satisfaction.  To  this 
no  reply  was  sent,  and  the  Colonel  then  wrote  another 
letter  more  offensive  in  its  language  than  the  former, 
and  threatened  to  horsewhip  the  Count,^ — that  is,  the 
officer  on  guard  threatened  to  castigate  his  prisoner, 
unless  that  prisoner  would  fight  a  duel  with  him  I 
Bertrand  forwarded  the  letter  to  the  Governor,  and, 
pretending  to  believe  that  Colonel  Lyster  was  only 

■  These  letters  are  printed  in  Olieara's' *  Exposition,'  pp.  66  et  teq. 
(2nd  edit) 

D   2 


36  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XX. 

acting  as  Sir  Hudson  Lowe's  second  in  the  matter, 
signified  with  safe  courage  his  readiness  to  give  the 
principal  the  satisfaction  which  he  refiised  to  the 
other.  The  consequence  was  that  Colonel  Lyster 
was  immediately  removed  from  duty  at  Longwood, 
and  Captain  Blakeney  was  re-appointed  in  his  place. 
At  the  same  time  the  Governor  wrote  to  Count 
Bertrand,  and  expressed  his  concern  and  extreme  dis- 
pleasure that  such  a  letter  should  have  been  addressed 
to  him  by  the  orderly  oflBcer, 

The  Gt)vernor  desired  O'Meara  to  attend  at  Planta- 
tion House  on  the  19  th  of  July,  and,  after  asking  him 
some  questions  respecting  Bonaparte's  health,  told 
him  that  Count  Bertrand  had  been  very  busy  in 
endeavouring  to  impress  upon  the  minds  of  the 
foreign  Commissioners  that  he  (O'Meara)  was  an 
ill-used  man,  and  that  he  was  quite  innocent  of  the 
delivery  of  the  snuff-box  to  Mr.  Boys,  which  had  in 
reality  been  given  to  him  by  Count  Montholon.  Sir 
Hudson  pointed  out  that  this  was  an  indirect  and 
improper  mode  of  exculpation,  and  expressed  his  sur- 
prise that  O'Meara  had  not  thought  proper  to  avail 
himself  of  the  opportunity  offered  to  him  of  clearing 
up  the  matter,  by  entering  into  a  full  explanation 
with  Admiral  Plampin.  O'Meara  answered,  that,  with 
regard  to  what  Count  Bertrand  had  mentioned  to  the 
Commissioners,  he  had  never  heard  of  it  until  now ; 
and  that  he  had  called  upon  the  Admiral  for  the  pur- 
pose of  stating  the  whole  matter  to  him,  but  he 
would  not  see  him,  and,  as  he  had  refused  once  to  see 
him,  it  was  not  his  business  to  go  there  a  second  time. 
The  GU)vernor  observed,  that  this  was  not  a  fair 
way  of  stating  the  question,  for  he  ought  to  have 
added  that  he  went  in  opposition  to  and  defiance 
of  a  written  order  fh)m  the  Governor,  of  which  the 


July,  1818.  GOURGAUD'S  REVELATIONS.  37 

Admiral  was  aware,  and  it  was  on  that  account  that 
he  was  not  received  by  him.  "  The  order,"  said  Sir 
Hudson,  "was,  that  you  were  permitted  to  leave 
Ix)ngwood  to  go  to  the  Admiral  in  case  the  latter 
desired  to  see  you.''  O'Meara's  answer  was,  that  he 
did  not  acknowledge  a  passive  obedience  to  all 
orders ;  and  that  he  had  a  right  to  exercise  his  own 
judgment  with  respect  to  what  it  was  proper  for  him 
to  obey. 

After  some  ftirther  conversation  the  Grovemor  said 
to  O'Meara,  that,  as  he  had  not  thought  proper  to 
make  the  attempt  to  clear  up  his  character  before 
the  Admiral,  as  had  been  so  frequently  suggested 
to  him,  he  must  consider  him  as  under  a  cloud 
for  having  betrayed  the  trust  reposed  in  him  as  a 
British  officer,  and  practised  a  deception  upon  his 
Government.  O'Meara  again  replied,  that,  having 
once  called  upon  the  Admiral  for  that  purpose  and 
been  refused,  he  did  not  think  it  his  business  to  go  .a 
second  time. 

About  the  middle  of  the  month  some  very  import- 
ant despatches  for  the  GrOvemor  arrived  from  England. 
Early  in  May  General  Grourgaud  had  given  to  Mr 
Gk)ulbum,  Under  Secretary  of  State,  such  information 
as  showed  that  O'Meara's  reports  of  Bonaparte's 
health  were  grossly  exaggerated,  if  not  altogether 
untrue,  and  that  he  was  so  much  under  his  influence 
as  to  be  no  longer  worthy  of  trust.  The  revelations 
made  by  General  Grourgaud,  as  to  the  clandestine 
correspondence  and  receipt  of  money  at  Longwood, 
prove  incontestably,  if  proof  were  wanting,  the  ne- 
cessity of  the  restrictions  so  much  complained  oi^ 
and  the  expediency  of  severer  regulations  than  had 
been  imposed  upon  Napoleon  and  his  suite.  A  copy 
of  Mr.  Qoulbum's  letter  was   forwarded    by  Earl 


38  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XX. 

Bathurst  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  and  it  is  so  interesting 
as  well  as  important,  that  it  is  here  given  eptire : — 

"  My  Lord,  "  Downing  Street,  May  10,  1818. 

"In  obedience  to  your  directions,  I  have  had 
several  conversations  with  General  Gourgaud,  for  the 
purpose  of  ascertaining  whether  he  was  disposed  to 
afford  any  further  details  upon  the  several  points 
adverted  to  in  Sir  Hudson  Lowe's  more  recent  de- 
spatches. The  information  which  I  have  received  from 
him,  though  given  in  considerable  detail,  is  in  sub- 
stance as  follows : — 

"  General  Gtourgaud  had  no  difficulty  in  avowing 
that  there  has  always  existed  a  free  and  uninterrupted 
communication  between  the  inhabitants  of  Longwood 
and  this  country  and  the  Continent,  without  the  know- 
ledge or  intervention  of  the  Governor,  and  that  this 
has  been  made  use  of,  not  only  for  the  purpose  of 
receiving  and  transmitting  letters,  but  for  that  of 
receiving  pamphlets,  money,  and  other  articles  of 
which  the  parly  in  Longwood  might  fh)m  time  to 
time  be  in  want:  that  the  correspondence  has  for 
the  most  part  been  carried  on  direct  with  Great 
Britain,  and  that  the  persons  employed  in  it  are  those 
Englishmen  who  fix)m  time  to  time  visit  St.  Helena, 
to  all  of  whom  the  attendants  or  servants  of  Buona- 
parte have  free  access,  and  who,  generally  speaking, 
are  willing,  many  without  any  reward,  and  others  for 
very  small  pecuniary  recompence,  to  convey  to  Eu- 
rope any  letter  or  packet  intrusted  to  their  charge. 
It  would  appear  also  that  the  captains  and  others  on 
board  the  merchant-ships  touching  at  the  island, 
whether  belonging  to  the  East  India  Company  or  to 
other  persons,  are  considered  at  Longwood  as  being 
peculiarly  open  to  the  Seduction  of  General  Buona- 


July,  1818.  GOURGAUD'S  REVELATIONS.  39 

parte's  talents,  so  mucli  so  indeed,  that  the  inhabitants 
of  Longwood  have  regarded  it  as  a  matter  of  small 
difficulty  to  procure  a  passage  on  board  one  of  these 
ships  for  General  Buonaparte,  if  escape  should  at  any 
time  be  his  object. 

"General  Gourgaud  stated  himself  to  have  been 
aware  of  General  Buonaparte  having  received  a  con- 
siderable sum  of  money  in  Spanish  dollars,  viz. 
10,000/.,  at  the  very  time  that  he  disposed  of  his 
plate,  but,  on  being  pressed  by  me  as  to  the  persons 
privy  to  that  transaction,  he  contented  himself  with 
assuring  me  that  the  mode  of  its  transmission  was  one 
purely  accidental,  that  it  could  never  again  occur,  and 
that,  such  being  the  case,  he  trusted  that  I  should  not 
press  a  discovery,  which,  while  it  betrayed  its  author, 
could  have  no  effect  either  as  regarded  the  punish- 
ment of  the  offenders,  or  the  prevention  of  a  similar 
act  in  fiiture.  The  actual  possession  of  money  was 
moreover  not  likely,  in  his  view  of  the  subject,  to 
afford  any  additional  means  of  corrupting  the  fidelity 
of  those  whom  it  might  be  advisable  to  seduce,  as  it 
was  well  known  that  any  draught,  whatever  might  be 
its  amount,  drawn  by  General  Buonaparte  on  Prince 
Eugene,  or  on  certain  other  members  of  his  family, 
would  be  scrupulously  honoured. 

"  He  assured  me,  however,  in  answer  to  my  inqui- 
ries, that  neither  Mr.  Balcombe  nor  Mr.  O'Meara 
were  in  any  degree  privy  to  the  above  transaction, 
and  that  the  former,  although  much  dissatisfied  with 
his  situation,  had  never  in  any  money  transaction 
betrayed  the  trust  reposed  in  him.  He  declined,  how- 
ever, most  distinctly,  giving  me  the  same  assurance 
with  respect  to  their  not  being  either  or  both  privy 
to  the  transmission  of  a  clandestine  correspondence. 

"Upon  the  subject  of  General  Buonaparte's  escape, 


40  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XX. 

he  confidently  stated  that,  although  Longwood  was 
from  its  situation  capable  of  being  well  protected  by 
sentries,  yet  he  was  certain  that  there  was  no  diffi- 
culty in  eluding  at  any  time  the  vigilance  of  the 
sentries  posted  round  the  house  and  grounds,  and  in 
short  that  escape  fi*om  the  island  appeared  to  him  in 
no  degree  impracticable.  The  subject,  he  confessed, 
had  been  discussed  at  Longwood,  and  the  individuals 
of  the  establishment  separately  desired  to  give  their 
plans  for  effecting  it ;  but  he  expressed  his  belief  to 
be  that  General  Buonaparte  was  so  fully  impressed 
with  the  opinion  that  he  should  be  permitted  to  leave 
St.  Helena,  either  upon  a  change  of  ministry  in  Eng- 
land, or  by  the  unwillingness  of  the  English  to  bear 
the  expense  of  detaining  him,  that  he  would  not  at 
present  run  the  hazard  to  which  an  attempt  at  escape 
might  expose  him.  It  appears,  however,  from  the 
statement  of  General  Gourgaud,  and  from  other  cir- 
cumstances stated  by  him,  that  General  Buonaparte 
has  always  looked  to  the  period  of  the  removal  of  the 
allied  armies  from  France  as  that  most  favourable 
for  his  return ;  and  the  probability  of  such  a  decision, 
and  the  consequence  which  would  follow  from  it,  were 
urged  by  him  as  an  argument  to  dissuade  General 
Gourgaud  from  quitting  him  until  after  that  period. 

"  Upon  the  subject  of  General  Buonaparte's  health. 
General  Gt)urgaud  stated  that  we  were  much  im- 
posed upon ;  that  General  Buonaparte  was  not,  as  far 
as  bodily  health  was  concerned,  in  any  degree  mate- 
rially altered ;  and  that  the  representations  on  this 
subject  had  little  if  any  truth  in  them.  Dr.  O'Meara 
was  certainly  the  dupe  of  that  influence  which  General 
Buonaparte  always  exercises  over  those  with  whom  he 
has  frequent  intercourse;  and  though  he  (General 
Gourgaud)  individually  had  only  reason  *  de  se  louer 


July,  1818.    INSTRUCTIONS  FOR  0'MEARA»S  REMOVAL.      41 

de  Mr.  O'Meara^'  yet  his  intimate  knowledge  of 
General  Buonaparte  enabled  him  confidently  to  assert 
that  his  bodily  health  was  not  at  all  worse  than  it 
had  been  for  some  time  previous  to  his  arrival  at 
St.  Helena. 

"  I  have  the  honour  to  be,  &c. 

**  Henry  Goulburn." 

In  consequence  of  the  information  given  by  General 
Gourgaud,  and  the  strong  grounds  thereby  furnished 
for  suspecting  O'Meara's  fidelity,  Earl  Bathurst  re- 
solved to  remove  him  fi*om  his  post  of  medical  attend- 
ant upon  Bonaparte.  And  it  deserves  to  be  especially 
noticed  that  General  G^urgaud,  and  not  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe,  was  the  cause  of  his  dismissal.  In  a  private 
despatch  to  the  latter,  dated  April  29,  1818,  Lord 
Bathurst  had  declined  to  comply  with  the  Governor's 
desire  to  remove  O'Meara  from  St.  Helena,  stating  as 
his  motive  that  the  reasons  which  must  be  assigned 
for  such  a  step,  namely,  his  unbecoming  behaviour 
towards  the  Gi^vemor,  and  his  refusal  to  reveal  his 
conversations  with  Bonaparte,  were,  under  the  cir- 
cumstances, not  sufficiently  strong  to  justify  so  invi- 
dious a  measure  as  the  withdrawal  of  the  only  doctor 
whom  Bonaparte  would  consult. 

Now,  however,  he  saw  the  matter  in  a  diflFerent 
light,  and  felt  that  it  was  dangerous  to  continue 
O'Meara  any  longer  in  his  responsible  office.  He 
therefore  wrote  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  on  the  16th  of 
May,  and  instructed  him  forthwith  to  remove  O'Meara, 
and  interdict  all  further  communication  between  him 
and  the  inmates  of  Longwood.  In  a  private  letter  of 
the  same  date  he  said, — "  We  must  expect  that  the 
removal  of  Mr.  O'Meara  will  occasion  a  great  sensa- 
tion, and  an  attempt  will  be  made  to  give  a  bad  im- 


42  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XX. 

pression  on  the  subject.  You  had  better  let  the 
substance  of  my  instruction  be  generally  known  as 
soon  as  you  have  executed  it,  that  it  may  not  be 
represented  that  Mr.  O'Meara  has  been  removed  in 
consequence  of  any  quarrel  with  you,  but  in  conse- 
quence of  the  information  furnished  by  General  Gk>ur- 
gaud  in  England  respecting  his  conduct." 

In  another  despatch  Lord  Bathurst,  adverting  to 
the  clandestine  correspondence  which  was  proved  by 
GK)urgaud*s  testimony  to  be  carried  on  at  Longwood, 
directed  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  to  **  impose  such  restric- 
tions with  respect  to  the  communications  between 
General  Buonaparte's  followers  and  the  inhabitants  of 
St.  Helena  as  might  appear  to  him  to  be  necessary  to 
prevent  its  continuance.'*  At  the  same  time  he  in- 
structed Mr.  Qoulbum  to  state  that  it  was  not  his 
object  or  wish  to  impose  any  further  restrictions  upon 
Bonaparte  himself,  or  enforce  against  his  followers 
when  in  his  company  any  which  might  be  made  by 
him  a  pretext  for  refSising  to  take  exercise,  or  might 
be  justly  represented  by  him  as  diminishing  the 
liberty  he  then  enjoyed. 

It  was  indeed  absolutely  necessary  to  exercise  the 
closest  vigilance,  for  it  was  discovered  that  secret 
communications  were  carried  on  between  Longwood 
and  Bahia  in  the  Brazils  by  way  of  the  Cape  of  GK)od 
Hope,  and  in  the  month  of  April  a  packet  of  letters 
from  the  French  at  St.  Helena  was  delivered  in  Lon- 
don by  a  person  who  arrived  there  from  Brazil.  Lord 
Bathurst  made  known  this  intelligence  to  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe,  and  in  the  same  despatch,  which  reached  St. 
Helena  in  the  middle  of  July,  informed  him  that  there 
was  no  doubt  that  it  had  been  in  contemplation  that  a 
party  of  French  and  other  adventurers  should  proceed 
from  Pernambuco  to  St.  Helena  for  the  purpose  of 


July,  1818.        CLANDESTINB  CORRESPONDENCE.  43 

effecting  the  escape  of  Bonaparte.  It  is  right  to  insert 
Lord  Bathorst's  letter  at  length,  as  it  will  show  what 
necessity  there  was  imposed  upon  the  QoYemor  to 
watch  his  prisoner  with  the  utmost  care.  The  de- 
spatch was  as  follows : — 

To  Lisut.-Gbkebal  Sib  Hudson  Lowe,  K.O.B. 
"  Sir,  "  Downing  Street,  London,  23rd  April,  1818. 

"I  have  recently  received  information  that  a 
channel  of  correspondence  has  been  opened  between 
the  inhabitants  of  Longwood  and  a  person  resident  at 
Bahia,  of  which  I  deem  it  necessary  to  put  you  in 
possession  of  the  details. 

"That  a  correspondence  has  taken  place  between 
Longwood  and  Bahia  by  the  way  of  the  Cape  of  Grood 
Hope,  without  your  intervention  or  knowledge,  admits 
of  very  little  doubt ;  and  it  is  only  a  few  days  since 
that  a  packet  of  letters  from  Longwood  was  delivered 
to  a  person  in  London  by  another  arriving  from 
Brazil.  On  an  examination  of  this  transaction,  it 
was  out  of  my  power  to  discover  the  name  of  the 
person  actually  engaged  in  carrying  on  this  corre- 
spondence. It  appeared,  however,  that  the  person 
was  an  Englishman  (possibly,  however,  an  American), 
usually  resident  at  Bahia ;  that  he  had  been  twice  at 
St.  Helena  by  way  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  and 
that  he  had  had  interviews,  if  not  with  Buonaparte,  at 
least  with  some  of  the  inhabitants  of  Longwood,  and 
had  received  from  them  letters  for  Europe.  The 
ostensible  object  of  some  of  the  letters  recently  de- 
livered in  London  was  to  secure  the  transmission  to 
Longwood  of  certain  political  publications.  For  this 
purpose  it  was  desired  that  they  should  be  forwarded 
in  small  packets  capable  of  concealment  if  necessary, 
and  addressed  to  a  merchant  there  of  the  name  of 


44  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XX. 

W.  Rose,  who  was  stated  to  have  the  means  of  en- 
suring their  delivery  at  Longwood,  and  who  is  repre- 
sented as  the  agent  and  correspondent  of  the  person 
at  Bahia. 

"  I  am  aware  that  the  evidence  obtained  upon  this 
subject  is  not  suflBcient  to  enable  you  to  take  any  im- 
mediate measures  beyond  those  of  vigilance  or  pre- 
caution. There  can  be  little  doubt,  however,  that 
this  hitherto  successful  mode  of  correspondence  will 
be  again  resorted  to ;  and  I  have,  therefore,  deemed 
it  necessary  to  communicate  the  information  to  Lord 
Charles  Somerset,  and  to  desire  that,  in  the  event  of 
any  person  from  Bahia  attempting  to  proceed  to  St. 
Helena  through  the  intervention  of  Mr.  W.  Rose,  his 
Lordship  would  send  in  the  same  ship  with  the  person 
so  proceeding  a  confidential  communication  to  you  by 
a  special  messenger.  You  will,  of  course,  see  the 
advantage  of  closely  watching  any  person  so  pointed 
out  to  you,  and,  if  circumstances  shall  appear  to  you 
to  justify  it,  to  make  a  seizure  of  his  person  and 
papers.  You  will  be  the  best  judge  as  to  the  period 
at  which  this  seizure  may  be  most  usefully  carried 
into  effect.  I  would,  however,  suggest  to  you  the 
advantage  of  deferring  it  until  the  person  in  question 
should  be  on  his  return  to  the  Cape,  after  having 
executed  his  commission  at  Longwood,  as  by  this 
means  it  appears  to  me  that  the  real  views  and  objects 
of  the  correspondence  may  be  best  developed. 

"There  is  no  doubt  that  measures  have  been  in 
contemplation  to  proceed  with  a  party  of  French  and 
other  adventurers  from  Pemambuco  to  St.  Helena 
for  the  rescue  of  General  Buonaparte ;  and  as  this  cir- 
cumstance was  not  known  to  the  person  who  furnished 
me  with  the  information  respecting  what  was  passing 
at  St.  Helena,  I  am  the  more  inclined  to  give  credit 


July,  1818.  HIS  WAEDROBE.  45 

to  the  intelligence  he  has  given  me.      I  have  the 
honour,  &c.  ,,  Bathukst/^ 

With  respect  to  the  question  of  another  residence 
for  Bonaparte,  Lord  Bathurst  wrote  strongly  dis- 
suading tiie  purchase  of  Rosemary  Hall,  which  had 
been  contemplated,  and  he  told  Sir  Hudson  Lowe 
that  he  wished  him  to  consider  himself  restricted 
by  his  instructions  to  the  alternative  of  either  enlarg- 
ing the  existing  house  at  Longwood,  or  building  a  new 
one  within  the  same  limits.  **  Nevertheless,"  con- 
tinued Lord  Bathurst,  "if  General  Buonaparte  shall 
have  expressed  a  decided  wish  to  have  the  house  built 
at  Rosemary  Hall,  and  you  shall  have  given  him 
reason  to  consider  it  as  a  matter  conceded  to  him, 
you  will  in  that  case  not  disappoint  him,  provided, 
first,  that  you  purchase  the  place  at  a  reasonable 
price,  and,  secondly,  that  General  Buonaparte  shall 
persist  in  preferring  that  situation  after  it  shall  have 
been  explained  to  him  that  no  other  purchase  is  to  be 
made,  and  that  his  limits  therefore  will  be  so  con- 
fined." 

Li  order  to  heighten  his  picture  of  the  straits  to  which 
he  pretends  the  ex-Emperor  was  reduced,  O'Meara  tells 
us  that  Napoleon  was  obliged  to  have  his  coat  turned^ 
owing  to  the  neglect  of  Government  in  sending  out  a 
proper  supply  of  green  cloth.^  That  Bonaparte's  coats 
were  turned  is  very  probable,  but,  if  so,  it  is  equally 
probable  that  this  was  done  for  the  purpose  of  making 
out  a  case  of  grievance.  At  all  events  the  English 
Government  showed  every  anxiety  to  keep  his  ward- 
robe well  furnished ;  and  with  the  despatches  above 
quoted  a  letter  arrived  from  Mr,  Gtoulbum,  addressed 

'  Voice,  Yol.  ii.  p.  153. 


46  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XX. 

to  the  Governor,  on  that  subject,  **  in  order  to  pre- 
vent the  possibility  of  the  original  stock  being  ex- 
hausted before  a  fresh  supply  was  placed  at  his  dis- 
posal." Few  can,  I  think,  doubt  that  Mr.  GK)ulbum 
was  justified  in  adding,  "  From  the  temper  which 
General  Buonaparte  has  so  frequently  shown  on  similar 
subjects,  it  is  not  improbable  that  he  might  be  dis- 
posed to  conceal  from  you  the  deficiency  of  any 
articles  either  of  necessi^  or  comfort,  with  a  view 
of  making  that  deficiency  hereafter  a  subject  of  re- 
monstrance and  complaint." 


July,  1818,  OliEARA  ORDEBED  TO  LEAVE  LONGWOOD.     47 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

REMOVAL  OF  o'mEARA  FROM  ST.  HELENA  —  PLANS  FOR  THE 
^  CONffTRUCnON  OF  A  NEW  RESIDENCE  FOR  BONAPARTE  — 
UNFAVOURABLE  INFLUENCE  EXERCISED  BY  COUNT  BERTRAND 
—  SIR  HUDSON  LOWE'S  MEASURES  FOR  THE  EXTINCHON  OF 
SLAVERY  IN  THE  ISLAND  —  GOOD  EFFECTS  OF  O'MEARA'S 
DEPARTURE  — •  DISCOVERY  OF  CLANDESTINE  CORRESPONDENCE 
DfPUCATINa  O'MEARA,  MIL  BALCOMBE,  AND  OTHERS. 

The  Grovemor  now  proceeded  to  put  in  force  the  in- 
stractions  he  had  received  with  regard  to  the  removal 
of  O'Meara.  On  the  25th  of  July  a  letter  was  ad- 
dressed and  delivered  to  that  person  by  Colonel  Wyn- 
yard,  the  assistant  military  secretary,  informing  him 
that,  in  consequence  of  orders  received  from  Earl 
Bathurst,  he  must  immediately  withdraw  from  Long- 
wood,  vyithoiU  holding  any  farther  communiccUion  what- 
ever  loith  its  inmates^  and  that  Admiral  Plampin  had 
received  directions  from  the  Admiralty  as  to  his  des- 
tination when  he  quitted  the  island/ 

Notwithstanding  the  positive  injunction  contained  in 
this  letter,  O'Meara,  as  he  himself  tells  us,  "deter- 
mined to  disobey  it  whatever  might  be  the  conse- 

'  It  is  worth  while  to  notice  that  O'Meara  gives  three  different  versions 
of  the  mode  in  which  he  was  employed  when  Colonel  Wynyard  called  upon 
him.  First,  in  a  letter  to  Mr.  Finlaison  of  the  10th  of  Angost,  1818,  he 
says,  "  I  was  informed  hy  my  servant  while  reading  in  the  library  at  Long- 
wood  Howe^^*  &c.  Secondly,  in  his  *  Exposition,'  puhlished  in  1819, "  While 
occupied^  on  the  25th  of  Jnly,  1818,  in  preparing  the  medicines  which  I 
left  with  Napoleon's  valet-de-chambre,"  &c.  Thirdly,  in  the  *  Voice,'  pnh- 
lished  in  1822,  vol.  iL  p.  414,  "  After  having  paid  a  professional  visit  to 
Napoleon,  whose  malady  was  by  no  means  altered  for  the  better,  and 
whiie  entering  my  room  at  about  haXf-paxt  fowr  o^dock^  &c. 


48  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXI. 

quences  ;"^  and  immediately  after,  ordering  his  servant 
to  pack  up  his  things,  he  went  to  Napoleon,  with  whom 
he  remained  two  hours  before  he  came  back  to  his 
room.  On  being  informed  of  his  return.  Colonel 
Wynyard,  accompanied  by  Captain  Blakeney,  went 
to  him  and  thus  addressed  him : — "  Mr.  O'Meara,  you 
have  thought  proper  immediately  on  the  receipt  of  the 
instruction  I  communicated  to  you  to  act  in  direct 
violation  of  it,  by  going  in  to  see  General  Bonaparte." 
He  answered,  "  Yes^  I  don't  acknowledge  the  autho- 
rity." Colonel  Wynward  then  said,  "Yery  well, 
Sir ;  on  the  receipt  of  that  letter  you  cease  to  belong 
to  the  establishment  at  Longwood ;  you  will  therefore 
see  your  things  put  up  as  speedily  as  possible,  and 
quit  the  premises  for  James  Town." 

This  order  was  at  once  put  in  force,  and  O'Meara 
left  Longwood  never  to  return ;  for,  in  consequence  of 
his  contumacious  language  and  conduct,  the  Governor 
directed  the  Marshal  of  the  island  (whom  O'Meara 
calls  the  "Gaoler")  to  inform  him  that  he  must  quit 
St.  Helena  forthwith. 

On  the  day  of  his  removal  from  Longwood,  Dr. 
Verling,  an  assistant-surgeon  of  the  Eoyal  Artillery, 
who  was  personally  known  to  Bonaparte,  having  come 
out  to  St.  Helena  with  him  in  the  Northumberland, 
was  directed  by  the  Governor  immediately  to  proceed 
to  Longwood  and  aflPord  his  medical  services  to  Bona- 
parte and  the  other  inmates  there. 

It  was  of  course  most  desirable  that  Dr.  Yerling 
should  know  the  mode  of  treatment  hitherto  adopted  by 
O'Meara  in  the  case  of  Napoleon,  and  have  an  ac- 
curate account  of  his  constitution  and  state  of  health. 
He  therefore  applied  to  O'Meara  for  permission  to 
inspect  his  medic^  journal,  **  the  only  document,"  as 

*  Voice,  vol.  ii.  p.  415. 


July,  1818.  REMOVAL  OF  O'MEARA.  49 

Dr.  Yerling  wrote  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  "on  which 
any  thoroughly  just  conception  could  be  formed  of  his 
(Bonaparte's)  constitution  or  the  nature  of  his  com- 
plaints, or  the  propriety  of  the  system  which  may 
have  been  adopted  for  their  cure/'  This,  however, 
O'Meara  positively  refused  to  allow,  nor  would  he 
consent  to  furnish  any  copy.  He  said  that  he  had 
not  the  journal  in  his  possession,^  and  that  if  he  had 
he  would  not  give  it  without  the  previous  sanction  of 
Napoleon ;  but  that  he  was  ready  to  give  the  bulletins 
and  a  sketch  or  extract  of  his  treatment  from  the 
journal.  This,  however,  was  clearly  insufficient,  and 
indeed  useless ;  for  no  reliance  could  be  placed  on  the 
bulletins  without  comparing  them  with  the  journal ; 
and  this  oflFer  was  declined.  Nothing  tends  to  throw 
greater  suspicion  upon  his  former  reports  than  this  ex- 
traordinary conduct.  Either  Napoleon  was  in  good 
health,  and  those  reports  were  false ;  or  he  was  ill, 
and  O'Meara  was  content  to  sacrifice  the  health  of  his 
patient  to  the  gratification  of  his  own  private  pique. 
Few  will  be  disposed  to  deny  that,  under  the  circum- 
stances of  the  case,  the  Governor  would  have  been  jus- 
tified in  taking  ft*om  him  his  medical  journal  by  force. 
O'Meara  was  now  sent  on  board  H.  M.  sloop  GriflFon 
for  a  passage  to  England.  He  protested  against  this 
proceeding  in  a  letter  to  the  Secretary  to  the  Govern- 
ment, on  the  ground  that  his  baggage,  bedding,  and 
money  which  he  had  placed  in  Captain  Blakeney's 
hands,  had  not  reached  him,  and  said  that  he  should 
hold  the  "  giver  of  the  order "  responsible  for  any 
consequences  to  his  creditors.  On  the  30th  he  com- 
plained, in  an  official  letter  to  Rear- Admiral  Plampin, 
that  while  he  was  separated  from  his  baggage  his 

*  The  journal,  in  reality,  had  been  made  over  to  Count  Bertrand,  but 
no  doubt  for  the  very  purpose  of  enabling  O'Meara  to  make  this  answer. 

VOL.  HI,  E 


60  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXL 

"  writing-desk  had  been  opened  and  plundered  "  of  a 
gold  watch-chain,  gold  seals,  an  onyx  brooch,  and 
other  valuable  articles  **to  a  very  large  amount." 
Admiral  Plampin  instantly  forwarded  the  letter  to  the 
Governor,  who  ordered  Sir  George  Kngham,  as  the 
sitting  magistrate,  to  institute  forthwith  a  judicial 
inquiry  to  ascertain  the  fiicts  of  the  case,  and  discover 
by  whom  tiie  articles  had  been  taken.  O'Meara  was 
permitted  to  land  for  the  purpose  of  making  a  depo- 
sition, and  both  his  servants  were  examined,  but 
nothing  was  elicited  which  could  throw  light  on  the 
alleged  theft. 

On  the  2nd  of  August  O'Meara  sailed  for  England, 
where  we  shall  find  that  in  his  anxiety  to  calumniate 
Sir  Hudson  Lowe  he  overreached  himself^  and  was 
dismissed  from  the  service — an  aflfront  which  he  was 
not  likely  to  forgive,  and  which  prompted  him  to  com- 
pile the  work  of  which  the  misstatements  and  misre- 
presentations have  been  allowed  too  long  to  delude 
and  mislead  the  public.^ 

On  the  30th  of  July  a  conversation  took  place 
between  Count  Montholon,  Dr.  Yerling,  and  Lieu- 
tenant Jackson,  when  the  Count  spoke  of  the  restric- 
tions, and  said,  "So  long  as  the  present  system  is 
adhered  to,  the  Emperor  will  continue  the  same  con- 
duct. For  two  months  past  he  has  not  been  out  of 
doors ;  he  generally  goes  to  bed  about  3  or  4  o'clock, 
gets  up  in  the  night  and  walks  about  in  his  robe-de- 
chambre ;  sometimes  during  the  day  he  walks  in  the 

1  Count  Montholon,  in  his  *  R^ts^'  vol.  ii.  p.  315,  relates  a  fiact  respect- 
ing O'Meara's  'Journal,'  published  in  1822,  which  is  curious  if  true: — 
**  During  the  little  time  that  O'Meara  remained  with  the  Emperor  [after  he 
was  ordered  to  leave  Longwood]  I  ran  to  the  surgery  to  take  his  Journal, 
which  he  had  hid  in  case  of  accident.  His  conyersations  were  written  in 
Italian.  I  transmitted  this  Journal  to  him  to  England  after  having  read  it 
to  the  Emperor,  who  pointed  <nU  many  enron  in  it,** 


Aug.  1818.         PLANS  FOR  A  NEW  RESIDENCE.  51 

billiard-room  dressed,  at  others  in  his  dressing-gown* 
He  is  never  seen ;  and  I  defy  the  Governor  to  say  thai  he 
knows  for  certain  he  is  at  Longwoody  or  has  haovmfor 
the  last  two  months.  Let  the  restrictions  be  removed, 
and  we  will  then  resume  our  former  method  of  living. 
The  Emperor  will  take  his  rides,  and  the  Governor 
may  himself  see  him,  and  know  from  actual  observa- 
tion that  he  is  here."  A  more  striking  proof  than  this 
of  the  absolute  necessity  that  the  orderly  officer  should 
insist  upon  seeing  Napoleon  daily  could  not  have  been 
given.  And  yet  there  was  no  point  which  Bonaparte 
more  pertinaciously  resisted. 

On  the  16th  of  August,  1818,  Lieut.-Colonel  Wyn- 
yard  called  npon  Count  Montholon  by  the  Governor's 
desire,  with  several  plans  he  had  directed  to  be  drawn, 
in  consequence  of  instructions  from  England  to  erect 
a  new  house  ;  and  he  said  he  had  to  request  that  the 
Count  would  examine  and  present  them  for  considera* 
tion.  He  added  that  the  Governor  had  in  these  plans 
endeavoured  to  consult  as  much  as  possible  their  con- 
venience and  comfort,  and  any  suggestion  that  was 
made  in  conformity  with  the  general  design  he  would 
be  happy  to  attend  to.  Count  Montholon  said,  he 
would  not  fail  to  present  them  on  the  first  oppor- 
tunity ;  but  he  afterwards  added,  that  he  very  much 
disliked  having  to  do  so,  and  wished  it  over  with  all 
his  heart.  A  few  days  afterwards  Colonel  Wyn- 
yard  again  called  upon  him  with  Major  Emmett  of 
the  Engineers,  and  submitted  some  plans,  which 
Montholon  ftilly  (discussed  with  them,  and  said  that 
the  main  considerations  were  large  rooms,  plenty  of 
them,  and  an  entire  separation  of  apartments. 

On  the  17th  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  had  a  conversation 
with  Count  Balmain,  the  Bussian  Commissioner,  who 
with  Captain  Be  Gors,  aide-de-camp  to  the  Marquis 

E  2 


52  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXI. 

de  Montchenu,  was  on  the  point  of  proceeding  for  a 
short  time  to  Rio  de  Janeiro.  He  met  him  riding  in 
company  with  the  Marquis,  and  the  Count  told  him 
that,  according  to  the  information  given  him  by  Count 
Montholon,  it  was  a  fixed  idea  in  the  minds  of  the 
French  at  Longwood  that  it  was  the  intention  of  the 
British  Grovernment  to  assassinate  the  Emperor,  and 
that  the  Grovernor  was  the  instrument  to  execute  their 
design.  Sir  Hudson  replied  that  this  was  not  what 
they  believed  themselves,  but  what  they  wished  to 
make  others  believe.  Count  Balmain  then  said  that 
Montholon  told  him  "that  he  had  done  everything 
in  his  power  to  remove  such  ideas  fi'om  the  Empe- 
ror's mind ;  that  he  had  assured  him  it  was  in  vain 
to  combat  against  the  evils  of  his  situation  by  follow- 
ing the  course  he  had  pursued;  that  the  Emperor 
lent  an  ear  to  him,  and  seemed  almost  disposed  to 
attend  to  his  suggestions,  but  that  Count  Bertrand 
would  then  come  in  and  say,  *  Mais^  Sire^  voire  gloire^ 
voire  nom  V  and  everything  which  Montholon  said,  or 
the  Emperor  proposed  to  do,  fell  at  once  to  the 
ground."  Count  Balmain  dwelt  much  on  this  eflFect 
of  Bertrand's  influence  and  interference ;  and  was  sup- 
ported in  his  remarks  by  the  Marquis  de  Montchenu. 

Count  Balmain  added,  that  he  believed  there  was  a 
great  jealousy  between  Bertrand  and  Montholon,  on 
account  of  the  Governor  having  recently  addressed  the 
latter  instead  of  the  former,  and  made  him  the  chan- 
nel of  his  communications  with  Bonaparte. 

Although  it  is  no  part  of  the  history  of  the  captivity 
.which  these  volumes  profess  to  record,  we  must  not 
omit  here,  in  justice  to  the  memory  of  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe,  to  notice  an  event  which  happened  about  this 
time,  and  which  stands  in  refreshing  contrast  to  the 


Aua.  1818.  ANTI-SLAVERY  MEASURES.  63 

disputes  in  which  he  was,  fix)m  no  fault  of  his  own,  so 
constantly  involved  with  the  French  at  Longwood.  I 
allude  to  the  gradual  abolition  of  slavery  at  St.  Helena, 
in  which  humane  act  the  Governor  took  a  leading  and 
conspicuous  part.  The  opinions  which  he  avowed  and 
the  exertions  which  he  made  with  reference  to  the 
extinction  of  slavery,  at  a  time  when  great  names  were 
arrayed  on  the  other  side,  and  many  reasoners  were 
found  who  were  not  ashamed  to  argue  that,  because 
slavery  is  not  expressly  and  by  name  prohibited  in  the 
New  Testament,  it  is  an  institution  sanctioned  by  and 
consistent  with  the  spirit  and  genius  of  Christianity, 
are  deserving  of  all  praise.  Having  carefully  consi- 
dered the  matter  with  the  members  of  his  Council,  Sir 
Hudson  Lowe,  on  the  13  th  of  August  this  year,  con- 
vened a  meeting  at  the  Castle  in  James  Town,  of  the 
principal  slave-proprietors  and  other  inhabitants  of  St. 
Helena,  and  addressed  them  in  an  able  and  concilia- 
tory speech,  with  the  view  of  inducing  them  to  consent 
to  a  law  declaring  that  all  children  bom  of  slave  pa- 
rents after  a  certain  date  should  be  free.    He  said, — 

"  He  had  grounds  for  saying  that  the  subject  had 
attracted  the  serious  attention  of  the  Court  of  Direc- 
tors, who  most  naturally  view  with  regret  this  island 
as  the  only  spot  under  their  government  where  slavery 
existed  under  any  form  or  shape  whatever. 

"How  infinitely  preferable  it  would  be  to  anticipate 
their  desires  by  a  voluntary  act  of  the  inhabitants 
themselves,  than  to  await  the  dictates  of  what  might 
be  suggested  to  them !  In  no  part,  he  was  happy  to 
find,  and  gratified  to  express  to  them,  did  slavery 
exist  in  a  milder  form  than  in  this  island — he  ever  was 
ready  and  willing  to  do  justice  to  the  disposition  of  the 
inhabitants  in  this  respect.  Still  slavery  existed,  and 
would  remain  in  perpetuity  upon  the  system  which  at 


64  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXI. 

present  prevaUed,  of  every  child  born  of  a  slave  being 
also  a  slave. 

"  This  was  the  only  possession  of  the  East  Indii 
Company,  he  repeated,  where  slavery  existed  Be- 
yond the  Cape  there  had  been  a  colony,  under  the 
administration  of  the  King's  Government,  where  it 
recently  remained  in  full  force ;  the  inhabitants  of  ihBi 
colony  however  (the  island  of  Ceylon),  had  come  to 
a  voluntary  resolution  of  declaring  that  all  the  chil- 
dren bom  of  slave  parents  after  a  fixed  day  (that  of 
His  Royal  Highness  the  Prince  Regent's  birthday  in 
the  year  1816)  should  be  fi-ee,  providing,  upon  certain 
conditions,  for  their  being  maintained  until  the  age  of 
fourteen  years. 

"  It  was  an  example  of  this  nature  he  proposed  to 
them  to  imitate." 

Sir  Hudson  Lowe  however  added,  that  he  left  the 
toatter  entirely  to  their  own  deliberation,  and  was 
desirous  that  nothing  should  be  resolved  upon  which 
did  not  meet  their  full  concurrence. 

Happily  the  humane  sentiments  of  the  (Jovemor 
and  his  Council  found  an  immediate  echo  in  the  minds 
of  the  inhabitants  of  the  island.  They  at  once  pro- 
ceeded to  elect  a  committee  for  drawing  up  resolutions 
on  the  subject,  which,  being  submitted  to  a  general 
meeting  of  the  whole  of  the  slave  proprietors  on  the 
17th  August,  were  unanimously  approved,  and  sub- 
mitted to  the  Governor  and  Council  to  be  passed  into 
a  law  on  the  same  day. 

The  first  of  these  resolutions  was,  **That,  from  and 
after  the  25th  day  of  December  next  ensuing,  being 
the  anniversary  of  the  birth  of  our  blessed  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ,  all  children  born  of  slaves  shall  be  con- 
sidered free." 

Upon  this  the  Governor  immediately  issued  a  pro^ 


Aue.  1818.  ANTI-SLAYERT  MEASURES.  65 

clamation  declaring  the  above  resolotion  to  be  a  law 
of  the  island. 

It  would  be  wrong  not  to  mention  also  the  en- 
lightened and  generous  policy  of  the  East  India  Oom- 
pany  in  this  matter.  In  a  letter  from  the  Court  of 
Directors  to  the  Governor  and  Council  at  St.  Helena, 
dated  the  2l8t  of  April,  1819,  they  said,— 

"  The  wise,  humane,  and  liberal  measures  which  we 
find,  by  your  letters  of  the  18th  August  and  11th 
September  last,  have  been  adopted  by  the  inhabitants 
of  St.  Helena,  for  preventing  the  perpetual  continuance 
of  slavery  in  the  island,  are  so  much  in  unison  with 
those  feelings  and  sentiments  which  we  have  long  en- 
tertained, that  they  cannot  fail  to  receive,  as  they  have 
merited,  our  approbation  and  applause ;  and  it  reflects 
the  highest  credit  on  the  inhabitants  that  they  should 
have  shown,  in  so  unequivocal  a  manner,  a  determina- 
tion to  strike  at  the  root  of  the  evil  by  the  adoption  of 
measures  tending  to  general  emancipation,  with  due 
regard  to  the  circumstances  of  the  island,  and  the 
situation  of  the  slaves  who  at  present  form  a  part  of 
its  population.  But  although  the  resolutions  above 
referred  to  will  gradually  lead  to  the  entire  abolition 
of  slavery  in  the  island,  where  the  Governor  has  justly 
observed  it  has  existed  only  in  a. mild  form,  it  is 
equally  evident  that  a  very  long  period  must  elapse 
before  this  most  desirabla  end  can  be  fully  accom- 
plished  We  have  given  particular  attention 

to  the  arguments  of  the  Committee  of  Proprietors  in 
the  second  paragraph  of  their  address  to  the  Governor 
and  Council  against  a  sudden  and  total  abolition  of 
slavery,  or  a  general  emancipation  of  their  slaves,  and 
we  admit  those  arguments  to  have  considerable  weight, 
and  to  show  the  inexpediency  of  immediate  and  uni- 
versal emancipation.     We  cannot,  however,   suflFer 


66  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXL 

them  to  interfere  with  our  anxious  desire  for  a  more 
general  extension  of  the  humane  principles  which  have 
influenced  the  decision  of  the  Conmiittee,  so  far  as 

regards  the  slaves  belonging  to  the  Company 

The  number  of  slaves  the  property  of  the  Company 
appears  by  the  letter  above  mentioned  to  be  97 ;  viz. 
53  males  and  44  females:  of  the  males,  28  were 
between  16  and  60  years  of  age,  two  above  60,  and 
23  under  16  years  of  age;  of  the  females,  21  were 
above,  and  23  under,  13  years  of  age.  The  slaves 
belonging  to  the  Company  were  all  employed  on  the 
Government  establishment  as  house-servants,  as  cattle- 
tenders,  or  in  taking  care  of  the  Government  garden  and 
grounds ;  the  women  in  washing  and  care  of  the  children. 
"  We  have  resolved  that  all  children  bom  after  the 
25th  December,  1818,  of  slaves  the  property  of  the 
Company  at  St.  Helena,  shall  be  considered /re^." 

When  O'Meara  left  Longwood  it  seemed  as  if  the 
evil  genius  of  the  place  had  departed :  at  all  events  the 
relations  between  the  Governor  and  its  inhabitants  soon 
became  of  a  more  amicable  and  satisfactory  character. 
On  the  4th  of  September  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  wrote  to 
Earl  Bathurst  and  informed  him  that  Bonaparte  had 
the  day  before  walked  out  in  his  garden,  dressed  in  his 
usual  manner,  being  the  first  time  he  had  quitted  his 
house  for  several  months  past.  He  mentioned  also 
that,  although  Bonaparte  had  not  consented  to  receive 
any  visits  from  Dr.  Verling,  there  was  strong  reason 
to  suppose  that  it  did  not  proceed  from  any  objection 
to  have  the  advice  of  any  other  medical  person  than 
the  one  who  had  lately  quitted  him,  but  that  he  really 
did  not  at  the  time  stand  in  need  of  medical  aid,  as 
Dr.  Verling  had  been  told,  both  by  Count  Montholon 
and  the  Countess  Bertrand,  that  his  health  was  much 


.Sept.  1818.         CLAKDESTINE  CORRESPONDENCE.  57 

better;  and  no  complaint  or  indication  whatever  of 
his  being  in  a  bad  or  even  indifferent  state  of  health 
had  manifested  itself  since  the  departure  of  O'Meara. 
The  foundation  for  the  new  house  had  also  been  traced 
without  opposition  in  the  precincts  of  the  garden  at 
Longwood,  which  appeared  to  be  the  best  situation  for 
it  that  could  be  found  in  that  locality. 

Sir  Hudson  Lowe's  letter  contained  a  characteristic 
anecdote  of  Madame  Bertrand.  She  seems  to  have  been 
a  lady  by  no  means  deficient  in  spirit,  and  one  who  was 
properly  sensitive  as  to  any  imputation  on  her  hus- 
band's honour.  "  The  Countess  Bertrand,"  he  said,  "  I 
understand,  is  a  good  deal  affected  at  the  affair  which 
occurred  between  her  husband  and  Lieut.-Colonel  Lys- 
ter.  She  has  attempted  to  justify  him,  firstly,  for  not 
attending  the  summons  of  Lieut.-Colonel  Lyster,  that, 
as  a  man  who  has  commanded  armies,  he  could  not  be 
supposed  wanting  in  courage,  nor  was  she  a  woman 
to  marry  un  lAche ;  and,  secondly,  that  General  Bona- 
parte himself  dictated  the  whole  of  the  letters  written 
to  me,  and  they  were  none  of  them  her  husband's 
composition ;  that  it  was  unfortunate  he  had  not  em- 
ployed Count  Montholon  to  write  them  instead  of 
him." 

A  discovery  was  now  made  by  the  Governor  which, 
although  it  led  to  no  future  results  of  importance,  yet 
threw  considerable  light  upon  the  conduct  of  persons 
both  in  England  and  St.  Helena,  and  proved  how  little 
O'Meara  and  Mr.  Balcombe  were  to  be  trusted  by 
either  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  or  the  British  Government, 
and  how  little  they  and  others  respected  the  regula- 
tions in  force  in  the  island.  At  the  time  no  doubt 
the  matter  was  of  considerable  importance,  and  justi- 
fied strict  inquiry  and  minute  investigation,  as  it  was 
impossible  to  tell  how  figtr  the  ramifications  of  what 


68  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON,  Chap.  XXI, 

looked  very  like  a  conspiracy  to  defeat  the  restrictions 
imposed  apon  commonications  with  Longwood  ex- 
tended.  Now,  however,  the  interest  has  passed  away, 
and  we  shall  only  relate,  as  clearly  and  concisely  as 
possible,  the  main  &cte  brought  to  light  on  the  oc- 
casion. 

On  the  19th  of  September  the  Lnsitania  store-ship 
arrived  at  St.  Helena  from  England,  and  brought  out, 
under  tlie  charge  of  the  commander,  Captain  Arash, 
a  box  of  books,  which  had  been  sent  down  to  him  at 
Deal  by  a  person  of  the  name  of  William  Hdmes, 
residing  at  Lyons  Inn,  London.  Captain  Brash  had 
previously  seen  Mr.  Holmes  at  his  office  in  town,  and 
was  made  acquainted  that  the  books  were  for  Mr. 
O'Meara;  but  in  a  letter  which  Captain  Brash  after- 
wards received  from  Mr.  Holmes,  enclosing  one  to  the 
address  of  Mr.  Fowler,  a  partner  in  the  house  of  Bal- 
combe.  Cole,  and  Co.,  he  was  informed  that  they  were 
for  Mr.  Balcombe's  partner.  A  letter  was  also  re- 
ceived by  the  same  occasion  to  the  address  of  ^^  Dr. 
O'Meara."  The  box  itself  bore  no  other  address  than 
that  of  Captain  Brash.  Mr.  Fowler,  the  partner  of 
Mr.  Balcombe,  to  whom  one  of  the  letters  was  ad- 
dressed, showed  it  immediately  to  Sir  Thomas  Beade, 
who  brought  it  to  the  Governor.  This  letter  enclosed 
another  to  the  address  of  "James  Forbes,  Esq.," 
which  Mr.  Fowler  was  desired  to  deliver.  He  was 
also  directed  to  deliver  the  books,  which  were  stated 
to  be  French.  Mr.  Fowler  said  that  he  did  not  know 
any  such  person  as  Mr.  Forbes,  neither  did  he  knoW 
Mr.  Holmes.  Mr.  Fowler  was  <^ed  before  the  Coun- 
cil, and  there  formally  interrogated  as  to  his  know- 
ledge either  of  Mr.  Holmes  or  Mr.  Forbes;  after 
which  the  Governor  informed  him,  in  the  presence  of 
Sir  Greorge  Bingham  and  Mr.  Brooke,  two  members 


Sept.  18ia        CLANDESTINE  COBBESPONDBNCE.  69 

of  Council,  Uiat  the  box  must  be  opened  and  examined 
in  his  presence  before  it  could  be  admitted  to  pass 
into  the  town.  This  was  immediately  done  at  the 
wharf  where  it  lay,  and  it  was  found  to  contain 
French  books  and  a  copy  of  the  *  Morning  Chronicle ' 
of  the  latest  date  prior  to  the  sailing  of  the  vesseL 
It  was  evident  from  the  nature  of  the  boc^s  that 
they  were  destined  for  the  inmates  of  Longwood,  and 
although  there  would  have  been  no  difficulty  in  the 
way  of  their  receiving  them  if  they  had  been  for- 
warded in  the  regular  manner,  this  clandestine  mode 
of  introduction,  in  violation  of  the  established  rules, 
naturally  excited  much  suspicion.  Sir  Hudson  Lowe, 
therefore,  after  communicating  with  Sir  George  Bing- 
ham and  Mr.  Brooke,  and  finding  that  they  entirely 
agreed  with  him  as  to  the  propriety  of  opening  the  letter 
addressed  to  "  Mr.  Forbes,"  who  was  not  to  be  found, 
and  re£^)ecting  whom  no  information  whatever  was  to 
be  had,  broke  the  seal  in  their  presence,  when  the 
first  words  that  appeared  were  ^^  Dear  O'Meofra^'^  and 
the  letter  was  signed  "  William  Holmes."  Its  con- 
tents have  little  interest  now,  but  they  clearly  prove 
that  secret  and  illicit  communications  were  kept  up  be- 
tween London  and  St.  Helena,  and  that  several  persons 
were  engaged  in  these  transactions.  The  only  passages 
which  are  worth  quoting  here  are  the  following : — 

"  I  have  persuaded  Brash  to  take  the  French  books, 
and  they  follow  him  to  Deal  to-night  to  be  shipped ; 
and  he  has  instructions  to  give  them  to  Fowler.  The 
English  books  are  sent  to  Stokoe.  I  intend  starting 
for  Paris  next  week  to  see  Lafitte,  and  perhaps  will 
see  Las  Cases,  but  fear  my  journey  will  be  useless, 
fi^m  the  insufficiency  of  the  documents  I  hold.  Bal- 
combe  much  regrets  that  he  did  not  bring  me  full 
authority  to  act ;  he  does  not  wish  to  appear  active 


60  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXI. 

himself;  he  nevertheless  acts  in  concert  with  me  on 
all  occasions. 

"  I  am  seriously  concerned  to  hear  of  Napoleon 
being  so  ill ;  do  advise  him  to  take  exercise ;  for,  if  he 
shortens  his  life  by  refusing  to  do  so,  he  will  only  the 
more  gratify  the  savage  malignity  of  his  foes:  he 
ought  not  to  despair,  for,  rest  assured,  a  change  for 
the  better  will,  sooner  or  later,  take  place,  and  his 
great  mind  should  not  at  this  juncture  forsake  him. 
Mills  will  not  answer  my  letters — what  can  he  mean  ? 
Seek  every  opportunity  of  writing  to  me,  and  sending 
what  you  can.  Street  and  Parker  refused  to  pay 
Gourgaud's  bill  for  500/.,  but  they  have  since  heard 
from  Las  Cases,  and  it  is  settled.  I  understand  the 
old  General  does  not  mean  to  publish,  but,  should 
he.  Perry  of  the  *  Chronicle '  has  promised  his  as- 
sistance. 

"  I  understand  you  are  to  draw  for  1800/. :  you 
shall  hear  the  issue  of  my  visit  to  Lafitte;  and,  if 
your  remittances  are  paid,  trade  of  that  kind  can  be 
carried  on  to  any  extent.'* 

Sir  Hudson  Lowe  now  went  to  Admiral  Plampin, 
and  communicated  to  him  the  discovery  that  had  been 
made.  The  Admiral  was  of  opinion  that  the  reference 
made  to  other  papers  in  the  letter  warranted  and  re- 
quired an  immediate  examination  of  all  other  letters 
or  parcels  which  might  have  been  brought  by  any 
person  for  O'Meara  from  the  same  quarter.  On 
examination  the  parcels  were  found  to  contain  books 
and  two  letters  for  O'Meara — one  from  Mr.  Holmes, 
and  the  other,  of  no  importance,  from  Mrs.  Balcombe. 
There  now  remained  unopened  the  letter  to  the  ad- 
dress of  O'Meara  brought  by  Captain  Brash.  On 
this  being  opened  it  was  found  to  contain  one  to  the 
address  of  Mr.  Stokoe  (assistant  surgeon  on  board  the 


Sbpt.  1818.         CLANDESTINE  CX)RRESPONDENCE.  61 

Conqueror),  who  said  he  had  no  acquaintance  what- 
ever with  Mr.  Holmes,  and  made  no  objection  to  the 
letter  being  opened  and  perused.  It  was  found  not 
to  contain  a  letter  from  Mr.  Holmes  to  him,  but  one 
from  Mr.  Balcombe  to  Mr.  Stokoe,  enclosing  another 
under  the  address  "For  our  friend  Barry  O'Meafa, 
St.  Helena."  It  thus  appears  that  this  letter  was  en- 
closed in  three  envelopes, — the  first  of  which  was  ad- 
dressed to  O'Meara,  the  second  to  Mr.  Stokoe,  and  the 
third  to  O'Meara  again  1 

The  letter  from  Mr.  Balcombe  to  Mr.  Stokoe  had 
nothing  in  it  to  commit  Mr.  Stokoe  himself,  and  con- 
sisted only  of  a  few  lines,  saying,  "I  am  doing  all  I 
can  for  our  friend  Barry,"  or  words  to  that  eflFect. 
That  from  the  same  writer  to  "our  friend  Barry," 
which  was  dated  "Holmes'  Office,  24th  June,  1818," 
was  as  follows : — 

"  My  dear  Barry, 

"  Everything  has  been  done  that  can  be  done ; 
all  your  books  were  sent  on  board  Lucytania,  but  the 
captain  has  just  called  at  our  friend  Holmes'  office, 
where  I  am  writing  this,  to  say  he  can't  take  them 
(I  mean  the  French  books).  Holmes  is  indefatigable 
in  his  exertions  in  yaviT  caus€j  and  all  my  friends, 

among  the  rest  Sir  George  and  Sir  P ,  are  of  the 

same  opinion  with  us.  All  communications  whatever 
must  be  sent  to  Holmes,  as  I  mean  to  leave  oflf  any 
agency  business  in  England  except  through  him.  He 
is  more  acquainted,  and  has  a  very  extensive  know- 
ledge of  what  ought  to  be  done  for  you ;  rest  per- 
fectly easy  that  no  stone  will  be  left  unturned  to  serve 
our  friends  on  the  island.  I  have  been  hard  at  work 
for  you,  and  what  has  been  said  has  been  listened  to. 
I  am  just  going  to  the  Secretary  of  State's  office, 
where  I  have  been  twice  before  on  your  business* 


62  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXI. 

The  election  is  going  on  rapidly ;  the  opposition  mem- 
bers are  all  coming  in,  the  ministerial  going  out ;  a 
change  in  the  administration  is  expected.    The  Leve- 

ret>  Sir  George  0 has  told  me,  will  sail  for  your 

island  in  the  course  of  ten  days,  when  you  will  receive 
the  French  books  from  Holmes.  I  have  delivered  all 
up  to  Holmes,  who  is  making  the  best  use  of  them. 
Pray  bum  all  my  scrawls,  as  they  are  not  fit  to  read — 
written  so  bad.  With  best  regards  to  all  our  friends, 
I  remain,  &c.  "  James  Baloombe." 

A  letter  also  came  from  Mr.  Holmes  to  Mr.  Stokoe, 
begging  him  to  give  the  following  enclosure  to  Count 
Bertrand  in  private,  in  case  O'Meara  had  left  the 
island,  as  he  did  not  wish  the  Governor  to  peruse  it. 

"  Reply  to  Lbttbb  addbessed  to  Paris. 

"  London,  August  25,  1818. 

"  The  100,000  francs  lent  in  1816  are  paid— like- 
wise the  72,000  francs  which  complete  the  396,000 
francs  mentioned  in  the  note  of  the  15th  March.  The 
36,000  francs  for  1817,  and  the  like  sum  for  1819, 
have  also  been  paid  by  the  person  ordered.  Remain 
quiet  as  to  the  funds  placed;  the  farmers  are  good, 
and  they  will  pay  bills  for  the  amount  of  the  income, 
which  must  be  calculated  at  the  rate  of  four  per  cent., 
commencing  from  1816 ;  that  is  to  say,  there  will  be 
three  years  of  the  interest  due  the  expiration  of  the 
present  year — all  other  letters  have  been  delivered." 

In  detailing  these  circumstances  to  Lord  Bathurst, 
Sir  Hudson  said  in  his  despatch  that  on  the  day  of 
Mr.  Balcombe*s  departure  from  St.  Helena  he  required 
his  attendance  in  James  Town,  and,  in  the  presence  of 
Sir  Thomas  Reade  and  Major  Gt)rrequer,  asked  him 
whether  he  had  any  other  accounts  or  transactions 


Pbpt.  1818.       CLANDESTINE  C0BRB3P0NDBNCE.  63 

with  the  persons  at  Lon^ood  than  what  were  at  that 
moment  lying  before  the  Governor  at  the  close  of  his 
public  and  private  accounts  with  the  establishment 
there^  which  were  to  be  left  in  the  hands  of  his  part- 
ner, Mr.  Cole,  to  settle.  He  said  that  Mr.  Balcombe, 
in  the  most  sol^nn  manner,  assured  him  that  he  had 
had  no  other  pecuniary  transactions  whatever  with 
them  than  those  of  which  the  (Governor  was  ^apprized. 
He  was  then  asked  if  he  had  charged  himself  with  or 
been  asked  to  be  the  bearer  of  any  communications 
whatever  to  Eurc^,  for  the  persons  at  Longwood,  or 
if  his  daughters,  who  had  visited  Longwood  the  day 
before,  had  charged  themselves  with  any ;  in  answer 
to  which  he  gave  the  same  solenm  and  distinct  as- 
surance in  the  negative. 

Notwithstanding  the  improper  mode  in  which  the 
books  had  been  sent,  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  forwarded 
them  all  to  Longwood,  and  exiH*es6ed  his  hope  that 
the  irr^ularity  of  their  conveyance?  was  not  owing  to 
any  &ult  of  those  for  whom  they  were  designed. 

Clandestine  letters,  however,  were  not  the  only 
means  whereby  the  partizans  of  Napoleon  sought  to 
keep  up  a  correspondence  with  him.  The  use  of 
ciphers  in  newspapers  was  resorted  to,  in  hopes  that 
they  might  meet  his  eye  and  arrest  his  attention.  On 
the  6th  of  March  in  the  preceding  year  Lord  Bath- 
urst  had  thus  written  to  the  Governor : — 

"My  dear  Sir, 

"  The  Austrian  Ambassador  has  transmitted  to 
me  the  copy  of  another  letter  which  appeared  in  the 
*  Anti-Gallican '  *  and  which  has  been  deciphered  at 
Vienna.  In  a  conversation  which  I  had  with  his 
Excellency  this  morning,  he  showed  me  the  two  first 
letters  deciphered,  in  both  of  which,  if  I  recollect 

'  The  '  Anti-Gkdlicau'  was  a  newspaper. 


64  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON,  Chap.  XXI. 

right,  I  am  sure  in  one,  ^  is  the  advice  given  to 
Gkneral  Bonaparte  not  to  go  to  bed  in  the  night.  I 
cannot  make  out  the  true  history  of  these  letters,  but 
I  am  inclined  to  suspect  that  there  is  not  much  in 
them  which  requires  your  attention.  On  the  whole, 
however,  I  am  disposed  to  think  that  you  had  better 
not  let  the  *  Anti-Gallican '  be  communicated  to  him, 
and  you  will  therefore  do  nothing  on  this  subject 
(notwithstanding  my  late  despatch  marked  *  confiden- 
tial ')  in  consequence  of  this  communication,  except 
perhaps  taking  some  measure  to  ascertain  whether 
there  appears  by  his  conduct  any  disposition  to  regu- 
late his  habits  with  a  view  to  escape. 

"He  would,  I  think,  take  much  more  care  of  his 
health  if  he  thought  an  escape  probable.  We  may 
doubt  his  being  as  ill  as  he  at  times  affects ;  but  as  he 
might  appear  as  ill,  and  yet  attend  more  to  his 
health,  I  think  the  neglect  of  it  is  real,  and  proceeds 
fix)m  his  considering  his  situation  to  be  hopeless. 
I  am,  my  dear  Sir,  yours  very  sincerely, 

"  Bathurst. 

"  There  is  reason  to  suspect  that  there  are  commu- 
nications made  to  General  Bonaparte  by  the  channel 
of  the  *  Morning  Chronicle '  and  *  Times.'  ** 


Oct.  1818.         HIS  REFUSAL  TO  SHOW  HIMSELP.  65 


CHAPTER  XXII. 

DIFFICULTIES  CAUSED  BY  BONAPARTE's  REFUSAL  TO  SHOW  HIM- 
SELP TO  THE  ORDERLY  OFFICER —  INTERVIEWS  AND  CONVER- 
SATIONS BETWEEN  THE  GOVERNOR  AND  COUNT  MONTHOLON 
—  ALLEGED  GRIEVANCES  —  ORDERLY  OFFICER'S  REPORTS  — 
CARDINAL  FESCH'S  APPLICATION  —  CALUMNIOUS  REMARKS  OF 
O'mEARA  at  ASCENSION  ISLAND  —  SUSPICIOUS  LETTER  FROM 
THE  CAPE. 

The  resolute  determination  of  Bonaparte  not  to  allow 
himself  to  be  seen  by  the  orderly  oflScer  made  it  ne- 
cessary that  some  decisive  steps  should  be  taken.  A 
whole  fortnight  had  elapsed  since  he  had  given  Cap- 
tain Nicholls,  who  had  succeeded  Captain  Blakeney, 
any  opportunity  of  certifying  the  fact  of  his  presence 
at  Longwood;  and  the  instructions  to  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe  from  the  English  Ck)vemment  were  precise  and 
positive,  that  he  should  assure  ImnseUtunceevery  daythsA 
Napoleon  was  actually  there.  He  had  strained  cour- 
tesy and  forbearance  on  this  point  beyond  the  limits 
which  his  duty  warranted ;  but  the  systematic  plan 
now  pursued  by  Bonaparte  of  withdrawing  himself  from 
view  rendered  further  connivance  at  such  an  evasion 
of  the  rule  impossible.  The  Governor,  therefore,  ac- 
companied by  Major  Qorrequer,  called  on  Count  Mon- 
tholon  on  the  3rd  of  October,  and  had  a  long  conver- 
sation with  him  on  the  subject. 

He  began  by  inquiring  whether  any  answer  had 
been  returned  by  Bonaparte  with  reference  to  their  last 
conversation,  on  which  Montholon  replied,  **  I  will  tell 
you  candidly  that  the  letter  I  was  made  to  write  the 

VOL.  III.  P 


66  OAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXn, 

very  night  after  you  came  here  was  couched  in  terms  so 
offensive  that  I  did  not  think  it  right  to  send  it  to  you 
as  I  had  promised.  It  would  only  have  befti  a  fresh 
cause  of  irritation  and  bitterness ;  and  there  have  been 
enough  of  discussions  during  the  last  six  months  with- 
out renewing  them  about  a  matter  of  no  consequence 
— a  piece  of  folly  {une  betise).  I  therefore  thought  it 
better  to  wait  and  see  you,  and  speak  firankly."  The 
Governor  said  that  he  had  no  wish  to  know  more  than 
simply  t/es  or  noj  whether  Bonaparte  still  refused  to 
see  the  orderly  oflScer  and  the  doctor.  The  Count 
replied  that  in  that  case  he  must  answer  in  the  nega- 
tive; and  a  discussion  arose,  in  which  Montholon 
asserted  that  the  Emperor  did  afford  opportunities  for 
his  being  seen,  by  drawing  his  curtains  and  coming  to 
his  window  ;  but  that  he  would  never  submit  to  show 
himself  like  a  prisoner :  such  was  his  positive  resolu- 
tion. The  Governor  said  that  he  had  that  morning 
received  a  report  from  the  orderly  oflScer,  stating  that 
he  had  no  certainty  of  the  presence  of  Napoleon 
Bonapaarte  at  Longwood ;  and  he  added  that  he  (the 
Governor)  had  pushed  delicacy  to  the  extreme  in  this 
respect ;  he  had  always  endeavoured  to  satisfy  himself 
that  he  was  at  Longwood  in  a  Way  not  disagreeable  to 
his  feelings;  and  thinking  that  he  might  have  been 
reluctant  to  show  himself  on  accotmt  of  the  workmen 
employed  on  the  new  building,  he  had  caused  a  wall  of 
turf  to  be  raised  in  order  that  he  might  not  be  incom* 
moded  by  them.  Count  Montholon  denied  that  the 
Emperor  had  any  intention  of  concealing  himself  from 
view,  and  attributed  his  continued  retirement  to  ill 
health.  He  said, — "He  does  not  even  care  to  see 
any  of  us ;  and  if  we  did  not  go  to  see  him  of  our  own 
accord  he  would  remain  whole  days  alone.  And  then 
he  has  taken  this  mania  for  warm  baths,  of  which  he 


Oct.  1818.  DIFFICULTY  OF  SEEING  HIM.  67 

sometimes  takes  three  in  a  day^  remaining  in  them  for 
hours :  his  room  is  so  hot  as  to  throw  one  into  a  violent 
perspiration ;  there  is  always  a  fire  there,  and  the  win- 
dows are  hardly  ever  open.  The  temperature  there  is  at 
least  75  or  76  degrees ;  and  all  this  weakens  him*  It 
seenfis  even  that  the  more  it  weakens  him  the  more  he 
perseveres  in  it"  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  replied  that  his 
orders  were  positive,  and  that  it  was  absolutely  neces- 
sary that  Captain  Nicholls  should  see  Napoleon  in 
some  way  or  other.  Count  Montholon  answered, — 
**It  is  a  subject  on  which  I  cannot  touch  without 
putting  him  out  of  temper ;  it  is  the  topic  which  irri- 
tates him  most.  The  more  I  should  seek  to  persuade 
him  the  more  obstinate  he  would  be.  He  is  a  man  who, 
the  more  cannon  you  fire  at  him,  the  more  he  resists ; 
it  is  only  by  gentle  means  that  anything  can  be  done 
with  him."  **But,  Monsieur  le  Comte,"  said  the 
Governor,  "  I  don't  fire  any  cannon  at  him  ;  on  the 
contrary,  every  one  knows  how  for  I  have  pushed  deli- 
cacy on  this  subject,  by  refraining  till  now  from  insisting 
on  the  point."  "  I  admit  it.  Monsieur  le  Gk)uverneur," 
replied  Montholon,  "  and  I  render  you  full  justice  in 
this  respect.  The  Emperor  himself  said,  *  Well,  he  does 
his  duty ;'  but  as  it  is  a  subject  on  which  I  know  he 
will  become  irritated,  I  had  rather  you  would  write  to 
me,  and  I  will  send  you  his  answer  in  like  manner." 

Some  allusion  was  then  made  to  0*Meara,  and  the 
Governor  mentioned  that  a  letter  had  arrived  at  St. 
Heleim,  after  that  person's  departure,  addressed  to 
him  under  a  feigned  name,  in  which  he  was  advised 
to  endeavour  to  persuade  Bonaparte  to  take  exercise, 
and  be  careful  of  his  health.  The  Count  exclaimed, 
"  How,  Monsieur  le  Qouverneur  I  a  letter  addressed  to 
Dr.  O'Meara  under  a  false  name  I  You  surprise  me ; 
wid  why  this  mystery  ?"    He  then  argued  against  the 

F  2 


68  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXII. 

possibility  of  any  plot  or  intrigue  being  carried  on  at 
St.  Helena  without  being  discovered,  saying  that  he 
was  certain  that  even  if  an  attempt  were  made  to  get 
the  Emperor  oflf— and  he  were  told  that  a4)oat  was  ready 
for  him  to  embark  in — ^he  would  refuse,  for  he  would 
never  go  away  like  an  adventurer,  but  would  act  as  he 
did  at  Rochefort  when  he  declined  to  try  and  escape,  and 
declared  that  he  would  not  thus  tarnish  his  career. 

Sir  Hudson  Lowe  made  a  remark  about  the  false 
impressions  which  Bonaparte  seemed  to  have  on  his 
mind  respecting  the  English,  on  which  Count  Mon- 
tholon  shortly  observed,  "It  is  Count  Las  Cases ; " 
and  there  is  no  doubt  that  this  person  was  the  author 
of  much  mischief,  for  his  previous  residence  in  Eng- 
land, and  acquaintance  (tiiough  imperfect)  with  the 
language,  had  given  him  an  influence  with  Napoleon 
which  he  seems  never  to  have  exerted  for  any  good 
purpose,  and  his  misrepresentations  of  English  cus- 
toms and  modes  of  acting,  if  not  wilful,  were  ridiculous. 
He  also  did  considerable  harm  by  misinterpreting  ex- 
pressions in  conversation,  and  even  Napoleon  on  one 
occasion  declared  that  he  was  satisfied  that  the  Count 
did  not  sufficiently  understand  the  language  to  avoid 
misleading  him. 

With  respect  to  O'Meara,  Count  Montholon  said 
that  he  was  from  the  first  convinced  that  the  doctor 
gave  an  account  to  the  Governor  of  all  that  happened 
at  Longwood.  "As  he  lodged  close  to  me,  and  as  I 
saw  him  always  writing  from  the  moment  he  entered 
his  room,  I  strongly  suspected  what  he  was  about ; 
and  he  would  have  been  the  very  last  person  to  whom 
I  would  have  confided  anything.  I  said  to  myself, — 
*  Well,  it  is  his  profession ; '  but  I  was  astonished  to 
see  the  Emperor  place  so  much  confidence  in  him  as 
to  speak  to  him  in  the  way  he  did." 


Oct.  1818.  DIFFICULTY  OF  SEEING  HIM.  6& 

Inquiry  had  been  made  about  some  books  which 
the  (lovernor  had  lent  for  perusal  at  Longwood,  and 
which  were  missing.  In  the  course  of  the  conversa- 
tion Count  Montholon  declared  that  they  had  all  been 
sent  to  O'Meara  for  the  purpose  of  being  forwarded  to 
Plantation  House,  and  that  he  particularly  recollected 
haying  seen  one  of  them  in  his  possession  after  it  had 
been  returned  to  him,  as  upon  the  margin  of  one  of 
the  pages  "the  Emperor"  had  written  some  remark, 
which  O'Meara  had  requested  he  would  read  to  him,  aa 
he  could  not  decipher  it  himself.  This  he  accordingly 
did;  "and  perhaps  he  might,"  added  Count  Mon- 
tholon, "have  kept  it  from  curiosity,  on  account  of 
the  note."  The  Governor  observed  that  was  no  reason 
for  his  purloining  the  book  itself  which  belonged  to 
him.  After  a  few  words  more  of  desultory  conversa- 
tion he  and  Major  Gorrequer  took  leave. 

Captain  Nicholls  still  reported  his  inability  to  get 
a  sight  of  Napoleon,  and  on  the  5th  Sir  Hudson  Lowe 
again  visited  Count  Montholon  and  told  him  of  this. 
The  Count  replied, — "  I  am  astonished ;  for  the  day 
before  yesterday,  immediately  after  your  departure, 
and  while  I  was  yet  speaking  with  Major  Gorrequer, 
the  Emperor  sent  for  me.  We  went  together  into  the 
billiard-room,  where  we  walked  for  an  hour  and  a  half 
with  the  windows  open,  and  from  which  we  even  saw 
Dr.  Yerling  go  by.  The  Emperor,  on  seeing  him, 
asked  me  whether  that  was  the  captain  or  the  doctor? 
and  I  told  him  it  was  the  latter.  I  subsequently 
asked  Dr.  Verling  if  he  had  not  seen  us ;  he  said  No, 
that  he  had  not  looked  that  way,  that  he  had  inten- 
tionally turned  his  head  away.  I  repeated  to  the 
Emperor  what  you  told  me  the  other  day ;  his  reply 
was,  *  What  would  he  have  ?  does  he  want  me  to  go 
out  when  I  am  ill  ?    I  do  not  hide  myself  from  any 


70  OAPTIVITT  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chat.  XXII. 

one.  I  hare  changed  none  of  my  habits,  nor  do  I 
mean  to  change  them ;  my  manner  of  living  is  always 
the  same.  I  perceive  that  for  some  time  past  they 
no  longer  examine  the  servants  and  the  workpeople, 
and  do  not  watch  me  from  under  my  windows.  That 
they  should  have  desisted  from  this  gives  me  pleasure. 
When  the  fine  weather  returns  and  my  hecJth  is 
better,  I  will  go  out  as  usual.  Can  I  go  out  while 
I  am  suffering,  and  during  such  bad  weather?  It 
is  no  very  agreeable  thing  to  deprive  myself  of 
fresh  air,  of  the  little  liberty  which  is  allowed  me 
here,  and  to  shut  myself  up  in  my  room.  I  conceal 
myself  from  no  one ;  I  have  no  intenticm  to  do  so ; 
what  then  do  they  want  ?  do  they  wish  some  catas- 
trophe to  happen?  If  it  be  any  innovation,  any 
new  regulation,  let  them  inform  me  of  it  in  writing.'  '* 
The  Governor  answered  that  it  was  no  innovation, 
but  that  there  now  appeared  to  be  a  system  esta- 
blished to  prevent  the  orderly  oflScer  from  seeing 
Bonaparte ;  that  Captain  Nicholls  had  only  seen  him 
once ;  that,  whenever  the  ofl&cer  was  perceived,  the 
blinds  were  instantly  drawn  across  the  windows,  and 
all  opportunity  of  getting  a  glimpse  of  him  was  thus 
prevented.  He  added  that  Captain  Nicholls  was 
under  the  impression,  notwithstanding  the  assurance 
of  Count  Montholon  to  the  contrary,  that  Napoleon 
strove  to  conceal  himself,  and  said  that  Captains 
Poppleton  and  Blakeney  had  also  complained  of  the 
difficulty  of  seeing  him.  Montiiolon  replied  that  there 
was  no  such  design,  but  that  the  Emperor  was  pro- 
strated, in  bad  health,  and  in  the  deepest  afflictioiL 
He  continued, — "  If  I  speak  to  him  on  this  subject  it 
provokes  and  irritates  him,  and  he  then  makes  use  of 
terms  and  words  that  are  very  disagreeable  to  me, 
and  would  be  equally  offensive  to  you  were  I  to  re- 


Oct.  1818.  HIB  8E0LUSI0N.  71 

peat  them.  When  I  spoke  to  him  about  it  the  other 
day,  he  ended  with  a  scene.  He  exclaimed,  *  Well 
then,  tl^y  want  to  assassinate  me  I '  He  has  always 
that  idea  in  his  head.*^ 

The  Governor  said,  **  These  expressions  which  he 
so  often  makes  use  of  go  for  nothing;  they  do  him 
no  good ;  on  the  contrary,  he  does  himself  harm  by 
ihem.  My  character  is  too  well  known  for  any  one 
to  imagine  that  I  take  delight  in  persecuting  him.  It 
is  not  possible  for  me  to  show  greater  delicacy  and  care 
to  avoid  anything  that  may  be  disagreeable  to  him 
than  by  coming  here  to  you  twice,  as  I  have  done,  to 
see  if  there  were  any  means  of  coming  to  an  arrange^ 
ment  instead  of  writing  to  you  ofiBcially;  and  you 
will  perceive  tiiat  on  this  point  there  cannot  be  two 
opinions.  I  see  no  use  in  writing.  What  can  I  say 
to  you  beyond  this, — that  the  orders  of  my  Govern- 
ment are  that  I  satisfy  myself  twice  a-day  of  his  actual 
presence  here,  and  tiiat  it  is  necessary  that  I  should 
cause  these  orders  to  be  punctually  executed  ?  It  is 
for  the  express  purpose  of  preventing  that  extremity 
that  I  have  come  to  speak  with  you  on  the  subject, 
and  in  wder  to  avoid  more  extreme  measures."  After 
some  furUier  discussion  the  Governor  ended  the  con- 
versation by  saying, — "  I  do  not  in  any  way  pretend, 
Monsieur  le  Oomte,  to  insist  upon  Napoleon  Bona- 
parte's receiving  visits.  He  is  master  in  his  own  in- 
terior to  receive  those  only  whom  he  pleases.  I  do  not 
interfere  in  the  least  with  this ;  but  the  orderly  oflBcer 
is  charged  with  a  duty  of  great  responsibility,  and  he 
muAt  have  the  meajis  of  performing  it/' 

Two  days  afterwards  Major  Grorrequer,  at  Count 
Montholon's  request,  called  upon  him,  and  another  long 
conversation  took  place  between  them  which  led  to  no 
result.    The  Count  professed  to  be  unable  to  under- 


72  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXn. 

stand  the  object  of  the  Governor's  last  two  visits.. 
Major  Gorrequer  replied  that  it  seemed  very  easy  to 
understand,  and  the  Governor  had  fully  explained  him- 
self on  the  subject  of  the  orderly  officer's  report  that  he 
could  not  see  Bonaparte,  and  that  it  was  impossible 
for  him  to  satisfy  himself  of  his  presence  at  Longwood, 
He  added  that  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  wished  Napoleon  to 
show  himself  in  the  way  most  agreeable  to  himself, 
and  that  he  had  preferred  speaking  to  writing,  as  he 
thought  the  matter  might  be  thereby  more  easily 
arranged.  To  this  Montholon  replied,  "Yes,  Sir,  I 
have  seen  with  pleasure  that  the  Governor  has  been 
most  considerate  in  his  conversations  on  this  subject ; 
but  when  I  go  to  the  Emperor  and  speak  to  him  about 
it,  he  puts  himself  into  a  passion,  and  seems  to  appre- 
hend something  disastrous — something  dreadftil:  he 
exclaims,  *  They  want  then  to  assassinate  me/  I  am, 
in  fact,  placed  between  two  twenty-four  pounders. 
He  was  in  a  passion  with  me  again  yesterday,  and 
said  very  disagreeable  things  to  me  when  I  spoke  to 
him  about  it.  He  repeated  to  me,  *I  hide  myself 
from  no  one.  I  do  not  aflFect  to  keep  my  room.  I 
am  not  acting  upon  any  plan.  When  I  go  out  I  may 
be  seen ;  I  do  not  conceal  myself  from  the  sight  of 
anybody.'  'f  Count  Montholon  afterwards  said, — "  I 
endeavour  to  make  him  see  things  in  a  better  light  and 
get  rid  of  these  ideas ;  but  what  would  you  have  me 
say  to  a  person  who  speaks  to  me  as  he  does  ?  I  am 
very  far  myself  from  approving  the  life  he  leads — his 
refiisal  to  take  exercise — to  ride  on  horseback — to  see 
any  one,  even  the  doctor — to  persist  all  the  more  when 
recommended  to  change  his  habits.  How,  the  devil  I 
not  to  call  in  a  doctor  when  one  is  ill  is  to  punish 
oneself— it  is  ridiculous.  All  these  things  are  cUldish, 
pure  follies.    He  is  seldom  up  more  than  two  or  three 


Oct.  1818.  HIS  SECLUSION.  73 

hours  a-day ;  he  is  so  used  to  this  that  it  has  now  be- 
come a  necessity  for  him  to  remain  long  in  bed.  He 
becomes  weak  in  body — his  blood  thickens — he  de- 
clines daily.  The  habit  of  remaining  in  bed  becomes 
an  absolute  necessity.  Then  he  is  in  a  bad  humour, 
sulky;  his  temper  is  soured  and  irritable.  Let  the 
fine  weather  come,  and  I  don't  say  that  he  will  not 
then  walk  out  in  his  garden  as  formerly.  Would  you 
wish  him  to  go  out  in  the  rain  to  show  himself?'* 

The  Count  proceeded  at  some  length  in  this  strain, 
and  Major  Gorrequer  told  him  that  he  would  have 
been  much  better  pleased  if,  on  his  return  to  Sir  Hud- 
son Lowe,  he  could  have  informed  him  that  the  orderly 
officer  had  seen  Bonaparte.  After  an  abortive  discus- 
sion, in  which  Count  Montholon  said  that  the  Emperor 
had  received  from  the  Prince  Regent  the  assurance 
that  his  privacy  should  never  be  violated,  the  con- 
versation terminated,  and  the  Major  took  leave. 

The  next  day  the  Governor  called  upon  Count 
Montholon,  and  said  he  had  done  so  in  consequence 
of  what  Major  Gorrequer  had  reported  to  him  of  the 
interview  that  had  taken  place  between  them  the 
preceding  day.  The  Gt)vernor  said  he  understood 
that  the  Count,  not  having  fully  comprehended  his 
object  in  their  last  conferences,  required  further  ^ex- 
planation, which  he  was  ready  to  give  him.  It  ap- 
peared there  was  an  impression  that  he  was  desirous 
of  introducing  some  innovation,  but  it  was  not  the 
case ;  and,  to  prove  to  him  it  was  not  a  new  system 
he  was  seeking  to  establish,  but  an  arrangement  made 
before  his  arrival  here,  he  referred  him  to  two  written 
papers,  one  of  which  contained  Sir  G<iorge  Cockburn's 
instructions  to  the  orderly  officer  on  the  10th  of  No- 
vember 1815.  Count  Montholon  read  them  and  ex- 
pressed himself  satisfied  that  no  innovation  or  change 


74  OAPTIVITT  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXn. 

was  intended ;  that  it  was  only  the  execution  of  an 
arrangement  made  on  their  first  arrival  in  the  island ; 
adding,  that  he  perceived  the  Governor  had  not  acted 
upon  it  fi^om  motives  of  delicacy.  The  latter  said 
that  that  was  not  exactly  the  reason ;  the  &ct  was, 
that  until  now  there  had  not,  in  reality,  been  any 
immediate  necessity  for  it,  for  whilst  O'Meara  was 
at  Longwood  there  was  always  an  opportunity  of 
ascertaining  Ni^leon  Bonaparte's  presence  tiiiere 
through  him,  and  for  a  long  time  also  through  the 
persons  who  visited  him.  Besides,  until  a  short  time 
ago,  there  were  English  servants  in  the  house  and 
people  employed  in  the  garden  ;  but  since  he  had  dis* 
missed  the  servants,  and  the  workmen  had  been  re^ 
moved  because  he  complained  of  their  intrusiveness, 
there  were  no  means  left  for  ascertaining  that  he  was 
actually  at  Longwood.  Since  that  time,  therefore,  his 
position  had  very  materially  changed.  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe  added  that  the  orderly  officer's  last  report  was 
the  same  as  before,  viz.  that  he  had  not  yet  seen  Bona- 
parte. Count  Montholon  replied  that  it  was  extra* 
ordinary  he  had  not,  for  that  very  morning  he  had 
been  walking  up  and  down  with  the  Emperor  in  his 
room,  and  Captain  Nicholls  passed  by  at  that  moment, 
and,  having  seen  him,  the  Emperor  asked  him  (Mon^ 
tholon)  who  it  was,  and,  drawing  his  curtain  aside, 
placed  himself  opposite  the  window,  where  he  re- 
mained some  time.  On  this  the  Gk)vemor  said,  **  Well, 
Monsieur  le  Comte,  you  will  not  persuade  him  that 
they  do  not  try  to  prevent  him,  and  I  give  you  my 
word  that  I  have  myself  twice  observed  that,  when  I 
approached  the  house,  the  curtains,  which  were  before 
open,  were  immediately  closed."  Montholon  then 
talked  about  replacing  things  upon  their  original 
footing,  when  the  Governor  begged  him  to  point  out 


Oct.  18ia     PRINCE  RBaBNTS  ALLEGED  PROMISE.  75 

wherein  they  differed,  for  he  himself  was  not  aware  of 
any  alteration.  **In  the  mode  of  persons  visiting 
ns,"  said  the  Count,  **  forwarding  notes  direct  to  their 
address,  aad  cards  of  invitation."  The  Governor  ob- 
served that,  with  regard  to  forwarding  notes  sealed, 
it  was  a  point  which  had  been  fully  discussed,  and  in 
that  there  could  be  no  alteration  made ;  with  respect 
to  visitors,  he  would  willingly  enter  into  some  arrange- 
ment with  him  about  it.  Count  Montholon  made  light 
of  the  importance  which  had  been  attached  on  their 
part  to  the  notes  being  sent  sealed,  saying,  "  In  Gtxi's 
name,  why  attach  so  much  importance  to  it,  when  one 
consents  to  writing  open  letters  to  one's  friends  and 
one's  family,  &c.  ?  this  is  mere  nonsense  (niaiseries)." 
The  Governor  afterwards  said  that,  having  heard  from 
Major  Grorrequer  that  Count  Montholcm  had  men^ 
tioned  that  the  Prince  Regent  had  given  an  assurance 
that  the  interior  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte's  house  should 
never  be  violated,  he  would  take  the  liberty  of  asking 
how  that  assurance  was  commxmicafced.  The  Count 
retried  that  the  Emperor  had  told  him  such  a  promise 
had  been  made  by  the  Prince  Regent,  but  he  did  not 
name  to  him  the  channel — it  might  have  been  on 
board  the  Bellerophon,  at  a  time  when  he  did  not 
enter  into  any  of  those  discussions.  The  Governor 
expressed  his  surprise  that  such  an  assurance  had  been 
given,  and  that  he  should  never  before  have  heard  it ; 
it  could  not  have  been  made  known  to  Sir  George 
Cockbum;  and  he  had  a  letter  from  Earl  Bathurst 
(a  copy  of  which  he  handed  to  him)  dated  the  26th 
of  June  1816,  wherein  he  would  find  under  what  rules 
he  was  directed  to  act  in  that  respect.  Montholon 
read  the  letter  and  returned  it,  saying,  **  I  see  in  feet 
that  you  require  only  what  your  instructions  pre- 
wrnbe." 


76  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON-  Chap.  XXlt. 

After  some  discussion  about  the  choice  of  a  medical 
attendant,  Count  Montholon  said  he  believed  one 
might  be  found  on  the  island  who  would  prove  agree- 
able, and  added,  **The  basis  once  established  and 
ourselves  agreed,  all  difficulties,  I  repeat  it,  would 
vanish ;  he  would  see  you  himself."  "I  put  myself 
quite  out  of  the  question, "  replied  the  Governor ;  "  but 
it  is  absolutely  necessary  that  I  should  be  enabled  to 
send  a  report  to  my  Government,  by  the  vessel  that 
is  about  to  sail,  of  his  (Napoleon's)  actual  presence  at 
Longwood,  of  which  I  have  not  received  any  positive 
assurance  by  persons  who  have  seen  him/'  The  Count 
then  assured  Sir  Hudson  that  Captain  Nicholls  should 
see  Bonaparte  the  next  day  before  four  o'clock  in  the 
afternoon,  and  continued,  **  The  Emperor  had  cause 
to  be  greatly  displeased  at  what  was  reported  to  him 
by  Dr.  O'Meara,  who  told  him  that  you  had  ordered 
him  to  repeat  everything  he  heard,  and  to  give  you 
an  account  of  everything  that  happened  here ;  in  fex^t, 
that  he  was  to  be  a  spy,  and  that,  because  he  refused, 
you  had  prohibited  him  from  speaking  to  us  on  any 
subject  but  medicine — that  he  was  merely  allowed  to 
feel  our  pulse  ;  that  if  he  engaged  in  any  kind  of  con- 
versation with  us  it  would  be  at  his  peril,  and  that 
he  was  obliged  to  tell  you  of  it."  The  Governor 
answered  that  all  that  was  absolutely  false ;  and  Count 
Montholon  said  that  he  gave  the  fullest  credit  to  the 
Governor's  assurance. 

The  Governor  then  related  the  directions  he  had 
given  to  O'Meara,  and  explained  that  he  had  not  for- 
bidden him  to  converse  on  other  subjects  than  pro- 
fessional ones,  but  had  told  him  that  any  other  con- 
versation was  on  his  own  responsibility,  as  he  could 
not  of  course  authorise  what  he  did  not  know  of;  that 
he  had  never  required  him  to  repeat  what  passed ; 


Oct.  1818.        CONDUCT  OP  CMEARA,  77 

that  O'Meara  had  sometimes  repeated  things  he  had 
heard,  btU  spontaneously;  and  that,  notwithstanding 
the  anxiety  O'Meara  showed  for  a  length  of  time  to 
repeat  to  him  what  had  been  said,  he  did  not  par* 
ticularly  encourage  it;  but,  he  asked,  what  would 
Count  Montholon  think  of  O'Meara  after  knowing  that 
he  acknowledged,  after  thus  coming  open-mouthed 
(la  bouche  ouverte)  with  his  reports,  that  he  had  pledged 
himself  to  Napoleon  Bonaparte  not  to  reveal  what 
passed  in  conversation  between  them  ?  Sir  Hudson 
said  that  the  knowledge  of  this  pledge  was  concealed 
from  him  for  two  years;  and  that,  after  hearing  of 
it,  he  never  asked  him  a  question.  It  appeared  in 
fact  that  he  had  formed  one  contract  with  his  Govern- 
ment, and  another  with  Count  Bertrahd.  "Well 
then,"  answered  Count  Montholon,  "I  would  say  that 
he  was  a  rascal ;  that  you  have  acted  like  a  man  of 
honour,  and  he  like  a  man  void  of  principle ;  and  that 
you  were  perfectly  right  in  saying  that  all  that  passed 
beyond  his  medical  reports  was  on  his  own  responsi- 
bility. But  I  was  never  the  dupe  of  Mr.  O'Meara. 
I  saw  clearly  through  all  his  manoeuvres.  I  knew 
that  he  often  wrote  to  you  the  reports  of  conversations 
he  had  had  with  us." 

The  Governor  afterwards  said,  that  in  his  opinion 
it  would  be  better  to  leave  things  as  they  were  for  the 
present,  and  make  no  change  imtil  an  answer  arrived 
from  the  English  Government  with  respect  to  the  ap- 
plication he  had  made  for  a  French  or  Italian  doctor. 
He  remarked  that  only  two  medical  persons  had  been 
admitted  to  familiar  conversations  with  Napoleon  in 
the  island,  and  it  was  very  evident  the  object  of  both 
was  to  publish  the  information  they  were  thus  enabled 
to  collect :  que  of  these  was  Mr.  Warden,  whose  book 
did  not  contain  a  word  on  medical  subjects — the  other. 


78  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXII. 

Mr.  O'Meara,  who  stated,  in  a  letter  he  had  seen,  that 
it  was  his  intention  to  publish  a  journal,  which  he 
said  would  be  highly  useful  to  the  British  nation  in 
general. 

After  some  further  conversation,  in  which  the  sub- 
ject of  the  orderly  oflBcer's  difficulties  was  again  dis- 
cussed, Count  Montholon  gave  his  assurance  that 
Captain  NichoUs  should  see  the  Emperor  the  following 
day,  and  the  Governor  took  leave. 

Sir  Hudson  Lowe  called  on  (Jeneral  Montholon 
again  the  next  day,  and  had  another  long  interview 
with  him.  Nothing  could  be  more  plausible  than  the 
language  and  demeanour  of  the  Count  during  these 
repeated  conversations,  and  apparently  therfe  was 
little  real  difiference  of  opinion  between  himself  and 
the  Governor  as  to  the  line  of  conduct  which  ougl^t  to 
be  pursued  by  the  latter.  It  would  be  tedious  to  give 
a  detailed  account  of  all  that  passed  on  these  occasions, 
full  minutes  of  which  were  taken  by  Major  Gbrrequer 
and  still  exist ;  for  it  is  not  worth  while  to  record  at 
length  conversations  on  subjects  which,  thdugh  at  the 
time  of  importance  to  the  parties  concerned,  can  excite 
only  a  faint  interest  now,  and  it  is  better  to  direct 
our  attention  to  those  parts  of  them  which  serve  to 
illustrate  the  character  and  conduct  of  the  Governor 
of  St.  Helena  and  his  great  Captive. 

At  this  interview  Sir  Hudson  declared,  as  he  had 
done  the  preceding  day,  that  the  whole  of  what 
O'Meara  had  asserted  as  to  his  having  been  ordered  to 
repeat  to  the  Governor  everything  mentioned  in  con- 
versation was  false;  and  he  said  that  it  was  most 
false  Hiat  O'Meara  had  ever  been  countenanced  in  any 
manner  as  a  spy ;  that  he  (Sir  Hudson)  never  had 
expressed  to  him  any  desire  to  know  what  was  said  to 
him  on  past  events,  but,  on  the  contrary,  repeatedly 


Oct.  1818.  O'MBARA^S  CHARACTER.  79 

told  him  he  did  not  require  to  know  such  matters, 
however  interesting  they  might  hare  been  to  him  to 
hear  them.  He  had  indeed  told  O'Meara  that  he  had 
not  his  authority  for  communicating  upon  other  sub- 
jects than  those  of  a  professional  nature,  as  he  (the 
Ck)vemor)  of  course  could  not  give  his  sanction  to 
conversations  of  the  purport  of  which  he  was  ignorant, 
and  which  might  relate  to  his  duties  as  Governor,  or 
other  matters  of  a  nature  improper  for  discussion  un- 
less he  were  informed  of  them.  Count  Montholon 
fiiUy  assented  to  this ;  and  the  Governor  went  on  to 
say  that  O'Meara  was  a  person  full  of  pretension,  who 
had  instilled  very  felse  notions,  and  done  a  great  deal 
of  harm  at  Longwood,  and  that  it  was  only  out  of  con- 
sideration for  the  personage  residing  there  that  he  had 
not  sent  the  doctor  away  from  the  island  more  than  a 
year  ago;  but  he  wished  to  avoid  depriving  Bona- 
parte of  his  services.  On  this  Montholon  observed, 
"  As  for  O'Meara,  he  is  just  the  man  to  be  always 
placing  himself  in  a  false  position ;  he  cannot  help  it ; 
he  must  be  always  stirring,  always  agitating,  always 
doing  something.  He  wanted  to  pick  up  some  anec- 
dotes, some  information,  some  details  which  were  little 
known,  probably  to  make  a  book  of  them,  and  pub- 
lish them ;  to  make  some  profit  by  them ;  to  make 
money." 

The  Governor  then  remarked  that  Count  Laa  Cases 
had  also  caused  much  irritation,  and  had  done  a  great 
deal  of  harm  by  representing  matters  in  false  points 
of  view.  Amongst  other  instances  he  mentioned  the 
sentiment  attributed  by  Las  Cases  to  Napoleon,  when 
he  said,  "  The  Emperor  cannot  bear  the  sight  of  a 
red  coat."  Count  Montholon  laughed  at  this,  and 
pledged  himself  that  an  expression  of  that  kind  had 
never  been  uttered  by  the  Emperor,  and  that  the  idea 


80  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXU. 

never  could  have  existed  but  in  the  mind  of  Las 
Cases.  He  added,  "  Monsieur  le  Gouvemeur,  if  you 
could  see  what  he  has  dictated  on  the  subject  of  the 
British  soldiers,  the  justice  which  he  does  them,  and 
which  he  takes  pleasure  in  doing  them,  his  admira- 
tion of  their  valour,  you  would  have  a  very  different 
idea  of  this ;  could  he  express  himself  thus  of  the 
soldiers  he  esteems  ?"  The  conversation  then  turned 
on  the  question  of  granting  passes  to  persons  wishing 
to  visit  Longwood,  and  the  Grovernor  said,  "I  have 
never  refused  granting  a  pass;  on  the  contrary, 
I  have  even  been  too  easy  on  this  point,  and  have 
granted  them  to  persons  who  begged  earnestly  for 
permission  to  visit  Longwood,  and  who  really  were 
not  persons  of  that  rank  in  society  which  you  could 
take  any  pleasure  in  receiving,  and  I  may  add  what  I 
wrote  to  Lord  Bathurst  on  this  subject :  that  if  the 
names  of  all  those  who  had  received  passes  from  me 
to  visit  Longwood  were  published  in  the  papers,  that 
would  fully  justify  me." 

Some  discussion  then  took  place  respecting  an  ex- 
tension of  the  limits  within  which  Bonaparte  might 
ride,  after  having  previously  informed  the  orderly 
officer  of  his  intention,  and  then  the  conversation 
terminated  after  Count  Montholon  had  said,  "Well, 
Monsieur  le  Gouvemeur,  I  really  hope  that  all 
will  now  be  settled  to  our  mutual  satisfaction — that 
all  our  discussions  may  end  here,  and  that  we  may 
establish  a  lasting  peace,  which  is  very  much  desired, 
I  assure  you.  You  will  always  find  me  ready  to  do 
you  justice  whenever  you  may  wish  to  give  us  the 
opportunity ;  there  has  never  been  anything  really 
serious  between  us.  We  have  been  building  up  a 
partition  wall  between  us  about  trifles.  I  will  give 
an  account  to  the  Emperor  of  this  conversation,  and  I 


Oct.  1818.         CONTRIVANCE  FOR  SEEING  HIM.  81 

do  not  doubt  that  we  shall  now  come  to  a  perfect 
understanding  on  all  the  points  we  have  discussed." 

After  quitting  Count  Montholon  the  Governor  went 
to  Captain  Nicholls,  and,  having  conversed  with  him, 
he  sent  back  Major  Gorrequer  to  say  that  the  orderly 
officer  was  still  unable  to  see  Bonaparte,  and  that  it 
was  absolutely  necessary  that  he  should  do  eo  before 
a  vessel  which  was  about  to  sail  to-morrow,  or  the  day 
after,  left  St.  Helena.  The  Count  professed  himself 
much  disappointed  that  the  orderly  oflficer  had  not 
seen  the  Emperor  that  morning,  saying  that  he  had 
sent  his  children  to  play  in  the  small  flower-garden 
before  the  windows,  on  purpose  to  give  the  oflficer  an 
opportunity  of  seeing  him,  and  that  the  Emperor  had 
placed  himself  at  the  window,  and  spoken  to  the 
children.  He  added,  that  as  soon  as  dinner  was  over 
he  would  send  them  again  to  try  and  bring  Napoleon 
to  the  window,  though  it  was  not  usual  to  do  it  at 
that  hour,  and  the  Emperor  therefore  might  suspect 
his  purpose  and  be*  angry  with  him ;  but  that  every 
fine  day  between  twelve  and  two  o'clock  the  children 
would  always  be  playing  there,  when  the  orderly 
oflficer  might  try  and  obtain  a  sight  of  Napoleon. 

On  the  12th  another  interview  took  place  at  Long- 
wood  between  the  same  parties,  and  Count  Montho- 
lon stated,  that,  having  rendered  an  account  to  the 
Emperor  of  the  several  subjects  that  had  been  dis- 
cussed between  them,  the  latter  had  said  that  he 
desired  nothing  better  than  to  come  to  an  amicable 
understanding  ((iccomrnodement),  and  had  charged  him 
to  ask  the  Governor  in  what  light  he  regarded  him  ? 
whether  as  a  prisoner  of  war,  or  in  what  character 
he  was  to  be  treated?  "These  are  details,"  con- 
tinued the  Count,  "which  in  appearance  are  of  little 
importance;  but  it  nevertheless  annoys  and  vexes 

VOL.  III.  '  G 


82  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXU. 

him,  and  they  are  subjects  of  humiliation  to  us  also." 
He  then  explained  that,  before  they  could  send  their 
linen'  or  anything  else  to  the  wash,  they  were 
obliged  to  obtain  the  orderly  oflBcer's  permission,  and 
the  articles  were  subject  to  his  inspection.  He  men- 
tioned also  other  details,  which  he  characterized  as  a 
kind  of  "  Inquisition." 

The  Governor  said,  he  should  continue  of  course 
to  consider  them,  as  he  had  always  done,  prisoners 
of  war ;  that  with  respect  to  the  inspection  of  any 
article  by  the  orderly  oflBcer  at  Longwood,  he  would 
see  if  some  arrangement  could  be  made  to  ayoid  any 
delay  or  inconvenience  from  it ;  he  had  himself  given 
no  order  about  the  linen,  and  the  custom  had  origin- 
ated he  supposed  with  the  orderly  officer,  who  had 
thought  it  necessary  in  the  execution  of  his  duties. 
Captain  Nicholls  had  just  mentioned  to  him  that  he 
had  not  been  in  the  habit  of  examining  the  linen, 

'  **  It  has  been  since  ascertained  that  neither  Captain  Nicholls  nor  any 
of  his  predecessors  had  exercised  any  particular  inspection  over  the  linen, 
although  the  trunks  (generally  veiy  large  ones)  in  which  it  may  have  beeu 
brought  or  carried  away,  like  every  other  article  brought  by  the  servants, 
might  be  subject  to  the  officer's  examination.  The  complaint  made  does 
not  diminish,  in  any  respect,  from  the  necessity  of  leaving  such  ix)wer  in 
his  hands,  whilst  it  may  even  present  a  motive  ibr  it  being  more  firequently 
exercised — in  the  manner,  however,  least  unpleasant  to  them,  llie  dis- 
tance between  Longwood  and  the  town  being  five  miles,  and  the  road  much 
frequented,  particularly  whilst  tihe  building  is  going  on,  the  right  of  in- 
spection on  the  spot  cannot  be  dispensed  with." — Note  hy  Sir  Hud&on  Lotve, 

Captain  Bkkeney,  the  orderly  officer,  says,  "  All  parcels  and  boxes  were 
brought  to  me  previously  to  their  being  sent  away  from  Longwood  to  the 
persons  to  whom  they  were  addressed.  The  linen  s^it  to  the  washer* 
woman  was  put  into  the  cart  that  daily  attended,  sometimes  in  front  of 
my  quarters,  and  at  other  times  at  the  houses  of  the  individuals.  It  wa» 
never  examined  hy  me  cr  any  other  perdon,  nor  did  I  receive  any  orders 
to  that  effect  from  the  Oovemor,  The  linen,  when  returned,  as  soon  as 
reported  to  me  by  the  carter  to  have  arrived,  I  desired  to  be  delivered  im- 
mediately without  examination.  General  Bonaparte's  linen  was  never  even 
brought  to  my  qoartera,  but  was  sent  and  received  by  his  own  servant." 


Oct.  1818.  POINTS  OF  FORM.  83 

though  it  was  true,  before  the  box  or  bundles  con- 
taining it  were  taken  away,  his  permission  was  asked. 
All  these  details  however,  he  said,  appeared  to  him 
to  be  more  questions  of  form  than  of  principle,  and 
depended  a  great  deal  on  tiie  mode  employed  by 
those  charged  with  the  execution.  Count  Montholon 
then  complained  of  the  constant  attendance  and 
eurveUlance  of  the  orderly  oflBcer.  The  Governor 
replied  that  the  best  course  for  them  to  adopt,  on 
those  occasions  where  his  presence  was  necessary,  was 
to  consider  the  orderly  oflBcer  as  a  companion,  in 
tiie  same  way  as  General  Gourgaud  did,  who  never 
was  quitted  by  an  oflBcer,  after  leaving  Longwood, 
until  he  embarked.  Montholon  afterwards  said,  "  The 
want  of  due  forms  aflfects  the  Emperor  more  than  the 
thing  itself — it  is  everything  with  him  ;  observe  due 
form,  and  you  may  do  with  him  whatever  you  please. 
Madame  Bertrand  wishes  to  have  a  cap,  a  handker- 
chief: she  cannot  get  it  as  quickly  as  she  would — that 
puts  her  into  a  rage — she  excites  her  husband,  who 
does  the  same  by  the  Emperor,  and  he  gets  into  the 
greatest  ftiry  (jusqu'au  36®  de  furie)." 

Montholon  complained  of  other  petty  annoyances, 
and  Sir  Hudson  answered,  Omi  the  rules  had  been 
broken  through,  and  more  attention  had  become 
necessary  in  enforcing  them,  but  it  was  always  his 
wish  and  desire  to  adopt  the  forms  which  were  the 
least  unpleasant  to  them ;  the  sentries,  who  formerly 
watched  the  immediate  approaches  to  Longwood,  had, 
to  remove  the  pretext  of  their  preventing  Bonaparte 
from  taking  exercise,  been  withdrawn,  and  this  had 
led  to  an  inspection  of  articles  when  they  arrived  at 
the  house ;  and  the  orderly  oflScer  must  necessarily 
exercise  his  discretion  on  such  occasions. 

Count  Montholon    next    inquired   respecting  the 

G  2 


84  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXn. 

extent  and  direction  of  the  space  of  ground  in  which, 
by  giving  previous  notice,  the  Emperor  would  be 
permitted  to  ride  unaccompanied,  and  asked,  how 
long  before  he  went  in  that  direction  it  would  be 
necessary  to  make  it  known  to  the  orderly  oflBcer. 
The  Governor  said,  he  thought  the.  space  he  should 
select  would  be  found  the  pleasantest  in  the  island ; 
he  would,  however,  ride  over  it  with  Count  Montho- 
lon.  He  added,  that  it  was  ample  for  exercise,  but  he 
requested  that,  if  Napoleon  wished  at  any  time  to  pro- 
ceed beyond  it,  in  that  case  he  would  allow  himself 
to  be  accompanied  by  some  English  oflBcer,  and  if  an 
hour  and  a  halfs  notice,  or  thereabouts,  was  given 
to  the  orderiy  oflBcer  before  he  went  out,  it  would  be 
enough. 

The  Governor  then  thanked  the  Count  for  the 
attention  he  had  shown  the  orderly  oflBcer  in  facili- 
tating his  seeing  Napoleon. 

In  the  course  of  conversation,  when  speaking  on  the 
subject  of  that  oflBcer's  inspection  of  things  brought  to 
Longwood,  the  Governor  remarked,  that  it  had  been 
his  intention  to  direct  the  same  rule  to  be  observed 
towards  O'Meara;  on  which  Count  Montholon  said, 
"  Ah  I  Monsieur  le  Gouvemeur,  I  wish  much  that  you 
had  done  so,  for  he  almost  ruined  me.  He  never  went 
to  James  Town  without  bringing  me  all  sorts  of 
baubles  and  little  ornaments,  which  I  had  no  need  of, 
and  which  he  bought  without  my  permission,  and  in 
that  way  he  spent  my  money." 

At  a  subsequent  interview  the  following  day  (the 
16th)  Count  Montholon  made  another  ineflfectual  at- 
tempt to  induce  the  Governor  to  relax  the  rule  which 
prohibited  the  French  at  Longwood  from  sending  or 
receiving  sealed  letters  in  their  correspondence  with 
persons  resident  in  the  island,  and  he  insisted  that 


Oct.  1818.  A  PRISONER  OF  WAR.  85 

prisoners  of  war  in  all  conntries  had  the  right  to  do 
this  within  the  space  allotted  to  them.  He  said  that 
the  Emperor  had  declared,  when  he  related  to  him  what 
had  passed  at  their  last  conversation,  that  "he  could 
not  allow  any  variation  in  his  rights  as  a  prisoner  of 
war;  for  from  the  moment  he  lost  one  of  them  he 
would  find  himself  subjected  to  arbitrary  measures  and 
no  longer  know  where  he  was.  Although  he  had  pro- 
tested against  his  detention  as  a  prisoner  of  war  for 
political  reasons,  and  although  he  acknowledged  no 
authority  over  his  person,  either  on  the  part  of  Eng- 
land or  any  other  power,  nevertheless,  as  his  situation 
was  the  result  of  a  battle,  and  it  would  have  been 
useless  to  contend  against  the  decision  of  the  principal 
powers  of  Europe,  against  the  opinion  of  the  English 
Parliament,  and  by  consequence  that  of  the  English 
nation,  he  had  given  way  to  circumstances :  he  would 
not  give  up  one  of  the  rights  conceded  to  prisoners  of 
war,  but  would  claim  the  very  least  of  them.  If  he  were 
a  state  prisoner  he  might  very  properly  be  denied  all 
communication;  but  he  never  would  consent  to  be  trans- 
formed from  a  prisoner  of  war  into  a  state  prisoner.'* 
Sir  Hudson  Lowe  told  the  Count  he  was  convinced 
that  the  suggestion  about  the  sealed  correspondence 
came  from  Marshal  Bertrand,  because  he  had  lately 
ordered  a  letter  to  be  written  to  him  returning  one 
which  had  been  irregularly  and  improperly  sent  sealed 
by  the  Marshal  direct  to  Mr.  Ibbetson,  who  acted  as 
the  banker  of  the  French  at  Longwood ;  and  he  said 
with  warmth,  "Monsieur  le  Comte,  I  must  speak 
plainly  on  this  subject.  If  it  had  not  been  entirely 
out  of  consideration  for  him  (Napoleon),  and  also  con- 
sideration for  Madame  la  Comtesse  and  her  family, 
Count  Bertrand  would  no  longer  be  here ;  he  would 
have  left  the  island  long  since.    I  will  not,  therefore, 


86  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXH. 

yield  on  this  point  to  satisfy  the  pretensions  of  a  per- 
son who  is  only  here  on  sufferance  on  account  of 
others.  The  instructions  of  my  Government  authorise 
me  to  be  much  more  strict  towards  the  persons  of  the 
suite  than  I  have  yet  been.  Although  I  have  also  had 
reason  sometimes  to  complain  otyou,  still,  as  you  have 
since  shown  a  desire  to  conciliate,  and  have  not  per- 
sisted like  Count  Bertrand,  I  wished  to  efface  all 
memory  of  that  (passer  vne  Sponge  sur  cela).** 

The  conversation  then  turned  on  the  subject  of  the 
extension  of  the  limits  allowed  to  Napoleon,  when 
Count  Montholon  said  that,  even  if  the  Emperor  did 
not  go  out,  he  could  always  occupy  himself  within 
doors,  and  he  was  then  employed  in  making  notes  on 
the  campaigns  of  Alexander  and  Caesar. 

The  next  day  (the  16th)  Count  Montholon  told  Sir 
Hudson  Lowe  that  he  had  given  the  Emperor  an  ac- 
count of  their  last  conversation,  who  said,  **  It  appears 
that  they  desire  I  should  go  out,  that  I  should  take 
exercise ;  that  they  take  an  interest  in  my  adopting 
my  former  habits.  I  desire  nothing  better  myself:  I 
will  go  out,  will  walk,  will  ride  on  horseback  with  plea- 
sure ;  I  have  need  of  it :  and  I  will  recommence  the 
mode  of  life  that  I  followed  the  first  nine  months  after 
my  arrival  here.  But,  first  of  all,  confidence  must  be 
restored  to  me.  Let  me  see  a  fixed  system,  not  sub- 
ject to  arbitrary  changes ;  that  I  may  say  to  myself, 
To-morrow  I  will  do  as  I  did  to-day ;  that  I  may  regu- 
late my  occupations,  and  that  the  rule  be  not  changed 
fi^m  day  to  day;  in  a  word,  that  the  order  once 
established  may  be  fixed  for  ever.  I  confided  in  the 
arrangements  made  by  Admiral  Cockbum,  because 
at  least  I  saw  stability  in  them,  and  I  understood 
them ;  restore  to  me  the  same  confidence.*'* 

^  liBt  the  reader^  however,  refer  to  the  language  used  by  Napoleon,  and 


Oct.  1818.  THE  GOVERNOR'S  POSITION.  87 

Sir  Hudson  replied  that  he  was  not  aware  of  any 
wide  difference  between  the  arrangements  made  by 
Sir  George  Cockbum  and  his  own,  and  that  the  Admi- 
ral saw  the  necessity  of  some  changes  before  he  him- 
self arrived  at  St.  Helena,  and  told  him  of  his  intention 
to  make  them,  advising  him  to  do  so. 

He  continued,  "  If  I  should  be  so  unfortunate  as  to 
be  thought  more  severe  than  Admiral  Cockbum,  I 
shall  be  ever  ready  to  discuss  before  the  whole  world 
the  principles  that  have  guided  my  conduct.  If  there 
be  a  determination  to  draw  a  parallel  between  me  and 
Admiral  Cockbum,  I  am  not  afraid  of  meeting  any 
question  on  that  subject :  there  is  no  difference  be- 
tween our  systems ;  all  that  can  be  said  is,  perhaps, 
that  I  have  caused  a  more  strict  observance  of  the 
regulations.  I  certainly  am  interested  in  the  safe  cus- 
tody of  the  person  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  as  much 
from  duty  as  upon  principle.  I  am  also  interested  in 
his  comfort,  and  that  he  enjoy  everything  that  is  com- 
patible with  the  security  of  his  person ;  but  I  will  not 
sacrifice  to  this  last  object  any  part  of  my  duties, 
either  in  principle  or  in  feet.  My  position  is  very  deli- 
cate, it  cannot  be  more  so.  If  I  be  suspected  of  ill- 
treating  him,  or  of  exercising  unnecessary  rigour,  there 
are  people  enough  in  the  world  to  cry  out  against  me. 
If  I  show  him  indulgence,  it  will  be  said,  *  He  is  caught 
like  the  rest.*  I  am  therefore  resolved  to  maintain 
my  independence  in  both  respects ;  I  shall  not  there- 
fore make  any  change  in  the  existing  regulations; 
they  are  the  basis  on  which  I  found  my  conduct; 
they  are  my  law."     • 

Count  Montholon  said,  **  I  confess,  Monsieur  le  Gou- 

by  Bertrand  at  his  diotati<Hiy  respecting  Sir  George  Cockbum,  before  the 
arrival  of  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  (ante,  vol.  i.  pp.  63,  68-9),  and  be  will  see 
what  kind  of  confidence  was  then  placed  in  the  Admind. 


88  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXII. 

verneur,  I  do  not  think  there  is  at  this  moment  any 
person  in  the  world  who  is  placed  in  a  position  more 
delicate  than  you  are."  He  afterwards  said,  "  You 
will  ever  find  me  ready  to  do  you  justice ;  the  Emperor 
also  does  you  justice  whenever  you  offer  him  the  op- 
portunity. He  has  seen  with  pleasure  your  care  and 
attention  towards  him  in  erecting  that  wall  of  earth 
round  the  new  building,  that  he  might  not  be  incom- 
moded by  the  sight  of  the  men  at  work ;  and  he 
directed  me  the  other  day  (what  I  forgot  to  tell  you 
before)  to  testify  to  you,  on  his  part,  that  he  was  sen- 
sible of  this.  You  have  surprised  us  by  the  works  that 
are  carrying  on  for  some  time  past.  I  would  never 
have  thought  that  you  could,  in  so  short  a  time,  have 
done  what  you  have,  that  it  was  possible  at  St.  He- 
lena, and  [I  wonder]  how  you  have  found  the  means. 
As  for  myself,  I  have  not  yet  seen  how  the  house  gets 
on,  but  Count  Bertrand  and  Madame  Bertrand,  who 
overlook  it  from  their  residence,  said  it  went  on  very 
quickly,  and  that  it  already  began  to  make  an  appear- 
ance ;  but  I  have  observed,  and  so  has  the  Emperor, 
all  the  constructions  and  preparations  you  have  effected 
for  hastening  the  work.  Indeed  you  have  done  great 
things ;  do  you  think  you  can  provide  us  with  any 
shade  ?  but  after  the  extraordinary  efforts  we  have  wit- 
nessed, I  should  not  be  surprised  to  hear  that  you  had 
brought  thither  full-grown  trees.^  I  am  pleased  also," 
added  the  Count,  **  to  do  you  justice  on  another  subject, 
that  is  to  say  the  provisionmg  of  the  house,  in  which 

*  In  Las  Cases*  famous  letter  of  the  19th  December,  1816  (vol.  ii.  pp. 
279-313),  he  calls  an  expression  of  the  Governor,  "  anplantera  des  arbres^^ 
a  vnot  affreuXf  as  implying  that  the  confinement  of  Napoleon  would  last 
until  the  trees  grew  up  and  afforded  shade.  And  the  same  expression  has 
been  quoted  in  this  country  as  a  proof  of  Sir  Hudson  Lowe's  heartlessness ; 
but  surely  it  would  be  more  charitable  to  suppose,  (if  he  ever  used  the  words 
at  allf)  that  no  such  idea  was  in  his  mind  at  the  time,  but  that  ho  alluded  to 
the  transplanting  of  full-grown  trees  as  Montholon  suggests  in  the  text* 


Oct.  1818.  MISCONDUCT  OF  BERTBAND.  89 

you  have  shown  every  kind  of  attention,  and  which  is 
now  effected  with  a  degree  of  regularity  unknown  to 
us  before.  If  I  were  called  upon  to  express  my  senti- 
ments on  this  subject  I  would  say  that  the  service  of 
the  house  has  never  been  so  well  managed  as  it  is  now, 
and  has  been  for  a  long  time ;  that  we  were  never  so 
abundantly  supplied  as  we  are  now  (not  even  at  first), 
and  have  nothing  to  wish  for  in  this  respect ;  and  that 
since  our  arrival  it  was  only  during  a  short  time,  on 
occasion  of  the  retrenchments  which  you  were  obliged 
to  make  in  consequence  of  the  orders  of  your  Govern- 
ment, that  we  felt  a  deficiency  of  anything." 

On  the  21st  the  Governor  called  again  on  Count 
Montholon  and  informed  him  of  an  act  of  Bertrand 
which  had  just  come  to  his  knowledge,  and  which  he 
said  was  by  no  means  in  conformity  with  the  spirit  of 
the  communications  he  had  lately  had  with  Montholon 
himself.  -It  seems  that  Count  Bertrand,  accompanied 
by  the  Countess,  had  a  few  days  before  ridden  out  in 
the  direction  of  3Iason's  Stock  House  (the  most  re- 
mote post  of  the  cordon  of  sentries),  where  an  officer 
was  on  guard.  They  entered  his  guard-room,  and 
began  immediately  to  converse  with  him  about 
O'Meara,  who  was  known  to  be  an  intimate  friend  of 
the  officer.  Bertrand  said  that  O'Meara  was  now  in 
England,  where  he  would  meet  with  justice  for  the  ill- 
treatment  he  had  experienced  here ;  adding,  that  he 
was  an  innocent  man,  and  would  be  supported  by 
ministers  on  his  arrival  at  home.  The  officer  replied 
that  he  himself  would  suffer  from  his  intimacy  with 
O'Meara ;  on  which  the  Count  said  that  no  harm  would 
ever  result  to  him  from  being  the  friend  of  that  per- 
son. Sir  Hudson  Lowe  expressed  his  strong  disap- 
proval of  the  conduct  of  Bertrand  in  thus  sounding  the 
dispositions  of  subaltern  officers,  and  seducing  them 


90  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEOJ!T.  Chap.  XXH. 

from  their  duty  by  reflections  on  their  superiors. 
Count  Montholon  expressed  much  surprise  at  this  intel- 
ligence, and  said  it  would  be  much  better  if  Bertrand 
would  not  walk  about  and  converse  with  the  officers 
as  he  was  in  the  habit  of  doing ;  and  he  added,  "  The 
Emperor  certainly  knows  nothing  about  it." 

The  Governor  then  left,  and  after  an  interval  of 
three  days  returned  to  Longwood,  accompanied  by 
Major  Gorrequer,  and  told  Montholon  the  decision  at 
which  he  had  arrived  on  the  various  subjects  which 
had  been  discussed  between  them.  He  said,  "  Having 
reflected  on  the  subjects  of  the  various  conversations 
which  have  passed  between  us  for  some  time,  I  have 
thought  that  it  would  perhaps  be  expected  that  I 
should  adopt  some  other  measures,  or  make  some 
change  in  consequence ;  and  under  this  impression  I 
have  come  to  repeat  to  you,  first,  that  I  am  ready  to 
point  out  to  you  the  space  which  I  have  determined  on 
beyond  the  boundary  for  exercise  on  horseback  (by 
giving  previous  intimation  to  the  orderly  oflficer),  by 
either  accompanying  you  myself,  or  sending  an  officer 
to  show  it  you.  I  have  also  examined  my  instructions, 
and,  during  the  summer  months.  General  Bonaparte 
will  be  free,  should  he  be  beyond  the  enclosure,  not 
to  return  till  nine  o'clock  in  the  evening,  taking  care 
always  to  come  in  by  the  barrier  of  the  Guard-house, 
in  order  that  he  may  be  seen  by  the  officer.  As  for 
the  persons  admitted  to  visit,  I  showed  you  a  list  the 
other  day  containmg  more  than  sixty  names,  among 
which  you  may  choose  fifty ;  they  are  the  principal 
persons  of  the  island,  civil  and  military ;  and  you 
know  how  limited  society  is  in  so  small  a  place  (where 
there  is  hardly  any  one  beyond  the  military),  the  in- 
habitants associating  little  among  themselves.  I  would 
wish,  therefore,  not  to  have  to  determine  this  list 


Oct.  1818.  LIST  OP  VISITORS.  91 

myself;  it  would  seem  as  if  I  wished  to  oblige  him 
(Napoleon)  to  receive  certain  persons;  but  I  can 
inform  those  whose  names  are  on  the  list  that  they  are 
free  to  visit  at  Longwood  without  being  obliged  to 
have  a  pass  for  that  purpose."  Count  Montholon  said, 
**  I  think  that  will  be  better.  As  for  myself,  I  should 
be  very  much  embarrassed  to  make  out  a  list.  I  know 
what  the  society  of  St.  Helena  is,  and  the  list  you 
showed  me  would  comprise  all  the  persons  of  note." 

Sir  Hudson  Lowe  then  expressed  a  hope  that  Gene- 
ral Bonaparte  would  no  longer  hesitate  to  consult  the 
medical  oflBcer  in  attendance  if  he  required  his  ser- 
vices ;  but  Montholon  frankly  replied  that  on  this  point 
the  Emperor  had  not  explained  himself,  and  that, 
though  he  had  repeatedly  urged  him  to  come  to  some 
resolution  on  the  subject,  he  had  no  idea  yet  of  the 
nature  of  his  determination.  After  some  further  con- 
versation respecting  the  conduct  of  Count  Bertrand  to 
Colonel  Lyster,  and  other  matters  of  no  particular 
interest,  the  Governor  proposed  to  have  Napoleon's 
carriage  repaired  and  made  serviceable  until  another 
arrived  from  England,  and  (^ered  in  the  mean  time  the 
use  of  his  own  whenever  he  preferred  carriage  exercise. 
Count  Montholon,  however,  said  that  it  was  not  worth 
repairing;  and  that  at  all  events  the  Emperor  pre- 
ferred riding  on  horseback,  to  which  he  always  had 
recourse  in  France  when  he  felt  himself  imwell. 

In  a  private  letter  to  Earl  Bathurst  dated  the  14th 
of  October,  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  entered  into  the  ques- 
tion of  his  conduct  towards  O'Meara.    He  said, — 

"  There  are  three  points  upon  which  I  have  con- 
ceived Mr.  O'Meara  may  endeavour  to  raise  a  voice 
in  his  favour : — 

**  Firstly,  he  may  say  T  wanted  to  employ  him  as  a 


92  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXTL 

spy.  Exclusive  of  his  having  acted  as  a  voluntary, 
and,  what  is  worse,  as  a  double  spy,  it  is  to  be  observed 
I  never  asked  him  to  give  me  any  other  information 
than  what  he  had  been  in  the  habit  of  carrying  to  Sir 
Gkorge  Cockburn,  and  this  I  asked  him  even  in  Sir 
George's  presence ;  since  when  even  Count  Montholon 
has  acknowledged  I  had  a  right  to  expect  being  in- 
formed of  any  discussions  into  which  he  might  enter 
with  Greneral  Bonaparte  respecting  my  duties  or  his 
own,  or  of  any  improper  communications  going  on. 
But  even  on  these  points  I  ceased  to  question  him 
when  I  foutid  the  pledges  he  had  entered  into. 

'*  Secondly,  he  may  say,  [ask?]  why,  if  I  had  com- 
plaints against  him,  I  did  not  bring  them  to  a  hearing  ? 
The  complaints  against  him  were  of  such  a  nature  as 
that,  if  proved,  I  could  not  have  suffered  him  to  remain 
on  the  island  without  the  worst  eflPect  of  example,  from 
a  supposed  impunity,  upon  the  ofiScers  and  inhabitants 
in  general;  and  having  received  his  resignation,  re- 
porting to  Government  General  Bonaparte's  applica- 
tion for  a  French  or  Italian  physician  to  succeed  him,  I 
considered  it  best,  unless  he  should  himself  apply  to 
the  Admiral,  to  let  matters  rest  until  the  answer  of 
Government  should  be  received,  for  which  the  want  of 
Mr.  Boys*s  evidence,  as  the  conclusive  one  in  the  case 
to  be  most  directly  brought  against  him,  afforded 
suflBcient  ground. 

"  Thirdly,  he  may  complain  of  my  general  mode  of 
treatment  towards  him.  If,  through  consideration  to 
the  very  particular  circumstances  of  General  Bona- 
parte's situation,  I  was  induced  to  act  with  a  modera- 
tion and  apparent  lenity  towards  Mr.  O'Meara  which 
I  could  not  have  done  towards  any  other  individual, 
this  was  no  reason  I  should  at  the  same  time  continue 
to  him  those  personal  regards  as  an  officer  and  a  gen- 


Oct.  1818.  HIS  CONTINUED  SECLUSION.  9S 

tleman,  which  his  conduct  and  proceedings  had  appeared 
to  me  to  destroy  all  claim  to,  I  never,  therefore,  suf- 
fered him  to  enter  my  house,  except  by  the  outer  door 
of  it,  which  leads  to  the  secretary's  office ;  and  when- 
ever he  attempted  to  manifest  any  impertinence  in  his 
replies  to  my  interrogatories,  dismissed  him  imme- 
diately from  my  presence.  He  felt  this,  but  never 
made  any  complaint  to  the  Admiral,  to  whom  he  was 
five  times  distinctly  referred  on  such  and  other  grounds. 
"The  last  discoveries  will,  however,  best  expose 
his  character  and  conduct ;  and  it  is  only  to  preceding 
circumstances,  therefore,  if  any  too  hasty  opinion 
should  have  been  formed  upon  them,  the  above  reason- 
ing applies." 

The  seclusion  in  which  Napoleon  at  this  time  kept 
himself,  and  his  refusal  to  see  Dr.  Yerling  or  any 
other  medical  man,  made  it  difficult  to  obtain  any 
accurate  account  of  the  state  of  his  health  and  spirits, 
and  the  only  information  we  can  give  respecting  them 
is  gleaned  from  such  notices  in  the  orderly  officer's 
journal  as  the  following : — "  Oct  4.  To-day  Dr.  Ver- 
ling  had  some  conversation  with  Montholon,  who  said 
that  Napoleon  was  grown  very  peevish,  and  his  facul- 
ties (of  dictating  his  history)  were  greatly  impaired, 
and  that  he  was  grown  very  indolent."  On  the  even- 
ing of  the  7th  "  Madame  Montholon  paid  a  visit  to 
Napoleon,  splendidly  dressed  in  full  court  costume." 
On  the  10th  "Bonaparte  appeared  at  his  dressing- 
room  window  with  a  red  handkerchief  round  his  head. 
He  continued  there  a  considerable  time  talking  to 
Madame  Montholon  and  the  children,  who  were  in  the 
garden.  His  countenance  appeared  excessively  cada- 
verous and  ghastly."  15th,  "  Napoleon  was  walking 
in  his  garden  this  afternoon  about  five  o'clock ;  he  had 


94  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXII. 

a  handkerchief  tied  about  his  head,  and  was  in  his 
dressing-gown.  Saw  him  from  Deadwood  barracks 
through  a  telescope;  he  appeared  very  pale.  Ser- 
jeant Lacey  was  very  near  him,  and  told  me  the 
Gkneral  came  out  of  his  house  whistling,  and  seemed 
in  good  spirits." 

During  the  month  of  November  Napoleon's  health 
and  spirits  seem  to  have  varied.  But  it  was  im- 
possible to  ascertain  the  fact  accurately,  as  nothing 
would  induce  him  to  admit  the  visits  of  Dr.  Verling  or 
any  other  medical  man.  We  must  therefore  still  rely 
upon  the  reports  and  journal  of  Captain  NichoUs,  the 
orderly  officer,  who  described  him  on  several  occasions 
as  looking  out  of  his  dressing-room  window  with  a 
countenance  very  ghastly.  At  one  time  he  was  seen 
in  his  front  verandah  for  a  short  time  "  in  excellent 
spirits,  whistling;"  at  another,  **  whistling  and  hum- 
ming a  tune." 

In  the  course  of  the  month  Sir  Hudson  Lowe 
received  a  letter  from  Lord  Bathurst,  dated  the  10th 
of  August,  1818,  which  mentioned  that  Cardinal  Fesch 
(Napoleon^s  uncle)  had  applied  to  the  Prince  Regent 
for  permission  to  procure  and  send  out  to  St.  Helena 
a  Boman  Catholic  priest  to  attend  on  the  exile.  Lord 
Bathurst  said  that  His  Royal  Highness  saw  no  reason 
to  withhold  his  assent,  and  he  instructed  Sir  Hudson 
to  take  an  early  opportunity  of  communicating  to 
Bonaparte  that,  **  Cardinal  Fesch  having  represented 
to  the  Pope  the  desire  of  General  Bonaparte  to  have 
a  priest  resident  at  Longwood  in  whom  he  may  con- 
fide, the  General  having  stated  himself  to  be  un- 
avoidably prevented  from  ftilfilling  the  duties  imposed 
upon  him  by  the  religion  which  he  professes,  and  de- 
prived of  the  essential  comforts  which,  according  to 
the  tenets  of  his  faith,  may  be  derived  from  a  partici- 


Dec.  1818.      APPLICATION  BY  CARDINAL  FESCH.  95 

pation  of  the  sacraments,  the  Prince  Regent  had  sig- 
nified his  consent  that  Cardinal  Fesch  should,  agree^ 
ably  to  the  wishes  of  Greneral  Bonaparte,  select  a 
priest  for  that  purpose,  and  that  this  priest  would 
have  permission  to  reside  at  Longwood,  subject  to 
such  conditions  as  it  might  be  necessary  for  him  pre- 
viously to  subscribe/*  Lord  Bathurst  added,  tha^  as 
Bonaparte  expressed  a  desire  to  have  a  French  sur- 
geon of  known  reputation  attached  to  the  establish- 
ment at  Longwood^  and  to  be  provided  wiih  a  cook 
in  whom  he  might  be  able  to  place  confidence,  he  had 
made  known  his  wishes  to  Oaxdinal  Fesch,  and  left  it 
to  him  to  select  the  proper  persons,  who  would  pro- 
ceed to  St.  Helena  in  company  witii  the  Roman  Ca- 
tholic priest,  and  under  similar  engagements  as  to  the 
restriction  of  their  communication  and  intercourse 
with  the  inhabitants  of  the  island. 

In  the  course  of  a  conversation  which  took  place 
early  in  December  between  Count  Montholon  and 
Major  Gorrequer,  respecting  some  books  which  were 
expected  at  Longwood  from  England,  the  Count  said 
that  the  books  which  Bonaparte  most  wanted  were 
those  of  an  historical  and  military  nature,  suoh  as 
related  to  the  French  revolution  and  other  political 
events,  to  his  own  campaigns,  tiie  campaigns  of  Fre- 
derick the  Great,  the  histories  of  Caesar  and  Alex- 
ander, and  otiier  similar  works.  "  The  Emperor,''  he 
added,  "always  writes  his  life  at  intervals,  when  he 
finds  himself  in  the  humour."  When  the  Qt)vemor 
was  informed  of  the  wishes  of  Napoleon,  he  imme- 
diately sent  to  Longwood  some  books  fix)m  his  own 
library  of  the  description  required,  and  desired  Major 
Gorrequer  to  make  it  known  that  he  would  be  happy 
to  attend  to  any  further  suggestions  on  ihe  same 
subject. 


96  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXII. 

In  a  note  from  Rear- Admiral  Plampin  to  Sir  Hud- 
son Lowe  on  the  13th  of  December,  he  mentioned 
that  O'Meara  had  accused  the  Governor  behind  his 
back  of  a  design  to  take  away  Bonaparte's  life.  The 
Admiral's  opinion  of  the  man's  character  and  veracity 
will  appear  from  the  following  passage  in  his  letter: — 

"  Young  Blackwood,  the  son  of  the  Admiral  Sir 
Henry,  who  is  a  Midshipman  of  the  Favourite,  at  pre- 
sent at  the  Briars  for  two  or  three  days,  tells  me  that 
that  impudent  vagabond  O'Meara  said  publicly  at 
Ascension  that  *had  he  obeyed  your  orders  Napoleon 
Bonaparte  would  not  then  have  been  alive ' — a  pre- 
cious rascal  this  to  talk  of  prosecuting  for  defamation !" 

The  information  which  Admiral  Plampin  had  thus 
received  of  O'Meara's  remarks  while  on  his  passage  to 
England,  caused  inquiries  to  be  made  of  other  oflScers 
of  the  Favourite ;  and  Mr.  Hall,  the  surgeon  of  that 
ship,  stated  in  writing,  on  the  25  th  of  December,  that 
in  a  conversation  that  took  place  between  himself  and 
O'Meara  on  board  the  GriflFon,  at  Ascension  Island, 
the  latter  stated  positively  that,  had  he  complied  with 
Sir  Hudson  Lowe*s  wishes,  he  did  not  think  Bona- 
parte would  have  been  then  alive.  He  also  hinted 
that  Mr.  Hall  perhaps  might  not  find  Bonaparte  in 
existence  some  few  months  thence.  From  the  expres- 
sions used,  Mr.  Hall  drew  the  inference  that  O'Meara 
meant  to  represent  that  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  had  wished 
him  to  poison  Bonaparte,  or  indirectly  put  an  end  to  his 
existence  by  withholding  medical  assistance  from  him. 

The  following  circumstance,  though  trifling  in  itself, 
will  serve  to  show  how  sensitive  Napoleon  was  on  the 
subject  of  the  least  intrusion  at  Longwood,  and  how 
little  he  was  disposed  to  show  any  civility  to  Mr. 
Baxter. 

That  officer,  having  been  invited  to  dine  at  Long- 


Dec.  1818.         CLANDESTINE  CORRESPONDENCE.  97 

wood  on  the  8th  of  December  with  Captain  Nicholls 
and  Dr.  Veiling,  went  there  abont  six  o'clock  in  the 
evening,  in  company  with  Major  Power.  They  both 
proceeded  to  look  at  the  new  building  that  was  going 
on,  and  on  their  return  observed  Bonaparte  standing 
at  his  window.  At  the  time  they  were  on  the  foot- 
path at  the  verge  of  the  lawn  in  front  of  the  house, 
and  continued  their  walk  into  the  wood  behind.  They 
came  back  by  the  same  path,  and  saw  him  still  at  the 
window  as  they  passed  on  to  dinner.  A  few  days  after- 
wards Count  Montholon  called  on  Captain  Nicholls, 
and  said  that  Napoleon  had  desired  him  to  deliver 
the  following  message : — "  Go  to  the  orderly  officer 
and  tell  him  that  a  few  days  ago  I  saw  Dr.  Baxter 
walking  round  my  house ;  that  I  conceive  his  doing 
so  as  an  indelicate  intrusion,  after  the  communication 
respecting  that  person,  and  the  protestations  I  some 
time  since  made  against  receiving  him  as  my  medical 
attendant;  and  that  I  desire  the  orderly  officer  will 
in  future  prevent  Dr.  Baxter  from  walking  about  my 
residence ;  and  further,  should  Dr.  Baxter  think  fit  to 
make  a  bulletin  of  the  state  of  my  health  in  conse- 
quence, I  protest  against  such  proceedings." 

Whatever  might  be  the  Governor's  inclination  to 
relax  the  restrictions  and  grant  indulgence  to  the 
exiles,  the  nature  of  the  communications  which  he 
from  time  to  time  received,  relative  to  clandestine 
correspondence  being  carried  on  and  secret  plans 
being  projected,  gave  him  little  encouragement,  and 
the  public  ought  to  bear  this  fact  constantly  in  mind 
when  judging  his  conduct.  To  show  the  kind  of  mys- 
terious agency  that  was  kept  up,  we  may  mention  that 
on  the  30th  of  December  this  year  Earl  Bathurst 
wrote  to  Lord  Charles  Somerset,  the  Gt)vernor  of  the 
Cape,  respecting  a  letter  which  had  been  intercepted, 

VOL.  iir.  n 


98  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXII. 

addressed  to  "B.  O'Meara,  Esq.,"  under  cover  to 
**  W.  Holmes,  Esq.,  Lyon's  Inn,"  and  which  purported 
to  be  written  by  a  person  of  the  name  of  Franklin,  at 
the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  The  letter  was  dated  Oc- 
tober 26th,  1818,  and  was  in  the  following  terms: — 

"Sir, 

"Everything  which  you  wished  has  been  done 
thoroughly,  but  nothing  has  been  finally  settled  upon, 
and  a  final  decision  is  waited  for,  and  very  probably 
you  will  soon  see  your  fi'iend.  You  may  rely  most 
implicitly  upon  every  exertion  being  made  for  you. 
Three  times  your  friend  saw  the  person,  and  the  idea 
was  much  approved,  as  it  will  undoubtedly  redound 
to  your  advantage  and  interest. 

"  I  have  the  honour,  &c., 

"  J.  E.  Franklin. 
"It  is  very  sure  that  immediately  one  thing  or 
other  will  speedily  be  done." 

It  is  obvious  that  this  was  a  letter  of  the  most 
suspicious  nature.  In  his  despatch  to  Lord  Charles 
Somerset  Lord  Bathurst  said — "  The  language  adopted 
by  the  writer  of  the  enclosed  letter  is  evidently  that 
of  concealment,  and  certain  expressions  in  it  have  led 
me  to  entertain  suspicions  that  it  has  some  connexion 
with  the  plans  which  there  is  Qvery  reason  to  believe 
are  in  agitation  for  the  escape  of  Greneral  Buonaparte.'* 
He  requested,  therefore,  the  Grovemor  of  the  Cape  to 
keep  a  watchful  eye  on  the  correspondence  and  pro- 
ceedings of  Mr.  Franklin,  and  impressed  upon  him  tiie 
importance  of  discovering  whether  the  latter  was  in  cor- 
respondence with  any  persons  in  Brazil,  "  that  being 
the  quarter  in  which  those  of  Buonaparte's  adherents 
who  were  the  most  likely  to  embark  in  an  enterprise 
to  favour  his  evasion  had  established  themselves." 


Dec.  1818.  INSTRUCTIONS  FROM  ENGLAND.  99 

About  the  close  of  this  year  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  re- 
ceived the  following  important  despatch  firom  Earl 
Bathurst,  containing  instructions,  which  he  imme- 
diately communicated  to  Bonaparte : — 

"  Sir,  "  Downing  Street,  Sept.  28, 1818. 

"  I  have  had  the  honour  of  receiving  your  de- 
spatch No.  166,  transmitting  the  memorandum  of  a 
conversation  which  had  taken  place  between  Count 
Montholon  and  Dr.  Verling  on  the  30th  of  July  pre- 
ceding, I  was  particularly  struck  with  that  part  of 
the  conversation  in  which  Count  Montholon  states 
that  General  Buonaparte  is  never  iseen,  and  that  he 
defies  the  Governor  to  say  that  he  knows  for  certain 
that  General  Buonaparte  is  at  Longwood  or  has  been 
there  for  the  last  two  months. 

"From  tiiis  assertion  of  Count  Montholon  I  am 
confirmed  in  what  I  had  been  led  to  apprehend  by 
certain  passages  in  some  of  your  late  despatches,  that 
you  have,  fix)m  a  feeling  of  delicacy  towards  General 
Buonaparte,  and  an  unwillingness  to  intrude  on  his 
privacy,  forborne  enforcing  the  regulation  mentioned 
in  your  despatch  of  12  th  May,  1816,  and  approved  in 
mine  of  the  26th  of  June  following,  the  purport  of 
which  was  that  it  should  be  distinctly  ascertained 
twice  in  every  day,  beyond  the  possibility  of  a  doubt, 
that  General  Buonaparte  was  actually  in  Longwood. 

"Although  I  duly  appreciate  the  motives  which 
have  led  to  this  forbearance  on  your  part,  and  am  dis- 
posed to  intrude  as  little  as  possible  upon  those  habits 
of  seclusion  which  General  Buonaparte  has  latterly 
imposed  upon  himself,  yet  I  confess  that  it  appears  to 
me  so  essential  to  the  security  of  his  person  that  the 
feet  of  his  being  actually  at  Longwood  should  be 
regularly  and  daily  ascertained,  that,  if  this  were 

H  2 


100  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXH. 

duly  enforced,  I  should  have  less  objection  to  dis- 
pense with  some  of  the  restrictions  of  which  General 
Buonaparte  has  complained. 

"  You  will,  therefore,  propose  to  General  Buonaparte 
the  regular  admission  of  the  orderly  officer  to  a  per- 
sonal interview  between  the  hours  of  nine  and  eleven 
every  morning  and  evening,  leaving  it  to  his  discretion 
each  day  to  select  within  the  time  limited  the  precise 
moment  at  which  he  may  prefer  admitting  the  officer. 
You  will  acquaint  him  also,  that,  upon  his  acquiescence 
to  this  arrangement,  you  are  authorised  to  relax  the 
other  restrictions  so  far  as  to  admit  of  his  taking 
exercise  either  oi>  foot,  in  a  carriage,  or  on  horseback, 
through  the  greater  part  of  the  island,  unattended  by 
a  British  officer  (but  subject  always  to  the  regulations 
as  to  hours  which  are  at  present  in  force),  and  to 
assure  him  that  in  such  case  the  sentries  will  in  fixture 
only  be  posted  round  Longwood  from  the  time  in  the 
evening  at  which  he  may  have  admitted  the  orderly 
officer  until  the  hour  at  which  he  may  again  receive 
him  on  the  following  morning. 

"  In  order  that  this  proposal  may  not  be  subject  to 
future  cavil  or  discussion,  you  will  in  making  this 
communication  state  to  him  those  parts  of  the  island 
from  which  it  may  be  proper  still  to  interdict  his 
approach  without  the  attendance  of  a  British  officer. 

**  I  should  hope  that,  with  the  exception  of  the  im- 
mediate neighbourhood  of  James  Town  and  two  or 
three  other  places,  he  may  be  permitted  under  this 
regulation  to  range  through  the  whole  island  in  what 
manner  he  may  think  proper. 

**  You  will  point  out  to  General  Buonaparte  that,  in 
leaving  it  to  him  to  fix  the  time  within  the  limit 
assigned  at  which  he  will  admit  the  orderly  officer  to 
a  personal  interview,  and  directing  that  until  such 


Dae.  1818.        INSTRUCTIONS  FROM  ENGLAND.     '  101 

interview  the  sentries  shall  not  be  placed  round  his 
house,  whatever  inconvenience  he  may  have  occasion- 
ally complained  of  by  the  early  posting  of  the  sentries 
will  in  future  be  entirely  removed. 

"  As  there  is  not  the  same  reason  for  extending  this 
indulgence  to  the  followers  of  General  Buonaparte 
(and  they  have  shown  a  great  disposition  to  abuse 
whatever  is  granted  to  them),  you  will  explain  that, 
except  at  the  time  when  they  shall  be  in  personal 
attendance  upon  him  in  these  excursions,  whatever 
regulations  are  now  in  force  with  respect  to  them  must 
be  continued. 

"  In  the  event  of  General  Buonaparte's  declining 
to  accede  to  this  proposal,  you  will  not  make  any 
alteration  in  the  existing  regulations,  and  you  will 
adopt  such  measures  as  you  may  think  most  eflfectual 
to  prevent  your  being  deceived  as  to  his  being  actu- 
ally at  Longwood,  taking  care  always  that  in  adopting 
these  measures  you  pay  all  possible  consideration  to 
the  feelings  and  habits  of  General  Buonaparte  not 
inconsistent  with  the  necessary  discharge  of  your 
painful  duty.  "  I  have  the  honour,  &c. 

"  Bathurst/' 


.  •      •    •' 


102  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXIII. 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 

Bonaparte's  refusal  to  be  seen  —  attack  of  vertigo  — 
mr.  stokoe  summoned  to  longwood  —  incurs  the  dis- 
PLEASURE OF  THE  GOVERNOR  —  NAPOLEON'S  *  NOTES  '  ON 
LORD  BATHURST'S  LETTER  —  O'MEARA'S  LEITER  TO  THE 
ADMIRALTY,  AND  HIS  DISMISSAL  FROM  THE  NAVY  —  REFUTA- 
TION OF  THE  CHARGES  AGAINST  SIR  HUDSON  LOWE  CONTAINED 
IN  THAT  LETTER  —  LORD  CHARLES  SOMERSET'S  OPINION  OP 
LAS  CASES'  JOURNAL. 

On  the  7th  of  January,  1819,  Captain  Nicholls  repre- 
sented to  Major  Qorrequer  that  Bonaparte  had  of  late 
thought  proper  to  adopt  a  system  of  concealment 
which  made  it  impossible  for  him  to  do  his  duty  at 
Longwood,  and  that  references  to  any  of  his  followers 
tended  only  to  embarrass,  rather  than  facilitate,  his 
duties.  He  said  that  the  day  before  he  had  had  an 
interview  with  Count  Montholon,  who  told  him  that, 
for  several  days  past.  Napoleon  had  been  so  ill  that  he 
was  not  able  to  sit  up  to  receive  visitors ;  but  in  oppo- 
sition to  this  Captain  Nicholls  asserted  that  he  Imew 
"  that  General  Bonaparte  was  seen  late  the  evening 
before  in  one  of  his  gardens,  dressed,  with  his  cocked- 
hat  on." 

At  an  interview  between  Count  Montholon  and  the 
orderly  oflScer  on  the  14th,  the  former  told  him  that 
Napoleon  had  heard  that  the  Governor  had  by  some 
means  got  possession  of  a  picture  and  bust  of  his  son ; 
and  if  that  were  the  case  he  thought  Sir  Hudson  Lowe 
had  acted  in  a  very  indelicate  maimer  in  not  present- 
ing those  articles  to  him.  Captain  Nicholls  was 
directed  to  inform  Count  Montholon  that  the  Gover- 


Jan.  1819.  ATTACK  OF  VERTIGO.  103 

nor  knew  nothing  of  any  bust  having  arrived,  except 
the  one  brought  by  the  ship  Baring,  which  was  sent 
up  by  him  to  Bonaparte  before  he  was  able  to  see  the 
man  who  brought  it  to  the  island,  and  for  which  the 
only  acknowledgment  made  was  the  most  violent 
abuse ;  that  a  print  had  come  to  St.  Helena  which 
the  Governor  had  not  in  his  possession,  nor  had  he 
ever  seen  it,  but  he  would  send  and  inform  the  person 
to  whom  it  belonged  that  Napoleon  Bonaparte  desired 
to  have  it. 

The  print  in  question  was  an  engraving  of  the  Duke 
de  Beichstadt  (Napoleon's  son),  in  a  newspaper  belong- 
ing to  Rear- Admiral  Plampin.  The  Admiral  imme- 
diately sent  it  to  Captain  Nicholls,  by  whom  it  was 
delivered  to  Count  Montholon  for  Bonaparte.  In  the 
evening  Napoleon  desired  the  Count  to  show  the  print 
to  Captain  Nicholls,  Dr.  Verling,  and  Lieutenant  Jack- 
son; and  Montholon  stated,  "  The  Emperor  was  exces- 
sively pleased  at  getting  the  picture  of  his  son,  and 
that  he  knew  of  its  being  in  the  island  for  three  months 
past." 

On  the  night  of  the  16th  Bonaparte  had  an  attack 
of  vertigo  and  faintness.  Although  Dr.  Verling  was 
on  the  premises  he  was  not  called  in,  but  Count  Mon- 
tholon  gave  Captain  Nicholls  a  letter  for  Mr.  Stokoe, 
surgeon  of  the  Conqueror,  requiring  him  to  come 
immediately.  Mr.  Stokoe  arrived  at  Longwood  early 
on  the  morning  of  the  17  th,  and  remained  there  seven 

hours.*    It  was  proposed  to  him  by  Napoleon  that  he 

■  ■ — i 

■  Notwithstanding  the  fact  here  stated  that  Mr.  Stokoe  was  sent  for,  and 
reached  Longwood  on  the  morning  of  the  17th,  a  few  hours  after  Napoleon's 
attack,  Count  Montholon,  in  his  recently  puhlished  work,  has  the  hardihood 
to  assert  that  it  was  not  until  the  19th  that  medical  assistance  was  pro- 
cured :  **  C'est  seulement  le  19  Janvier  que  le  Docteur  Stokoe  vient  k 
Longwood,  sur  une  nouvelle  demande  du  G^n^ral  Bertrand,  qui  lui  ^crivait, 
•  Mcmsieur,  vous  devez  fitre  rendu,' "  &c.— i?^rt«,  vol.  ii.  pp.  321, 322,   The 


104  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Cbap.  XXHI. 

should  become  his  physician,  provided  he  was  willing 
to  agree  to  certain  articles  or  conditions  (seven  in 
number)  prescribed  in  a  written  paper,  to  which  Mr. 
Stokoe  assented,  subject  to  the  approval  of  Admiral 
Plampin  and  Sir  Hudson  Lowe.  In  order  to  ascertain 
the  views  of  the  latter.  Count  Montholon  requested 
the  orderly  officer  to  accompany  him  late  in  the  even- 
ing to  Plantation  House.  Their  ride  is  thus  de- 
scribed in  Captain  NichoUs's  Journal : — 

"  We  set  off  at  nine  o'clock  with  two  men  mounted 
and  carrying  lanterns.  The  night  was  dark  and  rainy. 
Montholon  had  an  interview  with  the  Governor.  We 
took  coffee  and  returned  at  half-past  eleven  o'clock.  I 
was  excessively  wet.  I  met  one  of  my  dragoons  on 
the  road,  going,  by  the  way  of  Plantation  House,  with 
a  letter  for  Dr.  Stokoe  of  the  Conqueror,  from  Count 
Bertrand.  Note. — Dr.  Verling,  a  respectable  phy- 
sician, at  Longwood,  and  not  called  to  see  Napoleon ; 
he  could  not  be  very  ill  in  my  humble  opinion." 

At  this  interview  Count  Montholon  told  the  Gover- 
nor that  he  expected  the  Emperor  would  have  a  return 
of  his  attack  during  the  night,  and  that  he  dreaded 
"  un  coup  d'apoplexie ;"  that  the  blood  rushed  into 
his  head  "comme  d'un  coup  de  piston,"  and  it  was 
necessary  to  have  some  one  at  hand  to  bleed  him 
should  a  recurrence  of  this  take  place. 

As  Mr.  Stokoe  was  the  only  medical  man  in  whom 
the  Emperor  manifested  confidence,  and  the  only  one 
he  would  consent  to  see.  Count  Montholon  said  he 
hoped  the  Governor  would  make  no  objection  to  his 
remaining  at  Longwood  until  he  decided  the  question 

English  edition  (vol.  iii.  p.  66)  is  different,  but  not  less  at  variance  with 
truth :  "  On  the  19th,  Dr.  Stokoe  not  having  come  as  he  had  promised, 
the  Grand  Marshal  ag^in  wrote."  Mr.  Stokoe  did  come  on  the  19tb,  and 
remamed  the  night  at  Longwood,  but  it  \va8  his  second  visit. 


Jan.  1819.         CHOICE  OP  MEDICAL  ATTENDANT.  105 

of  his  being  established  there  as  the  Emperor's  medi- 
cal attendant.  To  this  the  Governor  assented^  but 
said  that  Mr.  Stokoe  was  under  the  Admiral's  autho- 
rity, and  he  himself  could  not  dispose  of  his  services. 
He  would,  however,  confer  with  the  Admiral  on  the 
matter,  and  could  give  no  answer  until  he  had  con- 
sulted him.  He  then  remarked,  that  an  insult  was 
oflFered  to  other  professional  persons  on  the  island  by 
the  manner  in  which  Mr.  Stokoe's  services  had  been 
required,  and  said  that  he  had  not  called  upon  him 
since  his  visit  to  Longwood  to  give  him  any  informa- 
tion respecting  Bonaparte's  health.  Count  Montho- 
lon  condemned  the  manner  in  which  the  affair  had 
been  managed,  and  threw  the  blame  on  Bertrand, 
saying  that  he  was  for  his  own  part  extremely  sorry 
that  Dr.  Yerling  was  not  the  person  selected ;  that  he 
had  the  highest  respect  and  value  for  him  as  a  medical 
man  as  well  as  personally,  and  that  he  and  his  wife 
would  always  recollect  with  gratitude  the  attention 
and  assiduity  he  had  manifested  towards  Madame 
Montholon  in  her  illness. 

Count  Montholon  afterwards  asked  Sir  Hudson  how 
he  wished  him  to  regulate  himself  in  their  correspond- 
ence, for  lately  they  had  been  returning  each  other's 
letters,  in  consequence  of  his  using  the  appellation  of 
"I'Empereur,"  though  it  was  the  same  form  of  "pro- 
tocole  "  he  had  followed  for  the  last  three  years ;  and 
he  quoted  two  letters  he  had  addressed  to  the  Governor 
in  the  preceding  July  where  that  title  was  used,  and 
which,  notwithstanding,  were  not  returned.  The  Go- 
vernor replied  that  he  had  acted  on  his  own  discretion 
in  some  cases,  and  overlooked  the  circumstance ;  but 
he  had  fully  explained  himself  by  letter  on  that  subject 
long  ago,  and  he  would  not  depart  from  the  rule  now. 

The  Count  said  that  he  was  very  sorry  to  hear  it,  as 


106  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXTTT. 

in  that  case  there  could  be  no  correspondence  between 
them.  He  admitted  that  it  was  childishness  {enfantilr 
lage)  to  give  the  title  of  Emperor  to  one  who  had  no 
longer  a  throne ;  and  in  his  present  situation  it  was 
perhaps  ridiculous;  "but  since  he  wishes  it,"  added 
Montholon,  "what  am  I  to  do  ?'* 

In  reply,  the  Governor  asked  him  why  he  did  not 
simply  say  "  Napoleon  "  in  the  notes  which  he  wrote 
in  his  own  name.  The  Count  answered  that  he  never 
wrote  any,  except  such  as  were  upon  unimportant 
matters,  but  by  his  dictation — they  were  all  written  in 
his  own  words.  He  made,  however,  the  remark,  that 
in  the  proposals  about  Mr.  Stokoe,  which  Napoleon 
had  himself  written,  he  had  been  careful  to  avoid  the 
title  of  "  Emperor."  He  was  told  he  was  mistaken,  for 
that  in  the  heading  of  the  paper  it  was  proposed  to 
give  Mr.  Stokoe  "le  caractere  de  m^decin  de  TEmpe- 
reur  Napoleon ;"  on  which  Montholon  said  that,  if  so, 
it  was  unintentional,  Bonjq)arte's  object  having  been 
to  keep  that  title  out  of  the  paper,  but  he  was  so 
accustomed  to  write  "  TEmpereur,"  that  it  had  slipped 
in  there  by  accident. 

Mr.  Stokoe  fell  into  the  same  mistake  as  O'Meara 
with  respect  to  Napoleon's  complaint.  He  treated  it 
as  a  disease  of  the  liver,  and,  in  a  report  to  Admiral 
Plampin  on  the  20th  of  January,  said  that  he  had 
taken  the  opportunity  of  particukrly  examining  that 
region,  and  was  fully  persuaded  of  its  diseased  state, 
"  having  distinctly  felt  a  degree  of  hardness."  In  a 
previous  report  he  spoke  of  the  symptoms  as  being 
those  of  "chronic  hepatitis."  And  this  idea  seems 
to  have  taken  full  possession  of  Napoleon's  mind,  at 
which  we  need  not  be  surprised, — erroneous  as  it  was 
afterwards  proved  to  be, — for  abundant  cause  was  on 
1^  post-mortem  examination  shown  to  have  existed  for 


Jak.  1819.         CHOICE  OF  MEDICAL  ATTENDANT.  107 

the  nneasiness  he  at  times  felt  in  the  stomach,  and  he 
naturally  adopted  the  opinion  as  to  its  origin  which 
was  held  by  his  medical  attendants. 

On  the  19th  a  paper  in  the  handwriting  of  Count 
Montholon,  dated  Longwood,  but  without  any  signa- 
ture, and  clearly  and  beyond  all  doubt  directly  dic- 
tated by  Niqwleon,  was  left  at  Plantation  House  for 
the  Gk>vemor,  who  however  returned  it  the  same  day, 
with  a  note  addressed  to  Count  Montholon,  telling 
him  that  no  representation  respecting  Napoleon  Bona- 
parte could  be  received,  unless  it  had  Ids  signature, 
or  that  of  some  officer  in  attendance  upon  him,  who, 
before  he  signed  his  name,  must  distinctly  express  that 
the  letter  or  paper  sent  was  written  by  his  direction. 

Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  however,  took  care  to  have 
a  copy  made  of  this  document  before  he  sent  it  back, 
and  it  proved  to  be  as  usual  an  attempt  to  frighten 
the  Governor  into  a  compliance  with  Bonaparte's 
views,  by  representations  of  the  fetal  consequences 
that  woiQd  ensue  to  his  health  if  they  were  disre- 
garded. But  the  contents  will  speak  for  themselves, 
as  the  paper  is  not  too  long  to  be  quoted  entire.  The 
following  is  a  translation  of  it : — 

"It  is  necessary  that  Dr.  Stokoe  should  remain 
at  Longwood,  if  he  is  to  pursue  the  treatment  which 
has  been  interrupted  since  the  departure  of  Mr. 
O'Meara,  that  is  to  say,  during  six  months;  which 
interruption  has  greatly  increased  the  disease  of  the 
liver,  the  first  symptoms  of  which  appeared  sixteen* 
months  ago.  The  whole  system  of  life  is  deranged : 
it  is  necessary  for  the  doctor  to  see  his  patient  several 
times  a  day.  The  attack  which  took  place  on  the 
day  before  y^terday  was  the  fifth  which  has  occurred 
within  six  months ;  they  always  come  on  at  night. 
Count  Bertrand  or  Count  Montholon  has  always  been 


108  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXUI. 

with  the  Emperor  durmg  them,  without  any  medical 
man ;  but  the  attacks  were  never  before  so  serious 
as  that  which  took  place  the  other  night,  when  for  a 
moment  they  despaired  of  his  life.  Count  Bertrand 
oflfered  to  send  for  Dr.  Yerling, — the  patient  refused 
to  permit  it ;  the  proposal  alone  altered  his  counte- 
nance, and  immediately  increased  the  violence  of  the 
attack ;  this  determined  Count  Bertrand  to  send  for 
Dr.  Stokoe  at  two  o'clock  in  the  morning ;  he  arrived 
at  six  o'clock ;  the  orderly  officer  not  being  author- 
ized to  write  to  the  town,  he  was  obliged  to  ask  per- 
mission of  the  Qt)vemor  to  do  so,  and  this  doubled  the 
distance.  The  doctor  arrived  too  late;  but  happily 
the  patient's  constitution  had  overcome  the  crisis. 
Thus  were  verified  the  words  contained  in  Count  Mon- 
tholon's  letter  to  the  Governor  of  the  25th  of  July  last, 
when  Dr.  O'Meara  had  been  torn  away  from  Long- 
wood,  but  was  still  at  James  Town :  *  That  even  in 
the  agonies  of  death  he  will  receive  no  assistance, 
nor  take  any  remedies,  but  fi-om  the  hands  of  his  own 
physician,  and  if  he  is  deprived  of  him  he  will  receive 
no  one,  and  will  consider  himself  assassinated  by  you.* 
When  Dr.  Stokoe  arrived,  he  went  to  Bertrand: 
the  latter  proposed  to  him  to  fill  Dr.  O'Meara's  place, 
and  presented  to  him  the  seven  articles  which  have 
since  been  forwarded  to  the  Governor.  He  accepted 
the  oflfer,  and  was  then  introduced  to  the  patient. 
The  Qt)vemor  could  not  prevent  this  transaction,  either 
directly  or  indirectly,  without  throwing  oflf  the  mask. 
Thus  tiie  treatment  of  the  disease,  interrupted  during 
six  months,  is  now  again  adjourned  until  the  arrival 
of  the  French  physician.  The  disease  of  the  liver 
will  make  greater  ravages  during  this  period,  and,  if  it 
should  at  length  become  incurable,  who  will  have 
kiUed  the  Emperor?    What  has  occurred  during  the 


Jan.  1819.      CHOICE  OP  MEDICAL  ATTENDANT.  109 

last  six  months  gives  reason  to  fear  a  crisis  every 
month,  and,  if  we  send  for  Dr.  Stokoe,  he  will  arrive 
too  late !  If  one  day  he  finds  the  patient  dead,  who 
will  have  killed  him?  The  worid  and  history  will 
answer  londly. 

"  Longwood,  January  19, 1819." 

An  attempt  was  now  made  by  the  French  to  get 
rid  of  Dr.  Yerling's  presence  at  Longwood,  where, 
although  his  professional  assistance  was  declined,  he 
continued  by  order  of  the  Governor,  since  the  de- 
parture of  O'Meara,  to  reside.  Count  Bertrand  called 
upon  him  on  the  19  th,  and  after  many  expressions 
of  good  will  told  him  that  obstacles  were  thrown  by 
the  Governor  in  the  way  of  the  choice  of  a  medical 
attendant  by  Napoleon;  the  correspondence  was 
becoming  more  warm,  and  motives  would  soon  be 
attributed  to  the  former  for  the  line  of  conduct  he 
adopted,  in  which  Dr.  Verling's  name  would  unavoid- 
ably be  implicated,  and  in  a  manner  in  which  it 
ought  never  to  appear.  He  therefore  advised  him 
to  retire  immediately  fi:om  the  situation.  Dr.  Ver- 
ling  however  replied  with  brevity  and  spirit,  that  he 
was  there  as  a  military  man,  in  obedience  to  orders 
from  his  superiors,  and  his  conscience  would  enable 
him  to  despise  any  false  imputations. 

Napoleon's  plan  of  having  Mr.  Stokoe  at  Long- 
wood  in  the  place  of  O'Meara  came  to  a  speedy  end. 
He  was  closely  examined  by  the  Admiral  respecting 
his  visits  there  on  the  19  th  and  20th,  and  the  nature 
of  his  communications  with  the  French,  when  he 
admitted  that  he  had  acquainted  them  with  O'Meara's 
calumnious  charges  at  Ascension  Island  against  the 
Governor,  and  spoken  to  them  about  the  letters  and 
books* which  had  arrived  for  O'Meara  under  a  feigned 
name  in  the  Lusitania  store-ship,  and  other  matters, 


110  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.         Chap,  XXIH. 

which  led  the  Admiral  to  tell  him  that  he  was  a  very 
dangerous  character.  Upon  this  Mr.  Stokoe  not  un- 
naturally declined  to  have  any  farther  communication 
with  Longwood,  and  wrote  to  the  Admiral  requesting, 
in  case  his  services  were  again  required  by  Bonaparte, 
that  his  decision  might  be  made  known  to  Count 
Bertrand.  A  few  days  afterwards  he  asked  to  be 
invalided  and  sent  home  to  England,  and  his  request 
was  complied  with. 

About  this  time  or  a  little  later  Sir  Hudson  Lowe 
received  from  Lord  Bathurst  a  despatch  insisting  that 
Bonaparte  should  be  seen  by  tite  orderly  oflScer 
twice  every  day.    Lord  Bathurst  said, — 

**  You  will  therefore  propose  to  General  Buonaparte 
the  regular  admission  of  the  orderly  officer  to  a  per- 
sonal interview  between  the  hours  of  nine  and  eleven 
every  morning  and  evening,  leaving  it  to  his  discretion 
each  day  to  select,  within  the  time  limited,  the  precise 
moment  at  which  he  may  prefer  admitting  the  officer. 

**  You  will  acquaint  him  also  that,  upon  his  acqui- 
escence in  this  arrangement,  you  are  authorised  to 
relax  the  other  restrictions,  so  far  as  to  admit  of  his 
taking  exercise,  either  on  foot,  in  a  carriage,  or  on 
horseback,  through  the  greater  part  of  the  island, 
unattended  by  a  British  officer  (but  subject  always 
to  the  regulations  as  to  hours  which  are  at  present  in 
force),  and  to  assure  him  that  in  such  case  the  sentries 
will  in  fature  only  be  posted  round  Longwood  from 
the  time  in  the  evening  at  which  he  may  have  ad- 
mitted the  orderly  officer  until  the  hour  at  which  he 
may  again  receive  him  on  the  following  morning." 

In  another  letter  written  a  few  days  later  Lord 
Bathurst  expressed  his  apprehension  that  Bonaparte 
might  still  decline  to  admit  the  orderly  officer  in  the 
manner  proposed,  and  he  then  thus  proceeded : — 


Pro.  1817,  HIS 'NOTES.*  Ill 

^^  Should  such  be  his  detennination,  and  should  hte 
system  of  seclusion  render  it  necessary  to  adopt  some 
compulsory  mode  of  learning  a  feet  indispensable  to 
the  prevention  of  his  escape,  you  will  instruct  the 
orderly  officer  to  take  prq3er  measures  for  obtaining 
a  view  of  his  person  at  some  hour  in  the  course  of 
every  day ;  and  should  any  resistance  be  made  to  the 
oMerly  officer  on  the  part  of  his  attendants  in  this 
necessary  brandi  of  his  duty,  it  will  be  your  duty 
to  furnish  the  means  of  overcoming  that  resistance, 
and  of  punishing  by  a  remo^  from  Longwood  the 
persons  who  may  have  engaged  in  it" 

On  the  12th  of  October  1818  there  had  appeared  in 
the  *  Morning  Chronicle  *  a  series  of  comments,  in 
French,  upon  the  contents  of  the  despatches  of  Lord 
Bathurst  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  of  the  1st  of  January 
that  year,  in  which  the  Colonial  Secretary  said  that 
he  transmitted  back  to  St.  Helena  Napoleon's  letter 
to  Lord  Liverpool  before  laying  it  before  the  Prince 
Regent,  for  whom  it  was  intended,  in  order  that  the 
Governor  might  first  have  an  opportunity  of  seeing 
and  answering  the  charges  there  brought  against  him. 
Extracts  from  these  despatches,  when  they  were  re- 
ceived, had  been  sent  by  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  to  Bona- 
parte, and  the  article  in  the  *  Morning  Chronicle' 
consisted  of  comments  upon  them,  headed,  *  Notes 
approuvfees  par  Napoleon.'  A  copy  of  that  news- 
paper arrived  at  St.  Helena  in  February  this  year, 
and  was  the  first  intimation  the  Governor  had  of  the 
existence  of  the  *  Notes.*  On  the  14th  he  wrote  to 
Lord  Bathurst  and  said, — "I  was  naturally  struck 
with  great  surprise  on  observing  the  Notes  contained 
in  this  paper,  under  the  head  of  *  Notes  approuvfees 
par  Napolfeon,'  having  received  no  reply  whatever 


112  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.         Chap.  XXIIL 

from  him  or  from  any  of  his  followers  on  the  subject 
of  your  Lordship's  instructions  to  which  they  refer, 
although,  when  I  transmitted  these  extracts  under 
cover  to  Count  Bertrand  (to  which  I  was  induced 
solely  from  the  reference  they  made  to  him),  I  ac- 
companied them  with  a  note  for  the  information  of 
Napoleon  Bonaparte  himself,  which  proves  the  false- 
hood of  the  assertion  contained  in  the  very  first  para- 
graph of  the  Notes,  wherein  it  is  said  the  extracts 
were  sent  *  sans  lettre  d'envoi.'  "  He  added  that  he 
availed  himself  of  that  opportunity  to  transmit  some 
observations  upon  the  Notes,  which  he  had  written 
after  seeing  them  in  print,  and  which  will  be  found, 
together  with  the  *  Notes'  themselves,  at  the  end  of 
the  volume,  being  neither  brief  nor  interesting  enough 
for  insertion  here. 

Throughout  this  month  nothing  occurred  at  Long- 
wood  which  deserves  notice.  Bonaparte  was  very 
seldom  seen  out  of  doors,  but  he  now  and  then  walked 
in  his  little  flower-garden,  and  is  described  by  the 
orderly  officer  in  one  of  his  reports  as  **  dressed  in 
green,  with  a  cocked  hat  on."  Captain  Nicholls  had 
great  difficulty  in  accomplishing  the  task  of  seeing 
him  as  often  as  his  instructions  required,  and  he  had 
frequently  to  remonstrate  on  the  subject  with  Count 
Montholon,  but  without  effect.  Napoleon  admitted  no 
company  to  his  presence,  and  kept  himself  in  solitary 
gloom  within  doors  at  Longwood. 

On  the  27th  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  wrote  to  Lord  Bath- 
urst  and  said  that  there  appeared  **  little  probability  of 
his  being  soon  relieved  from  the  state  of  seclusion  in 
which  he  at  present  lives,  except  by  shaking  oflF  his 
dependence  upon  Count  Bertrand,  whom  no  officer  now 
visits."  He  added, — "Count  Bertrand  will  receive 
no  person  in  the  presence  of  an  officer ;  and  even  where 


Mabch,  1819.  O'MEARA'S  LETTER  TO  THE  ADMIRALTY.   113 

the  orderly  officer  has  been  exercLsing  his  duty  in  the 
most  simple  and  natural  manner,  he  has  found  himself 
exposed  to  insults,  such  even  as  1  could  not  approve 

he  should  submit  to They  are  very  anxious 

at  Longwood  to  hear  something  respecting  the  French 
surgeon,  without,  however,  showing  any  desire  to 
change  the  present  one*  Madame  Bertrand  asked  Dr. 
Verling,  if  the  proposals  made  to  Mr.  Stokoe  were 
shown  to  him,  would  he  accept  them  ?  He  declined 
entering  into  any  reply  [discussion  ?]  with  her  on  the 
subject,  when  she  said  to  him,  *  If  you  wish  to  become 
the  Emperor's  physician,  why  do  you  maintain  such  a 
distance  from  my  husband  ? '  He  visits  frequently  at 
the  house  at  her  request,  but  is  on  terms  of  ceremony 
with  him.  Dr.  Yerling  has  said  to  me  more  than 
once  that  he  sees  it  is  not  a  medical  person  they 
want,  but  one  whom  they  can  render  an  instrument  in 
some  way  or  other  for  external  communication." 

On  the  16th  of  March  the  Redwing  arrived  at  St. 
Helena  with  despatches  for  the  Governor  from  Lord 
Bathurst,  who  sent  him  a  copy  of  the  celebrated  letter 
to  the  Admiralty  written  by  O'Meara  on  the  28th  of 
October  1818.  This  letter  was  inspired  by  a  spirit 
of  the  bitterest  hatred  against  Sir  Hudson  Low  e,  and 
was  a  kind  of  epitome  or  abstract  of  all  the  charges 
against  him,  which  he  afterwards  expanded  in  hii^book 
into  the  form  of  a  journal  of  real  occurrences.  It  is 
of  great  length,  and,  as  it  has  been  already  published, 
it  is  not  inserted  here,  but  is  given  without  abridg- 
ment at  the  end  of  the  volume,  accompanied  by  the 
indignant  notes  written  by  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  upon  its 
calumnious  statements.  It  is  greatly  to  be  lamented 
that  this  vindication  of  himself  should  not  have  been 
given  to  the  world  long  before  now;  and  even 
O'Meara  himself  could  hardly  have  anticipated  the 

VOL.  111.  I 


114  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXIH. 

success  which  his  malignity  achieved  in  blackening 
the  character  of  the  Governor,  upon  whose  silence  he 
could  not  have  reckoned.  But  in  one  respect  he  over- 
shot the  mark. 

**  He  who  of  old  would  rend  the  oak, 
Dreamed  not  of  the  rebound.** 

In  his  eagerness  to  attack  he  placed  himself  in  a 
dilemma  from  which  there  was  no  escape,  and  instant 
punishment  to  himself  was  the  consequence  of  his 
accusation  of  another.  It  will  be  remembered  that  in 
his  passage  home  to  Engkmd  O'Meara  threw  out  dark 
insinuations  that  the  life  of  Napoleon  was  not  safe  in 
the  hands  of  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  and  that  he,  in  his 
capacity  of  medical  attendant,  had  been  tampered 
with  to  see  if  he  would  assist  in  the  murderous 
scheme.  This  charge  he  repeated  in  his  letter  in 
terms  that  could  not  be  mistaken,  and  the  consequence 
was  instant  dismissal  from  the  service.  The  reasons 
for  this  step  are  detailed  in  the  following  letter  ad- 
dressed to  him  by  Mr.  Croker,  the  Secretary  to  the 
Admiralty,  on  the  2nd  of  November,  in  reply  to  his  of 
the  28th  of  October,  and  they  are  unanswerable.  It 
was  a  reponse  sans  rSpliqae : — 

"  Sir,  "  Admiralty  Office,  Nov.  2,  1818. 

"  I  have  received  and  laid  before  my  Lords 
Commissioners  of  the  Admiralty  your  letter  (and  its 
enclosure)  of  the  28th  ultimo,  in  which  you.  state 
several  particulars  of  your  conduct  in  the  situation 
you  lately  held  at  St.  Helena,  and  request  *  that  their 
Lordships  would,  as  soon  as  their  important  duties 
should  allow,  communicate  to  you  their  judgment 
thereupon.* 

"  Their  Lordships  have  lost  no  time  in  considering 
your  statement,  and  they  command  me  to  inform  you 


Mabch,  1819.    OlIEABA'S  DISMISSAL  FROM  THE  NAVY.  115 

that  (even  without  reference  to  ihe  complaints  made 
against  you  by  Lieut-General  Sir  Hudson  Lowe)  they 
find  in  your  own  admissions  ample  ground  for  mark- 
ing your  proceedings  witii  their  severest  displeasure. 

"  But  there  is  one  passage  in  your  said  letter  of 
such  a  nature  as  to  supersede  tl»  necessity  of  animad- 
verting upon  any  other  parts  of  it  This  passage  is  as 
follows : — 

"  *  In  the  third  interview  which  Sir  Hudson  Lowe 
had  with  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  in  the  month  of  May 
1816,  he  proposed  to  the  latter  to  send  me  away,  and 
to  replace  me  by  Mr.  Baxter,  who  had  been  several 
years  surgeon  with  him  in  the  Corsican  Rangers. 
This  proposition  was  rejected  with  indignation  by 
Napoleon  Bonaparte  upon  the  grounds  of  the  in- 
delicacy of  a  proposal  to  substitute  an  army  surgeon 
for  the  private  surgeon  of  his  own  choice. 

"  *  Failing  in  this  attempt.  Sir  Hudson  Lowe 
adopted  the  resolution  of  mantfesting  great  confidence 
in  me,  by  loading  me  with  civilities,  inviting  me  con- 
stantly to  dinner  with  him,  conversing  for  hours 
together  with  me  alone,  both  at  his  own  house  and 
grounds  and  at  Longwood,  either  in  my  own  room 
or  under  the  trees  and  elsewhere.  On  some  of  these 
occasions  he  made  to  me  observations  upon  the  be- 
nefit which  would  result  to  Europe  fi'om  the  death  df 
Napoleon  Bonaparte,  of  which  event  he  spoke  in  a 
manner  which,  considering  his  situation  and  mine, 
was  peculiarly  distressing  to  me/ 

"  It  is  impossible  to  doubt  the  meaning  which  this 
passage  was  intended  to  convey,  and  my  Lords  can  as 
little  doubt  that  the  insinuation  is  a  calumnious  false- 
hood ;  but  if  it  were  true,  and  if  so  horrible  a  sug- 
gestion were  made  to  you  directly  or  indirectly,  it 
was  your  bounden  duty  not  to  have  lost  a  moment  in 

I  2 


116  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.         Chap.  XXni. 

communicating  it  to  the  Admiral  on  the  spot,  or  to 
the  Secretary  of  State,  or  to  their  Lordships. 

"  An  overture  so  monstrous  in  itself^  and  so  deeply 
involving  not  merely  the  personal  character  of  the 
Governor,  but  the  honour  of  the  nation  and  the  im- 
portant interests  communicated  to  his  charge,  should 
not  have  been  reserved  in  your  own  breaat  for  two 
years,  to  be  produced  at  last,  not  (as  it  would  appew) 
fix)m  a  sense  of  public  duty,  but  in  furtherance  of  your 
personal  hostility  against  the  Governor. 

^^  Either  the  charge  is  in  the  last  degree  false  and 
calumnious,  or  you  can  have  no  possible  excuse  for 
having  hitherto  suppressed  it. 

"In  either  case,  and  without  adverting  to  the 
general  tenor  of  your  conduct  as  stated  in  your 
letter,  my  Lords  consider  you  to  be  an  improper 
person  to  continue  in  His  Majesty's  service,  and  they 
have  directed  your  name  to  be  erased  from  the  list  of 
naval  surgeons  accordingly.    I  have,  Ac. 

"  J.  W.  Croker." 

Li  transmitting  O'Meara's  letter  to  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe  Lord  Bathurst  wrote, — "It  will  be  a  trial  of 
your  temper  to  read  Mr.  O'Meara's  charges  against 
you.  The  answer  which  the  Lords  of  the  Admiralty 
gave  to  it  must  be  satisfactory  to  you,  more  especially 
when  you  know  that  Sir  George  Cockbum  was  the 
first  person  who,  on  reading  the  charges,  declared 
that  Mr.  O'Meara  ought  to  be  instantly  dismissed  the 
service." 

When  the  letter  reached  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  at  St. 
Helena  he  lost  no  time  in  preparing  a  refutation  of 
its  contents.  For  this  purpose  he  submitted  each 
separate  charge  to  those  persons  who  had  been  vouched 
by  the  writer  as  able  to  confirm  his  statements,  and 
with  minute  and  anxious  accuracy  investigated  every 


Mabch,  1819.      REPUTATION  OF  OlfEARA'S  CHARGES.     117 

allegation  which  was  capable  of  being  brought  to  the 
test  of  proof.  Point  by  point  and  line  by  line  the 
assertions  of  O'Meara  were  subjected  to  a  rigorous 
examination,  and  I  do  not  hesitate  to  say  that  a  more 
triumphant  answer  was  never  given  to  the  charges  of 
an  accuser.  Some,  if  not  all,  of  these  have  been 
already  proved  to  be  false ;  and  in  the  progress  of  our 
narrative  there  has  been  given  a  suflScient  confutation 
to  many  accusations  which  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  at  the 
time  when  they  were  made  known  to  him  was  enabled 
to  disprove  by  the  testimony  of  others  who  were  ac- 
quainted with  the  fiewjts.  It  is  therefore  needless  to 
encumber  this  part  of  the  work  by  going  again  over 
the  same  ground,  and  repeating  details  which  will  be 
found  elsewhere  in  their  proper  place  and  order,  and 
we  shall  only  introduce  here  some  items  which  either 
have  not  been  already  mentioned  or  not  yet  fully  ex- 
plained. 

O'Meara  stated  in  his  letter  to  the  Admiralty  that 
Captain  Blakeney  resigned  the  situation  of  orderly 
officer  at  Longwood,  because  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  re- 
quired him  to  perform  duties  degrading  to  a  British 
officer,  and  to  report  the  conversation  and  actions  of 
persons  with  whom  he  daily  sat  down  at  table. 

And  in  a  letter  from  Bertrand  to  Las  Cases,  which 
was  published  in  an  English  newspaper,  there  occurred 
the  following  passage  respecting  Captain  Blakeney, — 

"  Within  -a  very  few  days  of  his  arrival  he  found 
that  the  Governor  required  things  of  him  very  unwor- 
thy of  a  man  of  honour ;  but,  as  that  evil  sensibly 
increased,  he  urgently  requested,  as  soon  as  his  year's 
service  in  that  disgusting  post  expired,  that  he  might 
be  relieved  from  it.  We  know  that  he  declared  con- 
fidentially to  his  friends  in  the  regiment  that  it  was 


118  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Cha?.  XXIIL 

impossible  for  a  man  of  honour  to  continue  in  that 
post  without  forfeiting  his  own  good  opinion." 

The  newspaper  containing  Bertrand's  letter  arrived 
at  St.  Helena  at  the  same  time  as  0'Meara*s  letter  to 
the  Admiralty,  and  Captain  Blakeney  immediately 
wrote  to  the  Count,  and  said, — 

"  The  only  observation  I  have  to  make  upon  the 
above  is,  that,  as  far  as  it  relates  to  myself,  it  is  false, 
and  that  I  conceive  it  to  be  an  infamous  calumny 
upon  my  character.  The  confinement  necessarily 
attending  the  situation,  and  being  deprived  in  a  great 
measure  of  the  society  of  my  brother  officers,  was 
sufficient  for  my  wishing  to  be  relieved,  and  not  those 
reasons  imputed  to  me  by  you." 

In  addition  to  this  denial  by  Captain  Blakeney  him- 
self, the  officers  of  the  66th  Regiment  met,  and  signed 
the  following  declaration : — 

"  We,  the  undersigned  officers  of  the  regiment,  do 
hereby  declare  and  certify  upon  honour  as  officers 
and  gentlemen,  that  we  never  heard  Captain  Blakeney 
on  any  occasion,  either  directly  or  indirectly,  make 
use  of  the  above  expressions  mentioned  in  Count 
Bertrand*s  letter  to  Count  Las  Cases  (dated  St. 
Helena,  1 6th  August,  1818,  and  [which]  appeared  in 
the  *  Courier'  of  the  29th  October,  1818),  or  any 
words  to  that  eflfect." 

Captain  Blakeney  also  wrote  the  following  contra- 
diction of  O'Meara's  statement : —  • 

"  I  never  was  required  to  perform  any  duties  de- 
grading to  myself  or  situation ;  and  the  assertion  of 
my  being  desired  by  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  or  any  one 
else  to  make  reports  of  the  conversations  and  actions 
of  persons  with  whom  I  daily  sat  down  to  table,  is 
entirely  false." 


Mabch,  1819.    REPUTATION  OP  O'MEARA'S  CHARGES.       119 

Another  of  0'Meara*s  assertions  was  that  the  post- 
office  at  St.  Helena  had  been  tampered  with ;  and  the 
Governor  in  consequence  applied  to  Mr.  Cole,  who 
had  charge  of  that  department,  for  his  statement  on 
the  subject.  Mr.  Cole  immediately  wrote  to  Colonel 
Wynyard,  and  said  that  no  impediment  whatever 
was  ever  opposed  to  O'Meara's  receiving  any  letters 
that  came  addressed  to  him.  He  added,  "Such 
an  assertion  as  *that  the  Governor  required  and 
endeavoured  to  compel  me  as  Postmaster  to  furnish 
him  with  all  such  letters  as  he  thought  proper,  ad- 
dressed to  British  subjects  within  the  island  of  St. 
Helena,  that  he  might  secretly  open  them  and  examine 
their  contents,*  is  false.  His  Excellency  the  Governor 
must  be  aware  that  an  officer  of  his  staff  has  regularly 
attended  at  the  opening  of  mails." 

In  another  letter  Mr.  Cole  said  that  no  seizure 
of  newspapers  was  ever  made  at  the  post-office,  and 
that  all  newspapers  as  well  as  letters  addressed  to 
British  subjects  had  been  invariably  delivered  to  the 
persons  to  whom  they  were  addressed,  on  their  appli- 
cation. 

O'Meara  had  further  asserted  that  the  Governor 
"  caused  false  bulletins  to  be  made  out,  and  employed 
for  that  purpose  a  surgeon,  Mr.  Baxter,  who  never 
saw  the  patient,  and  who  consequently  could  not  be 
a  judge  of  his  complaint ;"  and  that  he  caused  the 
restrictions  of  the  10th  of  April,  1818,  imposed  upon 
him  (O'Meara),  to  be  removed,  because  he  had  been 
made  to  comprehend,  by  "authorized  persons,"  that 
if  Napoleon  died  during  the  time  he  kept  his  physician 
in  confinement,  or  under  the  hands  of  any  surgeon 
forced  upon  him,  strange  surmises  respecting  his  death 
would  arise  in  England  and  Europe,  of  which  they 
themselves  would  be  unable  to  give  a  satisfiictory 


120  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXHI, 

explanation.  The  question  of  the  "fiedse"  bulletins 
has  already  been  sufficiently  discussed,*  and  we  need 
only  add  that  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  submitted  these  ex- 
tracts from  the  letter  to  the  foreign  Commissioners, 
who  alone  could  be  meant  by  the  expression  *' au- 
thorized persons."  Count  Balmain  immediately  an- 
swered his  inquiry,  and,  with  respect  to  the  latter  part 
of  O'Meara's  statement,  denied  that  he  had  ever  inter- 
fered or  assumed  the  right  to  question  the  conduct  of 
the  Governor.  He  said  that  he  had  frequently  heard 
such  insinuations  as  those  alluded  to  from  the  French 
at  Longwood  (personnes  de  Longwood),  which  he  had 
constantly  repelled,  and  had  striven  to  disabuse  their 
minds^f  any  such  idea ;  and  that  General  Gourgaud 
after  he  left  Longwood  had  told  him  and  Baron 
Stunner,  "Ce  que  vous  me  repetez  sans  cesse  est 
vrai.  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  n'est  rien  de  ce  que  croit 
TEmpereur.    J 'en  suis  convaincu  maintenant." 

The  Marquis  de  Montchenu  was  equally  explicit  in 
his  denial,  and  some  time  afterwards  he  addressed  a 
letter  to  the  Qt)vemor  in  which  he  went  more  fully 
into  the  subject,  and  gave  the  substance  of  a  conversa- 
tion he  had  had  at  Longwood  at  the  time  of  O'Meara's 
detention,  when  he  was  told  that,  if  the  doctor  was 
willing  to  listen  to  the  insinuations  that  were  made 
to  him,  the  Emperor  would  not  be  long  alive.  The 
Marquis  then  described  with  such  dramatic  vivacity 
his  horror  at  hearing  this  language,  that  it  would  be  a 
pity  not  to  quote  the  passage  in  the  original : — 

"  A  ce  mot  un  mouvement  d'horreur  semblable  k  une 
convulsion  s'empara  de  moi ;  mes  deux  mains  se  levferent 
en  Tair,  et  mon  corps  en  arriere ;  je  ne  dis  que  Ho !  ho  I 
Sur  ce  mouvement.  Ton  me  dit  tout-de-suite,  d'un  ton 

'  See  vol.  ii.  p.  261, 


Maboh,1819,  question  op  supplies.  121 

radoaci,  Nom  ne  k  croyoris  paSj  mais  dest  toujours  ban 
h  dire:' 

In  thanking  Count  Balmain  for  his  letter.  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe  wrote  the  following  indignant  comment  on  the 
foul  accusation  brought  against  him : — 

"It  would  be  supposing  myself  however  in  a  state 
of  humiliation,  entirely  beneath  the  rank  I  hold,  the 
country  to  which  I  belong,  or  the  Government  I  serve, 
to  stand  in  need  of  any  vindication  whatever  against 
aspersions  of  so  foul  a  nature,  whilst  at  the  same  time 
I  can  hardly  imagine  a  lower  scale  of  moral  self-degra* 
dation,  or  a  more  complete  absence  of  everything  like  a 
spirit  of  true  honour,  than  what  has  been  exemplified 
in  the  conduct  of  the  principal  persons  you  have 
adverted  to,  both  bearing  the  appellation  of  general 
officers,  and  claiming  noble  rank  besides,  by  their 
descending  to  the  invention  of  such  miserable  calum- 
nies, or,  if  they  did  not  themselves  invent  and  believe 
them,  rendering  themselves  such  ready  and  willing 
instruments  for  their  dissemination." 

As  so  much  has  been  said  on  the  subject  of  the 
supply  furnished  to  the  establishment  at  Longwood, 
and  it  was  made  a  prominent  topic  of  complaint  in  the 
letter  addressed  by  O'Meara  to  the  Secretary  of  the 
Admiralty  on  the  28th  of  October,  1818,  we  will 
here  give  at  length  Major  Qorrequer's  observations 
on  that  statement,  and  the  reader  will  thus  have 
before  him  at  one  view  the  Governor's  defence  to  the 
charge  of  stinting  the  table  of  the  French  exiles : — 

"  In  a  conversation  which  I  had  with  Count  Mon- 
tholon  on  the  19th  July,  1816,  he  said  that,  when 
the  *  Emperor  *  first  heard  of  the  intention  of  the  British 
Government  to  curtail  the  expense  of  his  establish^ 
ment,  he  declared  he  would  rather  bear  the  whole 


122  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.         Chap.  XXIIL 

expense  himself  than  be  indebted  to  Government 
for  a  part.  Count  Montholon  then  remarked  that  the 
*  Emperor  *  could  easily  procure  the  means  of  paying 
for  his  expenses,  by  drawing  upon  some  of  his  rela- 
tions, either  his  mother  (Madame),  Princess  Pauline, 
Prince  Joseph,  his  own  son,  or  Prince  Eugene,  or 
some  other  of  his  family;  for  all  of  whom  he  had 
done  so  much,  and  who  surely  would  not  refiise  him 
500,000  francs  if  he  applied  to  them;  particularly 
Prince  Eugene,  to  whom  the  *  Emperor '  said  he  had  in 
one  day  made  over  twenty  millions  of  livres;  that, 
however,  the  ^  Emperor  *  would  only  agree  to  draw  for 
money  by  means  of  sealed  letters,  and,  if  the  Governor 
wished  to  make  any  proposition  in  regard  to  this 
matter,  the  *  Emperor '  would  be  ready  to  receive  it. 

**The  Governor  called  upon  Count  Bertrand  on 
the  16th  August,  for  the  purpose  of  entering  into  a 
full  explanation  with  him  on  the  subject  of  the  reduc- 
tion contemplated  in  the  annual  expenditure  of  the 
establishment,  but  in  consequence  of  the  warmth 
shown  by  Count  Bertrand  on  this  occasion,  which 
terminated  by  his  declining  to  interfere,  and  referring 
the  Governor  to  Count  Montholon,  the  subject  was 
broken  oflF  abruptly. 

**  On  the  5th  September  I  waited  on  Count  Montho- 
lon by  the  Governor's  desire,  and  made  the  following 
communication  to  him  in  presence  of  Mr.  O'Meara : — 

"  *  As  it  is  possible  the  British  Government  may 
not  have  been  aware  that  General  Bonaparte's  estab- 
lishment had  suflfered  no  diminution  of  numbers  when 
it  fixed  8000/.  per  annum  as  the  limits  for  its  ex- 
pense, and  required  the  excess  to  be  paid  by  General 
Bonaparte  himself,  the  Governor  has  undertaken  on 
his  oum  responsibility^  to  allow  a  further  sum  of  4000/. 
to  be  expended  by  Mr.  Balcombe,  including  all  charges^ 


Maboh,  1819.  THE  EXPENDITURE.  123 

until  he  receives  farther  instructions.  Mr.  Balcombe 
must  arrange  with  Count  Montholon  that  the  expense 
does  not  in  any  case  exceed  1000/.  ^w  months  and  the 
Gk>yemor  fixes  this  sum  with  the  conviction  that  it  may 
be  rendered  sufficient  if  proper  economy  is  observed. 

"  *  If  General  Bonaparte  is  averse  to  restrictions  of 
any  kind  on  this  head,  the  Governor  will  authorise 
farther  expenses  to  be  incurred,  but  drafts  must  in 
such  case  be  givea  in  the  manner  in  which  he  under 
stood  from  General  Bonaparte  himself  and  Count 
Montholon  would  be  the  case.* 

**  (Jeneral  Montholon  said  that  the  greatest  economy 
had  been  established  by  him  in  the  household  with  a 
view  to  curtail  the  expenses,  and  that  he  was  certain 
they  could  not  by  any  means  come  within  the  pro- 
posed sum  of  12,000/.,  but  he  would  state  the  purport 
of  the  communication  I  had  made  to  him  to  General 
Bonaparte,  and  give  me  his  answer  in  two  days  after, 
if  I  called  at  Longwood ;  that  he  however  was  per- 
suaded the  *  Emperor  *  would  not  either  authorise,  or 
even  allow  him,  to  have  anything  to  do  with  it ;  that 
his  answer,  (he  anticipated)  would  be,  *  Let  the  Gover- 
nor send  me  what  he  thinks  proper ;  I  ask  for  nothing ; 
I  must  take  what  he  sends  me,  since  there  is  nothing 
else  for  it :  c'est  un  cas  de  necessity  k  qui  il  &ut  se 
soumettre :  let  him  follow  his  orders.' 

^^  General  Montholon  declared,  he  himself  would 
have  nothing  to  do  with  Mr.  Balcombe  in  any  arrange- 
ment for  the  diminution  of  the  expense,  when  his  own 
conscience  convinced  him  the  present  allowance  was 
barely  sufficient ;  that  the  ^  Emperor  *  countenancing 
any  arrangement  for  a  decrease,  or  his  (Count  Mon- 
tholon) assisting  in  carrying  it  into  effect,  would  be 
an  acknowledgment  of  the  propriety  of  the  measure, 
and  he  therefore  would  take  no  farUier  interest  in  the 


124  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.         Chap.  XXHI. 

matter.  He  then  said  that  the  ^  Emperor '  was  anxious 
to  enter  into  any  arrangement  for  paying  the  whole  of 
the  expenses  of  his  establishment,  provided  any  house 
here,  or  in  England,  or  on  the  continent  of  Europe  (to 
be  fixed  upon  with  the  Governor's  concurrence,  or 
even  at  his  own  choice),  was  named  to  transact  his 
money  matters,  under  an  assurance  from  the  ^Emperor* 
that  all  letters  sent  through  this  house  would  be 
solely  on  pecuniary  affairs;  but  provided  also  that 
all  such  letters  should  pass  sealed  and  unopened  to 
their  destination. 

**  General  Montholon  added,  the  *  Emperor '  did  not 
blame  the  Governor  for  executing  the  instructions  of 
his  Government. 

"He  concluded  by  saying  that,  in  the  event  of  the 
mode  he  proposed  for  the  payment  of  the  *  Emperor's  * 
expenses  being  acceded  to,  it  was  to  be  distinctly 
understood  he  (G^nei*al  Bonaparte)  must  in  that  case 
have  the  undisputed  right  of  selecting  the  persons  to 
be  employed  as  purveyors. 

**Having  again  called  on  Count  Montholon  on  the  7th 
September,  for  the  purpose  of  knowing  the  decision  of 
General  Bonaparte  on  the  subject  of  the  communication 
I  had  made  to  him  on  the  5th  by  the  Governor's  di- 
rection, he  told  me,  in  the  presence  of  the  orderly  officer 
and  Mr.  O'Meara,  that  he  had  repeated  to  the  ^Emperor* 
the  conversation  that  had  passed  between  us,  who 
had  expressed  how  painful  it  was  to  his  feelings  to 
find  he  was  obliged  to  enter  into  details  of  that  nature ; 
that  he  had  never  felt  so  mortified  in  his  life  as  to  be 
obliged  to  discuss  the  matter  of  a  bottle  of  wine  or 
a  chicken  more  or  less,  and  that  the  British  Govern- 
ment should  find  it  necessary  to  descend  to  the  con- 
sideration of  one  or  two  thousand  pounds  as  an 
object  in  the  expenses  of  his  house.    That  if  Govem•^ 


MAacH,  1819.  THE  EXPENDITURE.  ,  125 

ment  was  so  desirous  of  retrenchment  and  economy, 
why  did  it  not  accede  to  his  proposal  of  paying  the 
whole  of  his  expenses  himself,  which  he  most  particu- 
larly desired  to  do  (always,  however,  on  the  terms 
mentioned  in  the  preceding  conversation),  and  it 
would  save  the  British  nation  the  necessity  of  expend- 
ing, anything  whatever  on  his  account. 

**  Count  Montholon  said  the  *  Emperor '  and  himself 
had  been  employed  the  whole  of  that  morning  to  see 
what  reductions  might  take  place  in  the  establishment, 
so  as  to  approximate  the  expenses  to  the  allowance 
notified  to  him  as  fixed  upon  (if  the  Governor  per- 
sisted in  not  acceding  to  the  mode  proposed  by  him 
of  obtaining  the  means  of  payment  from  his  own  fimds) ; 
that  the  *  Emperor  *  had  sent  for  him  very  early  for  that 
purpose,  and  had  entered  into  the  ^business  with  the 
greatest  readiness  and  the  best  humour  possible. 
He  had  first  asked  him  how  many  English  servants 
were  employed  in  the  house ;  on  his  answering  twelve, 
and  describing  their  different  occupations,  he  said, 
*  There  are  too  many,  we  can  do  witii  fewer,*  and  had 
directed  that  six  of  them  and  a  black  servant  (an 
inhabitimt)  should  be  discharged.  The  ^  Emperor  *  had 
also  inquired  what  quantity  of  wine  was  consumed 
daily,  and,  on  being  informed,  he  answered,  *  We  must 
be  satisfied  with  less;  twelve  bottles  of  wine,  in- 
cluding claret  and  white  wines  of  all  descriptions, 
must  suffice*  (viz.  for  the  use  of  himself  and  of  the 
oflScers  and  their  families) ;  that  he  also  directed  a 
proportionate  diminution  to  be  made  in  the  Cape 
wine,  in  consequence  of  the  reduction  he  had  ordered 
in  the  number  of  servants ;  but  that,  with  regard  to 
the  provisions,  he  had  observed  he  could  not  see 
any  possibility  of  their  being  reduced  below  the 
quantity  now  furnished. 


126  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.         Chap.  XXin. 

**  Count  Montholon  here  promised  to  send  me  the 
list  of  things  which  General  Bonaparte  considered  as 
sufficient,  and  stated  he  had  been  desired  to  say  that, 
if  it  appeared  still  necessary  to  restrict  them  further 
in  any  of  the  articles  of  provisions,  &c.,  the  *  Emperor  * 
in  that  case  had  charged  him  to  dispose  of  about 
25,000  livres  worth  of  his  plate  in  a  private  manner, 
eitlier  to  Mr.  Balcombe  or  any  other  merchant  in 
town,  as  he  could  spare  that  quantity  (not  being  at 
the  time  in  use),  and  from  the  produce  of  its  sale 
contrive  to  provide  those  little  comforts  denied  them ; 
that  this  might  last  them  two  or  three  months  longer, 
or  until  some  fresh  instructions  arrived  from  England  ; 
if  the  Governor  should  have  no  objection,  he  (Count 
Montholon)  would  therefore  send  for  Mr.  Balcombe, 
or  some  otiier  merchant,  to  arrange  about  the  disposal 
of  this  plate ;  it  however  would  be  more  desirable 
that  a  certain  sum  should  be  advanced  upon  the 
security  of  the  plate  than  to  actually  dispose  of  it. 

"  Count  Montholon  declared  the  *  Emperor '  bore  no 
ill  will,  nor  felt  any  cause  of  complaint  against  the 
Governor  in  regard  to  these  retrenchments ;  he  was 
only  executing  his  instructions,  and  the  orders  of  his 
(government  left  him  no  choice.  *  II  est  vrai  *  (he 
added)  *  que  j*ai  ecrit,  par  ordre  de  TEmpereur  re- 
cemment,  des  choses  bien  dures,  tr^  fortes,  tres 
sirieuses,  au  Gouvemeur,  mais  qui  ne  lui  etaient 
point  personelles ;  et  I'Empereur  est  tres  bien  con- 
vaincu  qu'il  ne  doit  pas  s*attendre  que  le  Gouverneur 
paie  de  sa  poche,  ou  aille  au  dela  de  ce  que  son  Gou- 
vernement  lui  prescrit.' 

"After  separating  from  Count  Montholon,  Mr. 
O'Meara  told  me  that  General  Bonaparte  had  sent 
for  Cipriani  (his  maitre-d*hdtel)  that  morning,  before 
he  saw  General  Montholon,  and  directed  him  so  to 


March,  1819.  THE  EXPENDITUBE.  127 

arrange  that  Count  Bertrand's  house  expenses  should 
never  exceed  100  francs  per  day.  On  the  10th  of 
September  Mr.  0*Meara  informed  me  at  Longwood 
that  Greneral  Bonaparte  had  told  him  Count  Montho- 
Ion  had  stated  to  him  that  in  the  conversation  of  the 
7th  I  had  either  proposed  or  insinuated  the  adoption 
of  the  measure  of  disposing  of  the  plate  to  assist  in 
paying  the  expenses  of  the  establishment ;  that  Gene- 
ral Bonaparte  appeared  much  irritated  and  very  in- 
dignant about  it ;  but  that,  he  (Mr.  O'Meara)  having 
replied  he  was  present  during  the  whole  of  the  con- 
versation, and  that  no  such  proposal  or  suggestion 
was  made  by  me,  General  Bonaparte  asked  him  if  he 
would  say  so  in  the  presence  of  Count  Montholon ; 
on  his  answering,  certainly  he  would,  the  General 
spoke  of  Montholon  in  very  angry  terms,  called  him 
*a  bavard,  un  coglione,*  said  he  had  never  authorised 
him  to  enter  upon  any  subject  of  that  nature,  and 
abused  him  for  having  done  so  without  his  permission. 
Mr.  O'Meara  also  mentioned  that  General  Bonaparte 
told  him  Count  Montholon  had  denied  having  said  to 
me  that,  in  the  event  of  the  Governor's  stating  to 
him  in  a  letter  that  he  would  pledge  himself,  if  bills 
of  exchange  were  sent  under  cover  to  him  (the  Go- 
vernor) unsealed,  they  would  only  be  seen  by  himself 
on  the  island,  and  by  His  Majesty's  Ministers  in 
England  (to  whom  he  would  transmit  them),  and  those 
immediately  concerned  in  the  payment  of  them,  the 
Count  woidd  submit  such  an  assurance  to  General 
Bonaparte ;  that  he  (Mr.  O'Meara)  replied,  he  was 
present  and  heard  Count  Montholon  express  himself 
to  that  effect  to  me. 

"  On  the  12th  September  I  was  informed  by  Mr. 
O'Meara,  that  since  he  last  saw  me  he  had  fully  ex- 
plained to  General  Bonaparte  that  part  of  my  con- 


128  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON,         Ghap.  XXIIL 

versation  with  Count  Montholon  about  the  plate, 
who  then  acknowledged  that  he  had  authorised  Count 
Montholon  to  sell  some  of  the  plate ;  adding,  *  The 
next  thing  I  must  sell  will  be  my  clothes/ 

"Having  upon  several  occasions,  when  at  Long- 
wood,  received  complaints  of  various  kinds  from  Count 
Montholon  against  Mr.  Balcombe,  the  purveyor,  who 
had  even  gone  so  far  as  to  say  that,  although  he  did 
not  mean  to  assert  Mr.  Balcombe  was  a  thief,  yet 
that  he  had  thieves  employed  under  him ;  and  having 
also  been  told  by  Count  Montholon  that,  in  the  event 
of  General  Bonaparte  paying  for  his  expenses,  it  was  to 
be  explicitly  understood  he  would  not  consider  himself 
obliged  to  continue  Mr.  Balcombe  as  purveyor,  but 
appoint  whoever  he  thought  proper ;  I  was  very  much 
surprised  to  learn  from  Mr.  O'Meara  what  Count  Mon- 
tholon had  stated  to  Mr.  Balcombe  respecting  me. 

"Count  Montholon  not  having  kept  his  word  of 
sending  me  the  list  of  what  supplies  would  be  con- 
sidered sufficient  for  the  establishment  at  Longwood, 
as  he  promised  me  on  the  7th,  the  purveyor  was 
desired  to  prepare  an  estimate  for  the  future  expendi- 
ture on  that  head,  after  consulting  with  Count  Mon- 
tholon, so  as  to  bring  'the  amount  as  near  as  possible 
to  12,000^.  per  annum,  as  Count  Montholon  had  been 
informed  by  me  on  the  5th  would  be  done ;  and  after 
two  or  three  sketches  had  been  made  out  by  the  pur- 
veyor, the  schedule  A  was  approved  of  by  the  Governor 
on  the  13th  September,  and  subsequently  acted  upon. 

"  The  quantity  of  claret,  madeira,  constantia,  cham- 
pt^ne,  vin  de  grave,  and  malt  liquors,  is  that  fixed 
upon  by  Count  Montholon  with  me,  who  told  me  that, 
calculating  at  the  rate  of  one  bottle  of  claret  daily  for 
each  of  the  gentlemen  and  ladies,  exclusively  of  the 
quantity  of  the  above-named  white  wines  as  specified 


Mabch,  1819.  THE  SUPPLIES.  129 

in  scale  A,  would  be  sufficient,  and  that  for  each  of 
the  domestics,  male  and  female,  living  in  the  house, 
one  bottle  of  Cape  wine  would  be  required. 

**  The  Grovernor,  however,  considering  the  six  prin- 
cipal French  domestics  as  of  a  more  respectable  class 
of  persons,  directed  that  their  table  should  be  supplied 
with  a  superior  kind  of  wine,  and  they  were  stated  to 
prefer  Teneriflfe.  The  English  soldier  servants  and 
Chinese  employed  in  the  house  received  their  island 
rations,  and  were  not  included  in  the  scale.  The 
orderly  officer  and  surgeon  had  a  table  supplied  sepa- 
rately, at  a  fixed  amount  of  expense.  A  nominal  list 
of  the  persons  composing  the  establishment  at  Long- 
wood  at  this  period,  supplied  as  per  schedule  A,  is  also 
annexed  thereto.  No.  1 ;  and  No.  2,  being  an  average 
estimate  of  the  annual  expense  calculated  on  this  scale, 
likewise  accompanying  it.  This  arrangement  con- 
tinued until  the  departure  of  Captain  Piontkowski  and 
three  French  domestics  for  the  Cape  and  an  English 
gardener  for  England,  the  removal  of  a  servant  of 
Count  Las  Cases,  and  the  dischai^e  of  one  of  General 
Qt)urgaud's,  both  inhabitants. 

**  The  schedule  B  shows  the  rate  of  supplies  on  the 
26th  November,  1816,  after  the  departure  of  the 
above  persons,  and  the  alterations  that  took  place  in 
consequence ;  by  which  it  will  appear  that  the  only 
reduction  was  1  bottle  of  claret  and  5  of  Cape  wine, 
10  lbs.  of  meat,  and  10  lbs.  of  bread ;  at  tide  same 
time  it  is  to  be  noticed  that  Captain  Piontkowski  had 
a  separate  table  kept  for  him  whilst  at  Longwood: 
this  reduction  in  the  wine  was  in  conformity  to  Count 
Montholon's  own  previous  computation.  It  will  be 
observed  in  this  scale  that  an  increase  took  place  in 
some  articles  (on  its  being  so  required  through  the 
purveyor)  on  the  21st  November;  the  expense  for 

VOL.  III.  K 


130  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXUI. 

vegetables  was  increased  from  20^.  to  26^.  daily,  and 
the  purveyor  was  informed  by  me  that,  when  the 
amount  for  confectionery  was  not  expended,  tiie  diflfer- 
ence  was  to  be  added  to  that  for  vegetables. 

"  Count  Las  Cases,  who  had  been  separated  from 
Longwood,  was,  as  well  as  his  son,  supplied  with  pro- 
visions, wines,  and  all  other  articles  necessary  for  the 
-table,  from  25th  to  30th  November,  from  the  Go- 
vernor's own  house ;  and  upon  their  removal  to  James 
Town,  preparatory  to  their  embarkation  for  the  Cape, 
they  were  supplied  from  a  board  and  lodging  house 
(Mr.  Solomon's)  until  the  30th  December,  when  they 
sailed.  The  additional  expense  incurred  on  account 
of  these  two  persons  from  the  25th  November  till 
their  embarkation,  including  their  sea  stock  to  the 
Cape,  amounted  to  240^.  lis.  3d. 

"  No  diminution  whatever  was  made  in  the  sup- 
plies of  the  establishment  in  consequence  of  the  de^ 
parture  of  Count  Las  Cases  and  son.  Island  beef 
exclusively  commenced  to  be  issued,  through  the  con- 
tractor employed  by  the  commissariat  (Mr.  Barker), 
on  the  27th  May,  1817,  and  has  been  thus  supplied 
ever  since.*     Schedule  C  will  be  found  to  contain  the 

*  The  following  note  was  sent  from  Major  Gorrequer  to  Captain  Blakeneyv 
the  orderly  officer,  dated  Decemlwr  31,  1817 :— "  Mr.  O'Meara  having 
yesterday  shown  the  Governor  a  sample  of  bread  sent  to  Longwood  for  the 
use  of  General  Bonaparte,  stating  at  the  same  time  it  had  been  occasionally 
bad  of  late,  I  inquired  the  reason  of  its  being  so.  I  am  now  informed  by 
Mr.  Carr,  the  baker,  who  came  up  here  himself  this  morning  to  explain  the 
circumstance,  that  the  cause  of  the  bread  being  less  pleasant  to  the  taste 
within  a  few  days  past  proceeds  from  the  necessity  he  has  been  under  of 
using  leaven  instead  o(  yeast  during  the  Christmas  holidays,  a  period  when 
the  breweries  are  shut  up,  and  an  evil  irremediable  for  a  few  days.  He  at 
the  same  time  brought  up  a  sample  of  rolls  made  of  yeast,  which  is  now 
again  procurable,  and  they  appeared  perfectly  well  made,  and  free  from 
the  leaven  acidity  of  the  sample  of  yesterday.  Mr.  Carr  has  received  the 
strictest  injunctions  to  spare  no  pains  to  have  a  constant  supply  of  the 
best  flour  for  the  use  of  Longwood,  and  he  seems  very  much  inclined  to 
use  every  means  in  his  power  to  furnish  the  best  quality  of  breed.** 


March,  1819.  THE  SUPPLIES.  131 

rate  of  supplies  on  the  29th  May,  1817,  also  the 
increase  of  several  articles,  viz,  bread,  on  a  request 
made  by  the  *  maitre-d*h6tel,'  Cipriani,  to  the  Go- 
vernor; an  additional  amount  charged  for  fish,  in 
consequence  of  the  price  having  risen ;  and,  on  the 
representation  of  Mr.  O'Meara  that  a  greater  quantity 
of  fael  would  be  necessary  in  consequence  of  the 
rainy  season  having  set  in,  it  was  increased  from 
3i  cwt.  to  7  cwt.  of  coals  daily  throughout  the  year, 
and  the  wood  was  also  increased  from  3  cwt.  to  6  cwt., 
because  an  aversion  was  stated  on  the  part  of  General 
Bonaparte  to  coals,  and  that  they  were  in  consequence 
only  used  for  preparing  the  hot-baths  (which  all  the 
families  are  in  the  constant  habit  of  using  at  Long- 
wood). 

**  Count  Montholon  having  requested  that  less 
champagne  should  be  sent,  and  that  the  difference 
might  be  added  to  the  quantity  of  vin  de  Grave,  this 
last  was  immediately  doubled,  but  no  decrease  took 
place  in  the  quantity  of  champagne. 

"  The  assertion  of  Mr.  O'Meara,  in  his  scale  sub- 
joined, that  the  claret  was  reduced  to  6  bottles 
daily,  and  the  fowls  to  5  in  number,  on  the  departure 
of  Count  Las  Cases,  is  perfectly  groundless. 

**  In  consequence  of  a  memorandum  in  Mr.  O'Meara's 
handwriting  presented  to  the  purveyor  by  the  *  maitre- 
dTiotel,'  dated  3rd  August,  requiring  an  increase  of 
*  rotis,*  turkeys,  geese,  and  pigeons  were  accordingly 
immediately  directed  to  be  added  to  the  usual  quan- 
tity, as  well  as  flour,  oil,  and  some  other  minor  articles 
(on  the  *  maitre-d*hoters '  application),  as  will  be  seen 
1^  the  above  schedule. 

"  Scale  D  is  the  list  of  supplies  as  furnished  on  the 
4th  August,  1817,  which  continued  without  alteration 

K  2 


132  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.         Chap.  XXIU. 

till  the  month  of  December  following,  when,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  Governor's  becoming  informed  by  Ci- 
priani that  General  Montholon*s  family  lived  sepa- 
rately, and  that  General  Gourgaud  also  did  the  same 
(instead  of  dining  at  General  Bonaparte's  table,  as 
had  been  the  custom  before),  a  bottle  of  claret  was 
added,  and  an  increase  took  place  in  some  other 
articles. 

**  Schedule  E  contains  the  rate  at  which  the  sup- 
plies were  provided  on  the  27th  January,  1818,  which 
continued  without  alteration  during  the  whole  of  the 
period  the  purveyorship  remained  in  the  hands  of 
Mr.  Balcombe,  viz.  to  31st  March,  1818. 

"  The  annexed  certificate  of  the  oflScer  of  the 
commissariat  department  who  was  charged  with  the 
issue  of  French  wines  sent  by  the  English  Govern- 
ment for  General  Bonaparte's  establishment,  will 
prove  that  the  quantity  of  claret  supplied  at  Long- 
wood  by  him  has  always  exceeded,  during  the  time 
adverted  to  by  Mr.  O'Meara,  the  rate  of  8  bottles 
per  day;  and  that  for  two-thirds  of  that  time,  viz. 
from  the  1st  October,  1816,  to  30th  June,  1817,  it 
has  not  been  less  than  9  ^  bottles,  for  the  delivery 
of  which  the  *  maitre-d'hotel's '  receipts  were  regu- 
larly given  to  him ;  and  that  Champagne  and  vin  de 
Grave  have  been  furnished  at  the  rate  of  li  bottles 
daily  for  the  period  Mr.  O'Meara  speaks  of. 

**  The  Madeira,  Constantia,  TeneriflFe,  and  Cape 
wines  have  been  regularly  supplied,  according  to  tie 
rates  stated  in  the  schedules,  by  the  purveyor  (as  will 
appear  by  the  accounts  sent  home),  for  the  delivery 
of  which  the  receipts  of  the  *  maitre-d'hotel '  were 
invariably  taken.  Burgundy  imported  from  Rio  de 
Janeiro,  and  some  of  the  choicest  Constantia  (white 


March,  1819.  THE  SUPPLIES.  133 

and  red),  procured  at  the  Cape,  were  sent  to  Long- 
wood,  exclusively  of  the  wines  mentioned  in  the 
schedules.^ 

"  The  purveyor's  accounts,  specifying  all  the  sup- 
plies ftirnished,  were  always  certified  as  received 
(before  payment  was  made  to  him)  by  Count  Mon- 
tiiolon.  If  in  any  case  the  supplies  have  been  below 
the  quantity  stated  in  the  schedules,  it  could  not  be 
avoided,  the  articles  not  being  procurable,  and  this 
could  have  been  but  very  rarely  indeed.  I  have 
invariably  and  repeatedly  desired  of  the  purveyor  on 
no  account  whatever  to  afford  the  least  ground  of 
complaint  in  this  particular.  Fruit  and  fish  are 
articles  which  were  not  always  to  be  obtained  to  the 
extent  required, 

**  After  Captain  Piontkowski,  Count  Las  Cases  and 
his  son,  three  French  domestics,  and  several  English 
servants  were  removed,  in  October  and  November, 
1816,  there  only  remained  General  Bonaparte,  three 
officers,  two  ladies,  and  a  few  children  (some  of  them 
infimts)  to  be  supplied,  exclusively  of  the  domestics ; 
and  one  of  these  three  officers.  General  Gourgaud,  left 
Longwood  in  February,  1818. 

**  Macaroni,  vermicelli,  and  dried  haricots,  liqueurs, 
foreign  cheeses  of  superior  description,  Mocha  coffee,* 

*  Extract  of  a  note  from  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  to  the  orderly  o£Scer  at  Long- 
wood,  dated  August  27,  1817 :— "  I  have  sent  also  a  case  of  three  dozen 
burgundy,  received  as  a  sample  from  Rio  Janeiro;  and  I  have  given  orders 
also  for  some  flour,  received  on  my  own  account  from  Rio  Janeiro,  to  be 
given  to  Mr.  Balcombe  for  the  use  of  the  establishment" 

Another  case  of  three  dozen  burgundy  was  afterwards  sent,  and  two 
casks  of  the  best  constantia.  The  Governor  repeatedly  provided  the  pur- 
veyor with  American  flour,  butter,  cheese,  and  other  articles,  out  of  his 
own  stores,  when  there  was  any  deficiency. 

*  Extract  of  a  note  from  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  to  the  orderly  officer,  dated 
August  27,  1817  : — "  The  bearer  will  deliver  a  bag  of  cofiee  sent  me  by 
Mr.  Farquhar,  Governor  of  the  Isle  of  France,  destined  particularly  for 


134  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXIII. 

&c.,  have  been  supplied,  which  are  not  noticed  in  the 
schedules. 

"  On  the  5th  March,  1818,  subsequent  to  the  death 
of  Cipriani  and  departure  of  General  Grourgaud,  Count 
Montholon  informed  me  he  had  desired  the  purveyor 
to  send  a  lesser  proportion  of  Teneriflfe  wine,  in  con- 
sequence of  the  death  of  the  fonner ;  and  stated  his 
intention  also  of  making  a  reduction  in  the  other 
wines,  the  meat,  and  the  bread,  as  there  was  a  greater 
quantity  of  these  last  articles  provided  than  was 
necessary  for  the  actual  number  of  persons  in  the 
establishment.  I  said  the  Governor  wished  the  house 
to  be  amply  provided,  though  at  the  same  time  he 
was  desirous  that  waste  should  be  avoided  as  much  as 
possible,  which  there  was  reason  to  suppose  had  taken 
place,  from  upwards  of  20  lbs.  of  wax  candles  having 
been  found  in  possession  of  one  of  the  English  soldier 
servants  employed  at  the  house.  The  Count  spoke 
much  about  the  waste  occasioned  by  Greneral  Gour- 
gaud's  mode  of  living,  and  said  that  their  eating  sepa- 
rately had  certainly  caused  an  increased  consumption, 
but  that  now  there  would  be  one  table  less  to  provide 
for ;  and  he  added,  *  Soyez  sur  que  nous  sommes  tres 
bien  persuades  de  la  bonne  volonte  du  Gouvemeur.* 
On  my  showing  him  copy  of  the  schedule  C,  he  said 
there  was,  it  appeared,  an  increase  in  several  articles, 
which  the  late  *  ma!tre-d*h6tel '  (Cipriani)  had  not 
mentioned  to  him,  and  which  he  was  not  before  aware 
of,  in  consequence  of  not  having  for  a  long  time  past 
examined  his  books,  on  account  of  his  (the  *  maitre- 
d'hotel's')   illness  and  death;  but  he  promised  to 

Oeneral  Bonaparte's  use.  It  is  the  whole  of  what  I  received,  and  is  of  a 
quality  that  cannot  he  again  readily  procured.  Another  bag  is  sent  up  of 
the  best  quality  that  can  be  generally  had — recommended  also  as  being 
Superior,  but  not  so  perfect  as  the  other." 


Maboh,  1819.  THE  SUPPLIES.  135 

examine  the  list  which  I  left  with  him,  and  to  make 
such  alterations  as  the  reduction  in  the  numbers  of 
the  establishment  would  permit. 

"  On  the  21st  March  I  again  saw  Count  Montholon, 
who  in  the  course  of  conversation  respecting  the  sup- 
plies for  the  establishment  said,  ^Nous  n'avons  aucun 
reproche  k  fiwre  au  Qouvemeur;  nous  ne  nous 
plaignions  de  rien,  et  nous  ayons  abondance  de  tout 
ce  qui  est  necessaire;'  that  he  found  since  he  last 
saw  me,  8  bottles  of  claret  daily  would  be  sufficient, 
and  1  of  vin  de  Grave ;  that  from  10  to  15  bottles  of 
Champagne  monthly  would  be  quite  ample;  one  of 
Constantia  daily  was  more  than  was  used  (particularly 
as  they  had  received  360  bottles  of  Constantia  the 
preceding  year,  besides  what  was  regularly  furnished 
by  the  purveyor);  that  they  always  had  an  ample 
provision  of  Champagne,  even  at  times  too  much,  for 
at  the  very  moment  he  was  speaking  there  were  no 
less  than  3  cases  in  their  possession  untouched,  and 
more  than  a  case  of  vin  de  Grave ;  that  sending  them 
more  of  those  wines  thiui  they  used  was  ^  inutile,'  as 
they  would  be  obliged  to  say,  *  You  give  us  too  great  a 
quantity,'  and  it  was  therefore  better  they  should  apply 
for  it  when  wanted.  *  Presque  toutes  les  fois, '  continued 
he,  *  que  Mr.  Darling  vient  ici,  il  me  demande,  Avez 
vous  assez  de  vin  ?  vous  manque-t-il  quelque  chose  ?  et 
je  lui  reponds  toiyours,  que  nous  ne  manquons  de  rien.' 

"  The  Count  said  he  had  found  much  feult  with 
Cipriani  for  allowing  1  bottle  of  claret  daily  to  the 
cook,  it  never  having  been  their  intention  that  wine 
should  have  been  used  but  *  pour  la  table  des  maitres,' 
and  he  had  immediately  ordered  it  to  be  discontinued ; 
that,  notwithstanding  the  good  opinion  he  had  of 
Cipriani,  he  found  tiiere  had  been  a  good  deal  of 
*  coulage '  (leakage)  under  him. 


136  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXIII. 

"  Count  Montholon  then  mentioned  to  me  all  the 
reductions  he  thought  might  be  made  in  the  supplies, 
and  I  took  a  memorandum  of  them  under  his  own  eye. 

"  The  *  Emperor '  had  observed  to  him,  he  added, 
that  although  they  thought  proper  to  keep  separate 
tables  that  was  not  a  reason  why  the  British  Grovem- 
ment  should  be  burthened  with  any  greater  expense  in 
consequence.  The  Count  again  acknowledged  his 
sense  of  the  attention  the  Governor  had  paid  to  their 
being  well  provided. 

**I  mentioned  to  Count  Montholon  that  the  pur- 
veyorship  was  to  be  conducted  under  the  care  of  Mr. 
Ibbetson  from  the  1st  of  April  ensuing,  as  Mr.  Bal- 
combe's  situation  of  purveyor  would  cease  on  the  31st 
of  March.  He  replied,  that  was  a  subject  in  which 
they  of  course  took  no  interest ;  it  signified  nothing 
to  them  whether  this  or  that  person  was  employed  as 
*  foumisseur  ;*  it  was  naturally  a  matter  for  the  Go- 
vernor's determination. 

"The  preceding  details  on  the  supplies  provided 
for  the  establishment  at  Longwood  from  September, 
1816,  to  December,  1817,  will  generally  refute  Mr. 
O'Meara's  allegations  on  that  subject. 

"  Mr.  O'Meara  states,  that  *an  order  was  given  in 
writing  by  the  Governor,  directing  Mr.  Breame,  the 
Company's  farmer,  to  supply  the  French  monthly 
with  a  stipulated  quantity  of  veal  at  their  own  ex- 
pense;* the  demand  was  made  through  him.  He 
then  proceeds  to  assert  *  that  Mr.  Balcombe,  the  pur- 
veyor, having  been  rigidly  restricted  by  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe  to  a  certain  price  in  the  purchase  of  sheep,  the 
mutton  was  frequently  of  a  very  bad  quality,  as  no 
good  sheep  were  to  be  obtained  from  tiie  farmers  at 
the  prices  fixed  by  him,  although  good  ones  were  to 
be  purchased  at  a  considerable  increase.     Similar 


Mabch,  1819.  THE  SUPPLIES.  137 

restrictions  in  the  price  of  poultry  also  frequently  pre- 
vented any  of  good  quality  from  arriving  at  Longwood/ 

"  There  never  was  any  permanently  fixed  price  for 
the  sheep,  as  will  be  apparent  by  reference  to  the 
purveyor's  accounts  transmitted  to  England. 

"From  the  1st  July  up  to  the  23rd  October,  1816, 
the  price  of  sheep  charged  by  the  purveyor  never 
exceeded,  but  in  the  instance  of  a  single  one  (which 
cost  21.  10^.),  21.  5s. ;  ^  and  when  his  supplies  failed 
him,  he  was  allowed  to  receive  from  the  East  India 
Company's  stockyard  good  stall-fed  sheep  at  that  rate. 

"From  the  24th  October  to  the  5th  December  he 
continued  receiving  sheep  as  he  required  them  from 
the  Company's  stockyard,  but  at  the  rate  of  21.  lOs.j 
the  price  having  been  increased  from  the  former  date 
5s.  a-head. 

"  The  number  of  sheep  in  the  Company's  stockyard 
being  at  this  time  very  much  reduced,  and  it  becoming 
necessary  to  reserve  a  sufficient  supply  for  the  use  of 
the  hospitals,  Mr.  Balcombe  was  desired  to  endeavour 
to  procure  them  elsewhere,^  and  on  the  3rd  of  Decem- 
ber he  reported  to  the  Governor  that  the  island 
farmers  asked  21. 15s. ;  the  Gk>vemor  (now  referred  to 
for  the  first  time  with  respect  to  the  price)  did  not  see 
any  motive,  because  the  purveyor  had  not  made  a 
previous  arrangement  for  a  regular  supply  from  the 
Cape,  that  any  encouragement  should  be  held  out  to 
increase  the  market  price  on  the  island,  and  he  there- 

'  Dnring  the  months  of  Februsuy  and  March,  1816,  «.  e.  previous  to  the 
arrival  of  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  the  average  price  of  island  sheep  was  21. 15«. 

•  Note  from  Mr.  Balcombe  to  Major  Gorrequer,  dated  December  3, 
1817 : — **  I  have  supplied  all  the  sheep  I  had  to  the  Longwood  establish* 
ment  at  506.  each,  and  have  made  application  to  the  farmers  to  know 
their  prices,  and  find  the  lowest  will  be  55«.  each.  I  Hhall  be  obliged  to 
you  to  let  me  know  as  early  as  possible  whether  his  Excellency  the 
Governor  wiU  permit  me  to  purchase  them  from  the  farmers  at  that  rate." 


138  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXIH. 

fore  directed  that  the  purveyor  should  obtain  them 
from  the  Company's  farm  at  the  usual  rate. 

^*From  the  5th  December  to  the  11th  February, 
1817,  the  purveyor  was  consequently  supplied  from 
the  Company's  farm  at  the  rate  of  21.  10^ ;  the  sheep 
from  this  farm,  which  is  the  largest  on  the  island, 
being  equal  to  those  bred  on  other  farms. 

"  On  the  9  th  of  February  the  purveyor  was  directed 
to  establish  a  regular  stockyard,'  for  the  sole  purpose 
of  stall-feeding  cattle  and  sheep  for  the  Longwood 
establishment;  he  commenced  forming  his  flock  of 
sheep  from  those  he  had  received  from  the  Company's 
farm,  but,  not  being  able  to  procure  a  suflSciency  from 
thence,  he  began  on  the  12th  of  February  purchasing 
them  from  the  island  fiumers  at  the  rate  of  3/.  each, 
and  furnished  his  stockyard  partly  from  the  island 
farmers,  partly  from  the  Company's  &rm,  and  sheep 
imported  into  the  island.* 

**  The  sheep  purchased  at  the  lowest  prices,  it  how- 
ever will  be  found  by  reference  to  the  purveyor's 
accounts,  were  those  which  weighed  most. 

"  The  expense  of  the  sheep  furnished  from  the  pur- 
veyor's stockyard  from  the  9  th  of  February  to  the 
30th  June,  1817,  was  found  so  great,  as  will  appear 
by  the  letter  marked  F,  that  from  that  date  they  were 
directed  to  be  exclusively  supplied  from  the  East 
India  Company's  stockyard ;  and  the  average  price  of 
them  (Cape  breed)  has  ever  since  been  from  1/.  12^.  Sd. 
to  21.  14*.  Qd.^  including  keep  and  fattening.  From 
that  period  the  best  mutton  has  been  invariably  sup- 


*  Extract  from  a  note  from  Major  Gbrrequer  to  Mr.  Balcombe,  dated 
January  10,  1817 : — "  A  complaint  has  been  made,  through  the  orderly 
ofiBccr  at  Longwood,  of  the  quality  of  the  mutton  sent  np  these  two  or 
three  last  days.  Will  you  be  good  enough  to  give  the  strictest  directions 
that  it  is  sent  up  of  the  best  quality  P" 


Mabch,  1810.  PURVEYOR'S  CHARGES.  139 

plied,  and  no  complaints  ou  that  head  have  been  made 
at  Longwood.  On  the  contrary,  acknowledgments 
have  been  received  of  their  satisfaction. 

"The  purveyor  was  always  permitted  to  charge 
5*.  6d.  for  fowls,  which  was  6d.  more  than  the  current 
price,  in  order  that  there  should  be  no  complaint  at 
Longwood,  and  also  to  indemnify  himself  for  such  as 
might  die ;  but  as  the  fowls  were,  notwithstanding,  dis- 
approved of,  and  that  [as  ?]  one  of  the  French  servants 
at  Longwood  had  oflfered  to  furnish  them  of  a  better 
sort,  he  (the  French  servant)  was  allowed  6^.  apiece 
for  them ;  and  a  poultry-house  was  built  for  him  at 
the  public  expense,  to  enable  him  to  rear  them,  which 
he  continued  to  do  for  some  months.  The  market- 
price  was  at  this  time  only  5«.  The  price  charged  by 
the  purveyor  for  all  sorts  of  poultry  was  always  the 
highest  paid  in  the  island.  The  steward  of  Plantation 
House,  where  the  greatest  consumption  takes  place, 
was  always  found  (whenever  questioned  on  the  price 
of  poultry)  to  pay  less  than  the  purveyor;  since  the 
purveyorship  was  put  into  other  hands  the  price  of 
fowls  has  never  exceeded  5^.,  and  those  of  approved 
description. 

"  The  highest  price  was  always  paid  to  ensure  good 
buteher's  meat  (t.  e.  island  beef  when  supplied).  The 
purveyor  had  tonnage  jq)propriated  to  him  for  the 
purpose  of  importing  cattle,  sheep,  poultry,  and  all 
other  kind  of  stock  and  provisions  by  every  Govern- 
ment vessel  which  went  to  the  Cape  or  other  places  for 
supplies,  and  which,  had  he  fully  availed  himself  of, 
would  have  enabled  him  to  obtain  all  those  articles  at 
perhaps  one-third,  or  at  least  one-hal^  of  the  island 
prices. 

"  As  a  proof  how  little  restricted  the  purveyor  was 
in  the  price  of  the  supplies  for  Longwood,  notwith- 


140 


CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON. 


Chap.  XXIU. 


standing  a  salary  of  500/.  per  annum,  and  the  means 
aflforded  him  of  importing  free  of  freight,  the  annexed 
paper*  will  show  that  he  charged  the  retail  price 
upon  articles  which  ought  to  have  been  procured  at  a 
price  much  below  that  of  the  dealers.  But  would  it 
have  been  just  towards  the  inhabitants,  the  navy  and 
military,  ships  taking  in  refreshments,  and  strangers 
arriving  at  the  island,  that  the  purveyor  should  have 
been  left  to  his  own  discretion  to  pay  any  price  for 
articles  of  consumption,  merely  because  they  were  for 
General  Bonaparte's  establishment,  and  that  he  knew 
Government  would  repay  him,  thus  enhancing  the 
market  prices  to  the  prejudice  of  all  others  ?  And  was 
it  not  proper  that  before  he  increased  his  charges  he 
should  have  made  it  appear  that  a  necessity  for  it 
existed  ? 

**  Previous  to  the  arrival  of  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  a 
tariflf  of  prices  had  been  established  for  all  sorts  of 
fresh  provisions  on  the  island,  but  since  the  increase 
of  population  it  has  not  been  enforced,  and  the  compe- 


Comparative  Rate  of  Prices. 


Articles. 


Madeira  -----  per  bottle 

Constantia       -      -      -      -  do. 

Teneriffe  -----  do. 

Cape  wine        -      -      -      -  do. 

Bum-      -----  do. 

Cape  butter      -      -      -      -  per  lb. 

Lard-      -----  do. 

Vinegar    -----  per  bottle 

Rice  ------  per  cwt. 

Coffee       -----  do. 

Flour        -----  do. 

Bait  ------  per  gallon 

Pepper      -----  per  lb. 

Capers      -----  per  pint 

Soap         -----  per  lb. 

Loaf  sugar       -      -      -      -  do. 


Prime  Cotfc 
At  the  Gape 
or  elsewhere, 


8.  d, 

3  4 

6  0 

2  3 

1  3 

2  6 
1  3 


16  0 
0  10 
0    5 

0     8 

0  9 

1  9 


Prices. 


8.    d, 

5  10 
10     6 

4  2 

2  6 

2/6  to  3/ 

2  0 

2  6 
1/4/0 

3  0 

2  0 

2  0 

6  0 

2  6 


Purveyor*! 
Prkee. 


8.  d. 

5  10 
10  6 

4  2 

2  6 

6  6 
2  6 
1  6 
1  6 

1/10/0 

1  6 


2     6 


Mabch,  1819.  QUALITY  OF  PROVISIONS.  141 

tition  in  the  market  has  generally  regulated  the  price  ; 
how  much,  therefore,  under  such  circumstances,  could 
not  the  purveyor  have  influenced  those  prices,  by 
giving  higher  ones  to  the  prejudice  of  the  public ! 

"  In  saying  that  there  was  a  stop  put  to  fresh  butter 
for  Longwood  by  the  Governor's  purchasing  the  cows 
that  formerly  supplied  the  milk  that  made  it,  Mr. 
O'Meara  is  in  contradiction  with  his  own  scale,  as  he 
therein  mentions  fresh  butter  as  one  of  the  items.  The 
fact  is,  that  it  was  for  a  long  time  very  rarely  to  be 
had,  and  when  procured  very  poor,  and  good  Cape 
butter  very  superior.  The  farmer  who  contracts  for 
the  beef,  forage,  &c.,  at  last  engaged  to  make  it  pur- 
posely for  General  Btonaparte,  who  has  ever  since  been 
constantly  supplied  with  the  best.  Half  a  pound 
per  day  was  the  quantity  first  ordered  to  be  sent  to 
Longwood,  but  the  * maitre-d'hStel'  said  it  was  too 
much,  and  he  himself  fixed  the  quantity  required  to  be 
furnished ;  the  price  is  7^.  6d.  per  lb. 

"  With  regard  to  Mr.  O'Meara's  assertion,  that  until 
October^  1817,  when  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  caused  island 
bullocks  to  be  slaughtered,  the  meat  was  almost  in- 
variably of  a  bad  quality,  &c.,  and  that  *  from  being 
carted  up  in  the  sun  it  was  often,  on  its  arrival,  stink- 
ing, and  unfit  for  human  use,'  I  shall  quote  what 
Mr.  O'Meara  said  a  month  previous  (viz.  on  the  2nd 
September,  1817)  in  my  presence  to  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe  upon  this  subject,  in  consequence  of  the  latter 
adverting  to  what  Santini  had  asserted  in  his  pamphlet 
on  that  point : — 

"  *That  he  (Mr.  O'Meara)  had  in  three  or  four 
instances  sent  back  meat  which  was  fly-blown,  in  con- 
sequence of  being  brought  up  not  properly  sheltered 
from  the  rays  of  the  sun ;  it  had,  however,  come  up 
in  that  state  but  a  very  few  times,  as  it  was  afterwards 


142  CAPTIVITY  OF  ITAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXIU. 

properly  covered  over ;  that  Santini  would  of  course 
exaggerate  the  thing  as  much  as  possible.' 

"  The  Governor  having  asked  him  if,  on  the  occa- 
sion of  his  sending  the  meat  back,  the  same  quantity 
had  always  been  replaced,  he  answered,  Yes,  certainly, 
he  believed,  but  perhaps  not  in  every  case  the  same 
day.  He  further  stated  that  the  meat  sent  up  for  a 
long  time  past  had  been  extremely  good. 

"  Mr.  O'Meara  declares,  *  that  several  articles  indis- 
pensable to  the  table  were  frequently  of  bad  quality, 
in  consequence  of  Sir  Hudson  Lowe's  having  com- 
pelled the  purveyor  to  purchase  damaged  and  musty 
provisions  at  the  Company's  stores,'  &c.  The  pur- 
veyor was  in  the  habit  of  purchasing  from  the  stores 
before  the  arrival  of  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  and  it  was 
continued  because  the  articles  from  thence  were 
equally  good  as  in  the  shops,  and  at  a  lower  rate ; 
there  were  very  few  articles  of  a  perishable  nature  in 
the  stores ;  and  if  the  purveyor  had  ever  received 
anything  of  a  bad  quality  from  thence,  he  would  have 
been  acting  in  direct  opposition  to  the  Governor's 
directions,  which  always  were  to  provide  the  be^  of 
everything.  In  some  cases,  however,  where  cheese 
was  represented  by  him  not  so  fresh  in  the  stores  as 
could  be  procured  in  the  town,  he  was  desired  to 
purchase  them  [it  ?]  there. 

*^  Mr.  O'Meara  also  asserts,  that  *  any  savings  made 
by  the  French  in  articles  allowed  by  the  Governor 
and  not  consumed  by  them  (the  English  confectionery 
for  example)  were  ordered  by  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  to 
be  credited  to  the  account  of  Government,  instead  of 
allowing  the  French  to  balance  by  means  of  them  (as 
they  desired)  any  increase  of  consumption  in  other 
articles.'  So  far  the  reverse,  on  a  representation 
being  made  that  the  allowance  of  confectionery  was 


Mabgh,  1819.  HOUSEHOLD  EXPENSES.  143 

more  than  requisite,  the  surplus  was,  and  has  ever 
since  been,  appropriated  to  a  further  supply  of  vege- 
tables as  desired,  in  addition  to  what  was  before 
provided  as  per  schedule.* 

"The  following  statement  of  Mr.  O'Meara,  viz. 
that  ^on  the  8th  of  April,  1818,  Sir  Hudson  Lowe 
required  that  the  French  should  not  draw  more  than 
100/.  per  month  for  the  extra  expenses  of  the  esta- 
blishment and  of  their  private  femiUes,  but  that,  when 
Madame  Bertrand  or  the  others  wanted  to  make  pur- 
chasesy  she  or  they  should  apply  through  the  orderly 
officer  specifying  them,  and  then  that  payment  should 
be  made  to  the  venders  by  "  bons  "  drawn  upon  Major 
Gorrequer,  and  countersigned  by  the  orderly  officer  at 
Longwood,'  I  shall  refute  by  giving  the  following 
relation  of  what  passed  in  conversation  between  Count 
Bertrand  and  myself  on  the  Ist,  7th,  and  8th  April, 
viz.: — 

"On  the  1st  of  April,  1818,  Count  Bertrand  having 
requested  to  see  me  at  Longwood,  he  delivered  to 
me  the  paper  annexed,^  containing  the  statement  of 
certain  sums  they  would  require,  he  said,  to  draw  for 
monthly,  by  bills  on  England,  for  the  use  of  the  esta- 
blishment, the  families,  and  paying  the  wages  of  the 

^  Memorandum  sent  to  the  purveyor  by  Major  Qorreqner,  Norember  21, 
1816 :— "  If  the  whole  allowance  for  confectionery  is  not  nsed,  the  saving 
under  that  head  may  be  laid  out  in  vegetables,  if  so  required." 

•  Repartition  mensuelle  de  fonds  pour  les  besoins  de  Longwood : — 

I*.  Au  Signer  Marchand,  pour  la  toilette  de  rEmpcreur  .  1,000  fr. 

2".  Pour  lea  besoins  de  la  maison,  au  Signor  Pierron  .    .  8,475 

3*».  Au  Comte  Bertrand 2,000 

4«.  Au  Comte  Montholon 2,000 

5*.  Aux  domestiques  pour  gages 1,525 

Total fr.  10,000 

S'il  Be  pr^scntait  quelques  d^pensea  extraordinaiies,  on  y  pourvoirait 
par  une  repartition  ad  hoc. 


144  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.         Chap.  XXin. 

domestics,  &c.,  and  begged  Mr.  Ibbetson  might  be 
allowed  to  cash  bills  to  that  amount,  and  pay  them 
the  sums  as  therein  specified. 

"  On  the  7th  of  April  I  again  waited  on  Count 
Bertrand,  and  informed  him  the  Governor  would  give 
authority  for  the  payment  of  the  following  items  of 
the  ^Repartition  mensueUe^'  viz. — To  Marchand,  for 
the  toilette,  1000  francs ;  to  Count  Bertrand,  2000 
francs ;  to  Count  Montholon,  2000  francs ;  and  for 
the  domestics*  wages,  1525  francs ;  but  that  he  consi- 
dered 2400  francs  monthly  as  the  utmost  he  would  be 
justified  in  continuing  the  payment  of  on  account  of 
the  house  expenses  (and  that  only  when  the  case  of  an 
actual  expenditure  was  made  out)^  as  the  supplies  were 
at  present  so  amply  furnished.*  If  more  was  at  any 
time  wanting,  a  demand  *  ad  hoc '  should  be  made. 
That  his  objection,  however,  was  not  so  much  to  the 
amount  as  to  the  form  of  payment ;  he  did  not  wish  so 
much  money  to  be  paid  in  hand;  all  bills  for  the 
house  or  private  expenses  might  be  paid,  to  the  amount 
specified  in  the  monthly  'repartition,'  by  a  check  on 
Mr.  Ibbetson.  The  Governor  suggested  this  as  the 
best  mode  to  pursue,  as  well  for  private  convenience 
as  to  obviate  diflBculty,  both  on  his  part  and  that  of 
Government,  whose  instructions  would  not  bear  the 
Governor  out  in  cash  payments,  except  under  such 
forms.  I  then  handed  him  a  printed  check-book  to  be 
used  in  giving  orders  (or  *bons ')  on  Mr.  Ibbetson. 

"On  the  8th  of  April  Count  Bertrand  again  re- 
quested to  see  me  at  Longwood,  and,  having  called 
upon  him,  he  showed  me  some  papers  particularising 
various  incidental  expenses  they  were  obliged  to  incur, 
and  strongly  urged  that  the  amount  of  the  monthly 
repartition  might  be  paid  them  in  cash  by  Mr.  Ibbet- 
son, General  Bonaparte  having  expressed  his  most 


Mabch,  1819.  HOUSEHOLD  EXPENSES.  145 

decided  determination  not  to  admit  the  checks.  I 
again  repeated  that  it  was  not  so  much  against  the 
amonnt  of  the  sums  demanded  monthly  that  the  Go- 
vernor had  any  objection,  as  against  payments  in  cash 
generally,  where  he  had  not  the  means  of  ascertaining 
the  mode  in  which  it  was  expended. 

^'  After  these  conversations  with  Count  Bertrand, 
Mr.  Ibbetson  was  authorised  by  the  Governor  to  pay 
the  monthly  rSpartition^  in  consequence  of  the  expla- 
nation given  by  Count  Bertrand  of  the  intended  ap- 
propriation of  the  diflferent  sums  therein  mentioned, 
and  the  difficulty  which  he  represented  of  their  dis- 
charging in  all  cases  their  bills  by  ^bons;'  and  Mr. 
Ibbetson,  on  receiving  drafts  upon  a  house  in  London 
for  the  amount  of  the  monthly  rSpartitioUj  paid  the 
sums  therein  specified  to  the  persons  indicated. 

"  Mr.  O'Meara's  assertion  that  100/.  was  all  that 
Sir  Hudson  Lowe  would  allow  to  be  drawn  for  the 
eatra  ea^penses  of  the  establishment  and  of  their  private 
families^  when  the  monthly  repartition  submitted  and 
authorised  to  be  paid  after  the  conversation  with 
Count  Bertrand  on  the  8th  of  April  was  10,000  francs, 
or  416/.  13s.  4d.,  is  just  as  correct  as  the  other  as- 
sertion which  follows  it,  viz.,  if  Madame  Bertrand, 
&c.,  wanted  to  make  purchases,  that  payment  should 
be  made  to  the  venders  by  ^  bons '  drawn  upon  Major 
Qorrequer,  when  it  is  notorious  I  never  had  a  fraction 
of  public  money  in  my  hands  since  I  came  to  this 
island,  nor  of  money  of  the  establishment  at  Long- 
wood  in  my  possession  or  under  my  charge,  the  pur- 
veyor having  been  the  only  person  who  transacted 
their  pecuniary  concerns. 

"  In  the  conversation  I  had  with  Count  Bertrand  on 
the  8th  of  April,  he  made  the  following  remark : — 

"  *  L'Empereur  n'a    qu'a  parler  pour   avoir  des 

VOL.  III.  L 


146  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.         Chap.  XXUI. 

millions ;  il  n*a  qu'd  donner  un  morceau  de  papier  de 
cette  grandeur  la '  (showing  me  a  bit  of  paper  of  an 
inch  square)  ^  qui  yaudrait  un  million.* 

"  On  the  16ih  October,  1818,  Count  Montholon 
said  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  in  my  presence, — 

**  *  Je  me  plais  aussi  k  vous  rendre  justice  sur  un 
autre  sujet ;  c'est  a  dire,  Tapprovisionnement  de  la  mai- 
son,  oil  vous  avez  mis  toute  sorte  d'attentions,  et  qui 
est  arrive  a  un  degr6  de  rfegularite  que  nous  n'avions 
jamais  connu  auparavant.  Si  j'avais  d  declarer  mes 
sentiments  la  dessus,  je  dirais  que  le  service  de  la 
maison  n'a  jamais  ktk  aussi  bien  fait  comme  il  Test 
aujourd'hui,  et  Ta  6te  depuis  longtems;  que  nous 
n'avons  jamais  ete  aussi  abondamment  pourvus  que 
nous  le  sommes  actuellement  (meme  du  commence- 
ment), et  qu'il  ne  nous  reste  rien  d  d^sirer  sur  cet 
objet ;  qu'on  supplee  amplement  a  tons  nos  besoins,  et 
qu'il  n*y  a  eu  depuis  notre  arrivfee  que  pendant  quelque 
tems  seulement,  a  Toccasion  du  retranchement  que  par 
suite  des  ordres  de  votre  Gouvemement  vous  avez  kte 
oblig^  de  faire,  ou  nous  ayons  manqu^  de  quelque 
chose/^ 

"St  Helena,  ISIO.** 

*  "  Gbnkbal  Statement  of  the  Winbb  supplied  for  General  Bonaparte's 
Establishment,  from  October  1, 1816,  to  June  80,  1817. 

Quarter  commencing  October  1,  and  ending  December  31, 1816. 
Supplied  from  the  Government  stores :—  BotUet. 

Claret      -------»-     830 

Vin  de  grave  ----.-«-       72 

Champagne     --------       36 

Supplied  by  the  purveyor  : — 

Cape        ---------  2038 

Teneriffe          --------  552 

Madeira  ---------  104 

Constantia       --------  92 

Quarter 


Mabch,  1819.  THE  SUPPLIES.  147 

About  this  time  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  received  a  letter 
from  Lord  Charles  Somerset,  Gtovemor  of  the  Cape  of 
Good  Hope,  where  it  will  be  remembered  Las  Cases 

Quarter  from  Januaflry  1  to  March  31,  1817. 

Supplied  from  the  Government  stores : —  BotUct. 

Claret      ---------816' 

Port        ---------24 

Vin  de  grave  --------     120 

Champagne     --------       36 

Supplied  by  the  purveyor : — 

Cape       ---------   1620 

Teneriffe  --------540 

Madeira  ---------       90 

Constantia      --------       90 

Quarter  from  April  1  to  June  30, 1817. 

Supplied  from  the  Government  stores : — 

Claret      ---------732 

Vin  de  grave  -------     120 

Champagne     --------       36 

Supplied  by  the  purveyor : — 

Cape        ---------   1642 

Teneriffe         --------646 

Madeira  ---------       91 

Constantia      --------       91 

The  quantity  of  malt  liquors  supplied  for  the  period  below  mentioned 

was  1512  bottles,  viz. :—  ^^^ 

Quarter  from  October  1  to  December  31,  1816  -      -     604 

Ditto       January  1  to  March  31, 1817       -      -     492 

Ditto       April  1  to  June  80         -      -      -       -     300 

Ditto       July  1  to  September  80-       -      -      -     216 

1512 


Mr.  CMsaba'b  Soalb,  referred  to  in  the  foregoing  Obsebvations. 
Allowed  by  Government  from  October,  1816,  to  June,  1817 : — 

DaUy, 
Meat,  beef  and  mutton  included    -      -      -      -     82  lbs. 

Fowls,  in  number    -------       6 

Bread        ---------     66  lbs. 

Butter       ---------       5„ 

L   2  I^rd 


148  OAPnVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.         Chap.  XXIH. 

proceeded  on  quitting  St.  Helena,  and  in  it  he  thus 
spoke  of  the  Count  and  his  Journal : — 

"  The  whole  of  the  Count's  publication  (if  it  really 

Lard----- 2lb8. 

galadoil    ---------  3i  pints. 

Sugar-candy      --------  4  lbs. 

CoflFee        ---------  2„ 

Tea,  green        --------        J„ 

Do.  black         «-------        i„ 

Candles,  wax    --------  8„ 

Eggs,  in  number      -----      --30 

Common  sugar         -------  6  lbs. 

Cheese       ---------       1„ 

Vinegar     ---------       1  quart 

Flour         ---------       5  lbs. 

Salt  meat  ---------       6„ 

Firewood  ---------       8  cwt. 

Porter  or  ale     --------       3  bottles. 

Vegetables,  in  value        ------  20«. 

Fruit  ^-------10«. 

Confectionery    „----"""       ^' 

Per  FortnigU. 

Ducks,  in  number    -------       8 

Turkeys,       „  -------2 

Geese,  „         -------2 

Loaf  sugar        --------       2  loaves. 

Fine  rice    ---------         ibag. 

Hams  (not  to  exceed  14  lbs.  each),  in  number     -       2 

Qoala  ----------45  bushels. 

Fish,  in  value  --------     SOs. 

Milk,       „        --------     98*. 

Fresh  butter,  salt,  mustard,  pepper,  capers,  lamp- 
oil,  peas,  not  to  exceed  in  value       -       -      -       7Z. 

Wine^  daily.  Bottles. 
Champagne,  or  vin  de  grave   ------       1 

Madeira     ----------       1 

Constantia        ---------       1 

Claret        ----------       6 

K.B. — Since  the  departure  of  Las  Cases  and  PiontkowsM  the  meat  has 
been  reduced  to  72  lbs.  daily,  and  6  fowls  daily.  Cape  wine  for  the  ser- 
vants, at  the  rate  of  a  bottle  a  day,  was  also  given  by  Government,  not 
included  in  the  above  scale." 


March,  1819.  THE  SUPPLIES.  149 

be  his)  is  so  contemptible  a  performance,  that  I 
own  his  waitings  and  his  complaints,  as  &r  as  they 
involve  myself,  are  matters  perfectly  indifferent  to  me  : 
with  regard  to  his  assertions  respecting  the  Cape,  and 
his  treatment  here,  I  know  them  to  be  so  absolutely 
and  impudently  false,  that  it  is  not  too  much  to  pre- 
sume that  there  is  not  a  single  correct  statement  in 
the  whole  book." 


150  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXIV. 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 

RUMOURS  OF  PLANS  FOR  ESCAPE  —  DR.  VERLING'S  ACCOUNT  OP 
PROPOSAL  MADE  TO  HIM  BY  COUNT  MONTHOLON  —  NAPOLEON'S 

statement  of  grievances  to  mr.  rickeits  —  sir  hudson 
Lowe's  explanation  of  his  refusal  to  communicate  with 
count  bertrand  —  difficulties  thrown  in  the  way  of 
the  orderly  officer  —  departure  of  madame  montho- 
lon from  st.  helena  — bribe  offered  to  captain  ripley 
to  convey  a  letter  from  longwood  to  europe  —  depar- 
ture of  sir  george  bingham. 

In  the  course  of  the  month  the  Governor  received 
other  despatches  from  Lord  Bathurst,  in  one  of  which 
he  authorised  him  to  dispense  with  the  delivery  of 
regular  bulletins  of  Napoleon's  health  if  he  continued 
to  object  to  them.  They  were  in  future  only  to  be 
required  in  case  of  serious  indisposition.  In  another 
despatch  Lord  Bathurst  gave  instructions  that,  in 
the  event  of  Bonaparte  being  seen  by  some  British 
medical  officer  at  those  times  of  the  day  which  he  had 
pointed  out  in  a  former  letter,  it  would  not  be  neces- 
sary for  the  Governor  to  insist  on  the  admission  of 
the  orderly  officer,  provided  he  himself  received  from 
the  medical  officer,  each  morning  and  evening,  an 
assurance  that  Bonaparte  was  indisposed,  and  actually 
at  Longwood. 

These  despatches  were  accompanied  by  a  private 
letter  from  Mr.  Goulbum,  which  is  worth  quoting,  to 
show  how  much  apprehension  was  felt  in  England  as 
to  the  possibility  of  Napoleon's  escape.  He  said  that 
an  East  India  captain  had  reported  that  an  Ameri- 


Mabch,1819.    rumours  of  plans  for  escape.  151 

can  ship  had  pnt  into  St.  Helena  on  the  plea  of  dis- 
tress, and  that  on  examination  it  proved  that  she  was 
only  deficient  in  water,  which  deficiency  was  supposed 
to  have  been  purposely  created.  Mr.  Qoulburn  men- 
tioned that  the  captain  had  further  added  that  a  vessd 
had  been  for  some  time  observed  in  .the  oflSng  of  St. 
Helena,  the  sailing  of  which  had  proved  so  superior  to 
that  of  the  ships  of  war  on  the  station,  by  whom  she 
had  been  repeatedly  chased,  that  all  attempts  to  come 
up  with  her  had  failed,  and  that  the  same  vessel  had 
frequently,  after  being  chased,  re-appeared  in  her 
original  station,  and  continued  for  a  length  of  time  to 
hover  round  the  island.  From  this  description  it 
would  appear  as  if  the  captain  who  told  the  story  had 
seen  a  vision  of  the  Flying  Dutchman,  which  was  sup- 
posed to  frequent  those  seas;  but  the  Ministry  at 
home  thought,  not  unreasonably  perhaps,  that  the 
mysterious  stranger  was  connected  with  some  plan  for 
the  escape  of  the  great  captive. 

Mr.  Goulbum  added, — *'You  will  have  probably 
seen  in  the  papers  the  letter  addressed  by  General 
Gourgaud  to  the  Duchess  of  Parma,  giving  an  account 
of  General  Buonaparte's  health  and  treatment  utterly 
at  variance  with  all  that  he  had  previously  stated 
either  to  you  or  to  me.  What  has  given  rise  to  this 
change  of  proceeding  on  his  part  it  is  impossible  to 
say,  but  he  has  latterly  associated  entirely  with  Mr. 
O'Meara,  and  other  persons  known  to  be  in  the  confi- 
dence of  General  Buonaparte's  friends.  As  permission 
to  reside  here  was  given  him  solely  on  the  condition  of 
his  continuing  to  conduct  himself  with  propriety,  the 
provisions  of  the  Alien  Act  have  been  put  in  force 
with  respect  to  him,  and  he  has  been  sent  to  Ham- 
burgh, from  whence,  I  suppose,  he  will  from  time  to 
time  promulgate  the   same   fabricated  accounts  of 


152  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXIV. 

General  Buonaparte's  treatment  which  others  of  his 
former  companions  have  indulged  in  in  other  parts  of 
Europe." 

The  Governor  enclosed  extracts  from  the  instruc- 
tions he  had  just  received  in  a  packet  addressed 
"Note  for  the  information  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte," 
and  sent  it  to  Count  Montholon  to  deliver  to  Bona- 
parte. In  this  note  he  told  him  that,  if  he  would 
signify  his  acquiescence  in  the  propositions  contained 
in  the  extracts,  he  (the  Governor)  would  immediately 
act  upon  them.  At  the  same  time  he  specified  what 
would  in  that  case  be  the  parts  of  the  island  which 
he  would  not  be  allowed  to  visit  unless  accompanied 
by  a  British  officer.  Several  days,  however,  elapsed 
before  the  note  came  into  the  hands  of  Bonaparte,  as 
Montholon  pleaded  illness  and  inability  to  visit  the 
Emperor. 

On  the  1st  of  April  Count  Montholon  made  a  re- 
markable proposal  to  Dr.  Yerling,  which,  as  the  latter 
wrote  a  memorandum  of  it  at  the  time,  shall  be  given 
in  his  own  words : — "Having  had  occasion  to  visit  at 
Count  Montholon's,  he  took  an  opportunity,  when  we 
were  alone,  of  introducing  the  subject  of  Napoleon's 
choosing  a  surgeon.  He  said  that  I  must  be  aware 
that  he  had  long  endeavoured  to  fix  Napoleon*s  choice 
on  me,  and  how  flattering  it  would  be  to  me  should  I 
now  be  chosen,  notwithstanding  that  I  was  the  person 
selected  by  the  Governor,  as  this  must  be  attributed 
to  the  favourable  impressions  made  by  my  conduct 
during  the  eight  months  I  had  been  at  Longwood. 
He  informed  me  that  propositions,  which  the  Governor 
might  perhaps  accept,  had  this  morning  been  made, 
and,  if  accepted,  Napoleon  would  instantly  choose  a 
surgeon,  but  that  he  could  not  think  of  having  near 
him  *  ITiomme  du  Qouverneur  •/  by  this  he  meant,  he 


April,  1819.  PROPOSAL  TO  DR.  VERLING.  153 

said,  any  person  whose  views  of  promotion  and  of 
self-interest  might  prompt  him  to  act  under  the  Gk)- 
vemor's  influence.  If,  on  the  contrary,  I  was  willing 
to  become  *  Thomme  de  TEmpereur,'  to  attach  myself 
*  comme  le  sien  propre,'  he  (Count  Montholon)  was 
authorised  to  make  a  proposal  to  me,  which  he  ad- 
vised me  to  accept,  as  I  should  at  once  obtain  a 
degree  of  his  confidence  by  avowing  the  motive  of 
making  my  fortune — a  motive  much  more  intelligible 
to  him  than  any  vague  declaration  of  admiration  of 
the  man. 

"  He  then  said  that  Napoleon  was  willing  to  give 
me  an  allowance  of  12,000  francs  per  annum,  to  be 
paid  monthly ;  and  as  he  (Count  Montholon)  had  re- 
presented to  him  the  danger  I  might  incur  *  de  perdre 
mon  etat/  pointing  out  the  examples  of  Mr.  O'Meara 
and  Mr.  Stokoe,  he  would  at  once  advance  a  sum  to 
be  paid  into  my  pocket  in  bills  upon  the  house  of 
Baring,  the  interest  of  which  should  be  equal  to  my 
present  pay  fi-om  the  British  Government.  He  asked 
the  amount  of  my  pay,  and  I  told  him  nearly  1/.  per 
day  on  the  island.  He  went  on — Napoleon  would 
not  require  firom  me  anything  which  should  compro- 
mise me  with  Gk)vemment,  or  with  any  tribunal,  or 
even  in  public  opinion ;  that  Mr.  0*Meara  had  never 
been  required  to  do  anything  of  this  nature.  I  should 
be  enabled,  when  I  saw  him,  to  judge  of  the  state  of 
his  liver,  which  he  himself  thought  was  much  dis- 
eased ;  thai  in  my  bulletins  my  report  might  lean  rather 
to  an  augmentation  than  a  diminution  of  the  malady; 
that  I  might  draw  the  line  rather  above  than  below j  as 
he  was  still  in  hopes  that  *  la  force  des  choses '  might 
remove  him  from  St.  Helena.  He,  however  (Count 
Montholon),  was  much  more  in  dread  of  apoplexy 
attacking  Napoleon,  to  which  they  all  thought  he  had 


154  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.         Chap.  XXIV. 

a  strong  tendency,  but  advised  me  to  be  guarded 
upon  this  subject,  as  it  was  one  upon  which  he  would 
not  converse,  and  from  which  he  wished  to  avert  his 
thoughts. 

"  To  this  proposal  I  replied  that  I  conceived  it 
totally  incompatible  with  my  duty  to  enter  into  a 
private  agreement  with  Napoleon  Bonaparte." 

At  a  subsequent  interview  Count  Montholon  told 
Dr.  Verling  that  the  hint,  as  he  termed  it,  thrown  out 
relative  to  the  exaggeration  of  Napoleon*s  maladies, 
came  entirely  from  himself,  and  that  Napoleon  only 
required  that  he  should  conduct  himself  faithfully 
(loyalement)  towards  him,  pledging  himself  never  to 
make  any  written  report  of  the  state  of  his  health 
without  giving  him  a  copy,  and  also  that  he  would 
never  repeat  any  conversations  he  might  hear  at  Long- 
wood,  unless  he  should  conceive  they  were  of  a  nature 
which  rendered  it  his  duty  as  a  British  subject  to 
divulge  them.  Dr.  Verling  replied  that  he  could  not 
enter  into  any  pledge  or  promise  secretly,  and  that 
if  such  were  necessary  they  should  be  made  known 
clearly  to  him  by  the  Governor. 

On  the  2nd  of  April,  in  the  afternoon,  Mr.  Ricketts, 
a  cousin  of  Lord  Liverpool,  was  presented  to  Napo- 
leon by  Count  Bertrand,  and  remained  in  conversation 
with  him  for  four  hours.  Napoleon  entered  fully  upon 
the  subject  of  his  grievances,  and  gave  his  visitor  the 
following  memorandum  in  writing,  as  containing  a 
short  abstract  of  his  wishes  and  complaints  : — 


(( 


1**.  Sortir  de  Tile,  parceque  j'ai  une  h^pathitis 
chronique. 

"  2^.  Qu'en  quelque  position  ou  je  sois,  la  raison 
politique  est  de  mettre  pres  de  mpi  un  homme  d'hon- 
neur  qui  ait  des  formes. 


April,  1819.  STATEMENT  OP  GRIEVANCES.  155 

"  3^.  M^envoyer  mon  medecin  O'Meara,  m'en  don- 
ner  un  Fran9ois,  ou  m'en  envoyer  un  Anglais  civU  qui 
n'ait  aucon  lien  militaire,  et  bien  lam^. 

**  4?.  Ne  pas  me  contraindre  k  habiter  la  nouvelle 
maison,  parcequll  n'y  a  pas  d'arbres,  parcequ'elle  est 
trop  pres  da  camp,  et  qu'elle  est  dans  la  position  de 
Tile  oil  il  n'y  a  pas  d'arbres ;  que  c'est  un  chene  que 
je  desire. 

"  6^.  Que  si  Lord  Liverpool  envoie  I'ordre  qu'on  ne 
viole  pas  mon  int^rieur,  qu'on  ne  m'en  menace  point. 

"  6**.  Qu'il  autorise  une  correspondance  directe  avec 
lui  cachetee,  et  qui  ne  passe  pas  par  Lord  Bathurst ; 
ou  avec  un  pair  du  royaume  qui  soit  notre  avocat 
pres  du  ministere,  tel  que  Lord  Holland :  c'est  le  moyen 
que  le  public  ne  s'occupe  plus  de  cela." 

Napoleon  also  desired  Mr.  Ricketts  to  give  his 
"  remerciments  "  to  Lord  and  Lady  Holland  for  their 
attention  in  sending  him  books,  and  presents  to  Ber- 
trand's  children;  his  " remerciments "  also  to  the 
Duke  of  Sussex,  and  his  "  souvenirs "  to  Lord 
Amherst. 

On  the  3rd  Count  Montholon  wrote  to  the  Gk)- 
vernor,  stating  that  he  was  unwell,  and  requesting 
him  to  address  himself  to  Count  Bertrand  in  any 
written  communication  he  might  have  to  make.  He 
complained  also  that  the  Emperor  felt  himself  ag- 
grieved and  insulted  by  the  form  in  which  Sir  Hudson 
had  lately  transmitted  the  "  note "  to  Longwood  for 
his  information,  having  addressed  it  to  "Napoleon 
Bonaparte."  The  Grovemor  in  his  reply  expressed 
his  regret  that  Bonaparte  should  consider  himself  as 
outraged,  and  said,  "  In  using  the  name  of  *  Napoleon 
Bonaparte*  I  have  strictly  followed  his  own  desire, 
communicated  to  me  by  Count  Bertrand;  whilst  in 
writing  papers  for  his  own  information,  and  enclosing 


166  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXIV. 

them  to  a  person  of  his  family  for  delivery,  it  has 
been  my  real  wish  and  study  to  adopt  that  mode  of 
address  and  communication  which  I  conceived  was 
least  likely  to  prove  displeasing  to  him."  And  with 
reference  to  the  suggestion  that  he  should  write  to 
General  Bertrand,  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  added,  **  Upon 
this  point  I  wish  to  be  most  distinctly  understood. 
Regard  to  peculiar  circumstances  in  the  situation  of 
Napoleon  Bonaparte,  mixed  with  certain  consideration 
towards  the  family  of  Count  Bertrand,  have  hitherto 
alone  prevented  me  from  removing  Count  Bertrand 
from  Longwood ;  but  the  forbearance  I  have  on  such 
grounds  practised  must  have  its  term,  nor  whilst  it 
continues  can  I  suffer  any  undue  advantage  to  be 
drawn  from  it.  I  have  no  pretension  to  interfere  in 
any  private  relation  between  Napoleon  Bonaparte  and 
any  «of  the  French  officers  who  have  followed  him 
hither ;  but  I  am  myself  resolved  not  to  enter  into 
any  communication,  by  writing  or  otherwise,  with 
Count  Bertrand,  or  suflFer  any  person  under  my  au- 
thority to  enter  into  such  with  him,  on  any  affair 
whatever  that  regards  my  duties  towards  the  person 
upon  whom  he  is  in  attendance. 

"  In  the  letter  which  Count  Bertrand  addressed  to 
me  on  the  27th  April,  1818,  afterwards  made  public, 
he  himself  withdrew  from  any  communication  with 
me  respecting  the  affairs  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte ;  and 
in  a  letter  I  addressed  to  him  on  the  21st  July,  I 
desired  he  would  not  depart  from  this  rule.  The  lan- 
guage he  has  l&esides  at  various  times  held  to  officers 
of  my  staff,  and  others  whose  duties  have  led  them 
near  him,  has  been  in  the  highest  degree  disrespectful 
and  insulting." 

The  difficulties  experienced  by  Captain  NichoUs  in 
the  discharge  of  his  duty  as  orderly  officer,  in  conse- 


April,  1819.    ORDERLY  OFFICER'S  DIFFICULTIES.  157 

quence  of  Bonaparte's  wilfully  concealing  himself  from 
his  observation,  may  be  judged  of  from  some  entries 
in  his  journal  during  this  month: — April  3rd.  "Na- 
poleon still  keeps  himself  concealed.    I  have  not  been 

able  to  see  him  since  the  25th  ultimo." April 

19th.  "  I  again  waited  on  Montholon,  and  told  him 
that  I  could  not  see  Napoleon.  He  appeared  surprised, 
and  said  they  had  seen  me.  N.B.  General  Bonaparte 
has  got  in  most  of  his  billiard-room  windows  small  holes 
to  put  his  spy-glass  through ;  consequently  he  is  able  to 
see  them  [i.  e.  persons]  without  being  himself  exposed 
to  observation.  A  few  minutes  past  6  p.m.  General 
Bonaparte  appeared  in  his  back  flower-garden,  dressed 
in  green,  with  his  cocked  hat.  I  believe  it  was  Ber- 
trand  that  was  with  him.  I  was  nearly  twelve  hours 
on  my  legs  this  day,  endeavouring  to  see  Napoleon 
Bonaparte,  before  I  succeeded,  and  I  have  experienced 
many  such  days  since  I  have  been  stationed  at  Long- 
wood.  While  at  dinner  this  evening  Sergeant  Kitts 
told  me  that  Napoleon  was  walking  in  Longwood 
garden  between  7  and  8  p.m.  Montholon  told  me 
this  day  that  General  Bonaparte  could  not  appear  out 
of  his  quarters,  he  was  so  chilly  and  cold."  .... 
"  23rd.  I  believe  that  I  saw  Napoleon  Bonaparte  to- 
day in  the  act  of  strapping  his  razor  in  his  dressing- 
room." 

On  the  28th  of  April  a  conversation  occurred  be- 
tween Count  Montholon  and  Major  Gorrequer  on  the 
race-ground,  when  the  Major  inquired  after  the  Coun- 
tess, whom  her  husband  represented  as  in  a  very  bad 
state  of  health,  owing  to  the  liver  complaint.  He 
asked,  "  Does  she  still  adhere  to  her  intention  of  going 
away?"  "Oh,  mon  Dieu!"  answered  Montholon, 
"oui,  bien  certainement."  "But  you.  Monsieur  le 
Comte,  you  remain?"     "Ah I  non;  je  pense  bien 


158  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXIV. 

toujonrs  partir ;  je  ne  veux  pas  laisser  aller  ma  femme 
sans  raccompagner/'  He  then  began  to  explain  the 
conflict  he  had  daily  to  go  through  with  Napoleon, 
who  tried  every  means  of  persoasion  to  induce  him 
to  change  his  intention,  and  urged  him  at  all  events 
to  remain  until  an  application  could  be  made  to  the 
British  Government  for  another  person  to  replace 
him  and  an  answer  could  arrive,  which  would  only 
make  a  diflFerence  to  him  of  six  months.  Napoleon 
said  he  did  not  care  who  was  sent  out;  it  was  of 
little  consequence,  provided  he  were  a  person  who 
was  able  to  write  expeditiously  and  correctly,  under- 
stood French  well,  and  one  whom  he  could  employ  in 
writing  for  him,  for  this  kind  of  occupation  was  a 
great  source  of  distraction  to  his  mind,  and  when  he 
lost  Count  Montholon,  and  was  deprived  of  the  means 
of  pursuing  this  habit,  his  situation  would  become 
doubly  irksome  and  painfiil.  Napoleon  added,  accord- 
ing to  the  Count's  statement,  that  Bertrand  could  not 
compensate  his  loss,  as  he  was  not  '*  un  homme  de 
travail,"  and  he  could  not  consequently  render  him 
the  same  services. 

Major  Gk^rrequer  afterwards  inquired  after  the 
health  of  Bonaparte,  and  Montholon  represented  him 
as  "  se  plaignant  toujours  d'etre  trSs  souffrant,  quoique 
cependant  je  ne  m'apper9oive  pas  qu'il  empire;  il 
prenait  son  bain  quand  je  suis  sorti."  On  this  Major 
Gt)rrequer  made  some  remark  on  the  tendency  to  pro- 
duce debility  and  depression  of  spirits  which  this  fre- 
quent use  of  the  warm  bath  must  have ;  and  Mon- 
tiiolon  replied  that  he  himself  would  also  be  of  the 
same  opinion  had  not  the  Emperor  assured  him  that 
it  acted  diflFerently  upon  him,  and  produced  a  bracing 
effect  on  his  constitution.  It  seems,  however,  im- 
possible to  believe  that  this  could  really  be  the  case. 


Apbil,  1819.  A  NOVEL  COMMAND.  159 

for  the  result  of  such  constant  immersion  in  hot  water 
must  have  been  great  relaxation  of  the  muscles,  and 
opening  of  the  pores  of  the  skin,  so  as  to  render  the 
body  extremely  susceptible  of  cold. 

With  reference  to  the  subject  of  the  departure  of 
Napoleon^s  suite,  there  is  a  curious  passage  in  one  of 
Sir  Hudson  Lowe's  letters  to  Lord  Bathurst,  dated  the 
19th  of  April  this  year,  by  which  it  appears  that  the 
Emperor  issued  a  novel  sort  of  command  to  General 
Bertrand  in  order  to  secure  his  stay  in  the  island : — 

"  It  will  be  observed  by  Madame  Bertrand's  letter 
to  Lady  Malcolm  that  she  is  in  a  state  of  pregnancy. 
Upon  a  former  occasion,  when  Madame  Bertrand  was 
urging  her  husband  to  leave  the  island,  and  he  made 
known  her  and  his  own  desires  to  General  Bonaparte 
on  the  subject,  saying  she  could  never  be  happy  here, 
the  reply  made  was,  *  Faites  lui  encore  un  enfant.^ 
This  idways  creates  the  delay  of  removal  for  a  year, 
and  serves  Madame  Bertrand  also  as  a  *  distraction/ 
It  serves  further  as  a  kind  of  protection  to  the  Count 
himself  against  any  strong  measure  on  my  part  towards 
him ;  but  I  shall  still  be  equally  solicitous  for  some 
particular  instruction  from  your  Lordship  as  to  the 
course  I  am  to  pursue  with  him." 

On  the  29th  Sir  Hudson  wrote  to  Lord  Bathurst, 
and  said, — 

"  It  is  my  intention,  if  no  French  medical  attend- 
ant arrives  in  the  William  Pitt,  or  either  of  the  other 
two  store-ships,  to  propose  to  Dr.  Amott  that  he  should 
relieve  Dr.  Verling  at  Longwood,  having  received  the 
most  fevourable  accounts  of  his  private  character, 
as  well  as  his  professional  skill,  and  having  reason  to 
believe  that  he  enjoyed  in  a  very  particular  manner 
the  confidence  and  esteem  of  two  very  distinguished 


160  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.         Chap.  XXIV. 

officers  by  whom  the  20th  Regiment  had  been  com- 
manded, the  late  Major-General  Robert  Ross,  and 
Colonel  Sir  John  Colborne." 

The  following  report  from  Captain  Nicholls  to  Major 
Gk)rrequer,  dated  the  15th  of  May,  1819,  will  show 
the  extraordinary  difficulties  interposed  by  Napoleon 
in  the  way  of  the  execution  of  his  duty.  Surely, 
there  was  something  of  childish  obstinacy  in  the 
determination  of  the  fallen  Emperor  not  to  submit 
to  the  requisition  that  his  actual  presence  at  Long- 
wood  should  be  daily  ascertained  by  the  orderly 
officer.  Such  conduct  was  neither  dignified  nor  rea- 
sonable : — 

"  I  received  your  note  late  last  night,  and  this  morn- 
ing I  again  waited  upon  Count  Montholon,  and  stated 
to  him  that  it  was  absolutely  necessary  that  I  or 
some  other  officer  should  daily  see  General  Bona- 
parte, and  that  my  orders  on  this  head  were  very 
positive.  I  also  requested  that  the  Count  would  be 
pleased  to  point  out  a  certain  room  for  me  to  see 
Napoleon,  or  that  some  one  of  Greneral  Bonaparte's 
family  would  inform  me  where  he  would  be  seen. 
The  Count  said  he  would  state  this  to  Napoleon.  In 
the  afternoon  I  again  saw  Count  Montholon,  and  he 
told  me  that  he  had  mentioned  the  above  to  Napoleon 
Bonaparte,  but  had  received  no  answer. 

"  I  must  here  beg  leave  to  state,  that  in  the  execu- 
tion of  my  duty  yesterday  I  was  upon  my  feet 
upwards  of  ten  hourSy  endeavouring  to  procure  a  sight 
of  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  either  in  his  little  garden,  or 
at  one  of  his  windows,  but  could  not  succeed ;  that 
during  the  whole  of  this  time  I  was  exposed  to  the 
observations  and  remarks  of  not  only  the  French 
servants,  but  also  to  the  gardeners  and  other  persons 


Mat,  1819.      DEPARTURE  OF  MADAME  MONTHOLQN.        161 

employed  about  Longwood  House ;  and  that  I  have 
very  freqvjently  experienced  days  of  this  kind  since 
1  have  been  employed  on  this  duty." 

On  the  26th  of  May  Count  Montholon  called  on  the 
Gk)vernor  to  request  permission  for  his  wife  to  return 
to  Europe,  in  consequence  of  her  bad  state  of  health. 
The  Groveraor  observed  that  the  Count  was  aware  of 
the  rule  which  prescribed  that  all  persons  of  the 
establishment  at  Longwood  desiring  to  return  to 
Europe  were  to  be  sent  to  the  Cape  of  GU>od  Hope  in 
the  first  instance,  until  the  instructions  of  the  British 
Government  arrived  respecting  their  further  destina- 
tion ;  and  although  he  had  been  induced  in  the  case  of 
General  (rourgaud,  in  consequence  of  the  particular 
circumstances  in  which  he  stood,  to  take  upon  his  own 
responsibility  to  send  him  to  Europe  direct,  instead 
of  the  Cape,  yet  this  deviation  in  one  particular 
instance,  and  under  certain  circumstances,  did  not 
form  a  precedent,  or  furnish  any  reason  for  again 
dispensing  with  a  rule  which  still  remained  in  force. 
That,  whether  from  premeditated  design  or  not,  it 
had  nevertheless  occurred  that,  on  every  occasion  of 
persons  from  Longwood  returning  to  Europe,  publica- 
tions had  invariably  appeared  soon  after  their  arrival 
there,  full  of  complaints  and  misrepresentations,  and 
it  was  therefore  impossible  to  divine  what  might  be 
the  real  object,  and  not  to  feel  mistrust  under  such 
circumstances :  that  it  would  be  therefore  proper  for 
his  own  justification  to  the  British  Government  to 
have  certificates,  not  of  one,  but  of  three  medical 
persons,  to  show  the  necessity  of  Madame  Montho- 
lon's  return  to  Europe  on  account  of  ill  health ;  that 
no  certificate  however  was  necessary  for  her  quitting 
Longwood ;  it  was  only  requisite  in  case  she  desired 
after  leaving  St.  Helena  not  to  be  sent  to  the  Cape. 

VOL.  III.  M 


162  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXIV. 

The  Count  said  it  was  his  particular  wish  that  such 
a  certificate  should  be  obtained,  and  he  would  be 
delighted  if  the  medical  men  gave  it  as  their  opinion 
that  there  was  no  necessity  for  his  wife  quitting  the 
island  on  account  of  her  health ;  that  he  did  not  wish 
her  to  go  by  any  means,  her  departure  would  leave  him 
very  unhappy  ;  the  way  in  which  they  lived  together, 
and  his  attachment  to  his  children,  which  the  Governor 
was  not  a  stranger  to,  would  sufl&ciently  prove  to  him 
how  unhappy  his  situation  would  be  after  the  de- 
parture of  his  wife  and  family.  He  said  that  he 
had  frequently  requested  Dr.  Verling,  and  had  also 
applied  to  Mr.  Livingstone,  to  sign  a  certificate  of  her 
state  of  health,  but  they  had  declined  giving  it,  fear- 
ing, as  it  appeared  to  him,  that  it  might  be  considered 
as  a  political  question,  and  that  they  might  compro- 
mise themselves ;  he  had  even  asked  Dr.  Yerling 
whether  the  Gk)vemor  had  prohibited  his  giving  it, 
who  assured  him  he  had  not,  and  said  that  the  refusal 
to  do  so  was  his  own  act.  As  to  sending  Madame 
Montholon  to  the  Cape,  he  declared  "ce  serait  Ten- 
voyer  A,  la  mort ;"  he  therefore  entreated  the  GU)vemor 
to  permit  her  to  go  direct  to  Europe.  He  said  that 
the  latter  was  himself  a  father  and  a  husband,  and 
would  therefore  easily  feel  for  him.  He  declared  that 
Madame  Montholon  would  charge  herself  with  nothing 
from  thence ;  her  object  was  to  go  to  France  and  join 
her  family  there,  to  live  retired  and  peaceably,  and  in- 
terfere in  nothing ;  that  he  himself  had  been  in  hopes 
of  being  able  to  accompany  her,  and  the  Emperor  had 
even  appeared  two  or  three  times  to  assent  to  it,  but 
afterwards  withdrew,  saying,  "Comment!  vous  voulez 
vous  en  aller  et  me  laisser  seul  avec  Bertrand  comme 
cela!  non."  He  wanted  to  have  some  one  in  Montho- 
lon*s  place,  if  he  left,  who  had  been  near  him  before. 


May,  1819.  MONTHOLON'S  APPLICATION.  163 

and  was  acquainted  with  his  habits,  **  avec  qui  il  pent 
causer,"  and  who  could  write  under  his  dictation, 
"  enfin  un  autre  moi-meme,"  but  Montholon  said  that 
the  Emperor  did  not  care  who  was  selected. 

The  Govemor  replied  that  it  was  impossible  for  him 
to  anticipate  the  sentiments  of  Government,  and  there- 
fore could  say  nothing  on  the  subject ;  it  was  neces- 
sary Count  Montholon  should  write  to  him  officially 
respecting  the  Countesses  desire  to  return  to  Europe, 
and  at  the  same  time  he  might  state  also  what  he  had 
just  said  verbally.  He  added,  that  before  Madame 
Montholon  could  proceed  to  England  it  was  neces- 
sary that  he  should  give  sufficient  previous  notice  of 
the  application  to  his  Government,  and  she  would 
have  therefore  to  remain  in  the  island  for  some  weeks 
after  he  had  given  such  intimation. 

Count  Montholon  begged  that  the  Gt)vemor  would 
have  the  goodness,  in  the  same  despatch  by  which  he 
signified  Madame  Montholon *s  intention  of  returning 
to  Europe,  also  to  announce  his  own  of  accompanying 
her,  if  either  a  medical  attendant  or  a  priest  arrived 
before  her  departure ;  for,  if  either  of  those  persons 
had  arrived  (as  it  was  hoped  they  would)  by  the 
store-ships,  he  would  not  have  stayed  any  longer. 
He  would  not,  however,  stay  beyond  six  months  after 
his  wife  left  him,  and  whilst  he  remained  he  would 
continue  "Thomme  de  TEmpereur."  He  wished  to 
leave  him  on  good  terms,  and  not  lose  the  fruit  of  four 
years'  attendance  upon  him  in  such  a  situation ;  ^^  mais 
dhs  Tinstant  que  je  quitte  Longwood  je  rentre  dans 
la  classe  des  citoyens."  From  that  moment  his  object 
would  solely  be  to  join  his  wife  in  France,  and  to 
live  unknown  and  forgotten. 

Count  Montholon  immediately  afterwards  addressed 
a  formal  letter  to  the  Governor  asking  permission 

M  2 


164  OAPTIVITT  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXIV. 

for  his  wife  to  go  to  England,  and  stating  his  intention 
of  rejoining  her  as  soon  as  he  could  reconcile  his  de- 
parture with  the  duties  which  detained  him  at  Long- 
wood.  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  complied  with  the  Count's 
request,  and  two  days  after  the  interview  with  him 
he  wrote  to  Lord  Bathurst  detailing  their  conversa- 
tion, and  said, — 

"The  Countess  Montholon's  bad  state  of  health 
was  assigned  as  the  motive  for  her  departure.  Her 
health,  it  is  well  known,  has  been  suflFering  very  much, 
she  being  stated  to  be  afflicted  with  liver  complaint, 
dating  from  a  long  period  back,  and  having  been  under 
the  hands  of  physicians  for  the  same  disorder  in 
France ;  she  had  lately  also  endured  a  miscarriage. 

"The  season  of  the  year  (the  middle  of  winter 
here'  for  sending  her  to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  even 
supposing  her  medical  attendants  did  not  give  their 
opinion  against  her  being  sent  there,  is  besides  the 
most  unfavourable.  I  have  judged  it  best  therefore 
to  decide  upon  allowing  her  to  proceed  to  Europe 
within  such  a  space  of  time  from  hence  as  will  enable 
your  Lordship  to  take  the  same  precautions  previous 
to  her  arrival  as  might  be  done  if  she  had  been  sent 
by  the  circuitous  route  of  the  Cape,  and  to  enable  her 
also  to  arrive  in  Europe  before  the  winter  season  com- 
mences there."  He  then  requested  Lord  Bathurst's 
instructions  as  to  the  course  he  was  to  pursue  in  the 
event  of  Montholon  making  an  application  to  be 
allowed  to  return  to  Europe  himself. 

On  the  morning  of  the  27th  Captain  Nicholls  met 
the  Count  and  Countess  Bertrand  at  the  bottom  of 
the  garden  at  Longwood,  and  they  appeared  both  in 
very  low  spirits  in  consequence  of  the  sickness  of  their 
youngest  child,  Arthur.  The  Countess  said  that  she 
wished  their  boy  to  try  change  of  air,  either  in  some 


May,  1819.     DEPARTURE  OF  SIR  GEORGE  BINGHAM.        165 

other  part  of  the  island,  or  on  board  ship,  or  at  the 
Cape,  where  she  wonld  with  pleasure  accompany  him 
if  permitted,  and  she  said  she  cared  not  if  she  never 
returned.  The  Countess  was  in  tears  while  she  spoke. 
Captain  Nicholls  recommended  her  to  mention  the 
circumstance  to  Dr.  Verling,  in  which  advice  she 
acquiesced. 

Two  days  afterwards  a  conversation  took  place 
between  Captain  Ripley  of  the  H.E.I.C.  ship  Regent 
and  Sir  Thomas  Reade,  at  which  the  former  disclosed  a 
proposal  made  to  him  a  few  days  before,  which  proves 
what  constant  attempts  were  made  by  the  French  to 
carry  on  a  clandestine  correspondence  with  Europe. 
Captain  Ripley  stated  that,  after  he  had  landed  at 
St.  Helena  on  the  24th,  he  was  told  by  some  person 
(but  whom  he  did  not  recollect)  that,  if  he  consented 
to  be  the  bearer  of  a  letter  from  the  French  at  Long- 
wood,  he  might  receive  600/.  for  so  doing ;  and  the 
money  would  be  paid  by  a  draft  upon  the  banking 
firm  of  Sir  John  Lubbock  and  Co.  He  was  told  that,  if 
he  would  walk  on  the  road  between  Hutt's  Gate  and 
Longwood,  he  would  meet  a  person  who  would  deliver 
both  the  letter  and  the  draft,  and  to  whom  he  would 
have  to  give  a  pledge  of  secrecy.  He  was  further 
assured  that  two  of  the  commanders  of  the  Company's 
ships  last  season  had  taken  letters  in  a  like  manner, 
and  had  each  received  a  similar  draft  on  the  same  firm. 
Sir  Thomas  Reade  several  times  asked  Captain  Ripley 
to  recollect  if  possible  the  name  of  the  person  who 
gave  him  this  information,  but  he  declared  he  could 
not  remember. 

At  the  end  of  this  month  the  Governor  sustained  a 
serious  loss  in  the  departure  of  General  Sir  George 
Bingham,  who  had  applied  for  leave  of  absence  to 
proceed  to  England  on  account  of  his  own  private 


166  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXIV. 

affairs,  and  also  because  he  felt  hurt  that  the  Court 
of  Directors  had  not  confirmed  his  appointment  as 
member  of  Council  at  St.  Helena,  to  which  the  Gover- 
nor had  provisionally  nominated  him. 

In  mentioning  the  circumstance  to  Lord  Bathurst  in 
a  despatch  of  the  28th  of  May,  Sir  Hudson  bore  the 
following  strong  testimony  to  that  oflBcer^s  merits : — 

"  It  would  be  difficult  for  me  to  express  in  too 
strong  terms  the  high  sense  I  entertain  of  Brigadier 
General  Sir  Gkorge  Bingham's  very  important  and 
useful  services  during  the  period  he  has  been  under 
my  command ;  of  his  attention  towards  the  comfort 
as  well  as  discipline  of  the  troops  placed  under  his 
immediate  orders ;  of  the  cordial,  zealous,  and  effect- 
ual assistance  and  support  I  have  derived  from  him 
on  every  occasion  in  the  execution  of  my  own  duties ; 
and  of  his  vigilance  in  every  point  where  the  public 
service  could  be  benefited  by  it ;  but  I  cannot  afford 
a  stronger  proof  of  the  perfect  sincerity  with  which 
I  take  the  liberty  of  thus  expressing  my  sense  of  his 
conduct  than  by  making  known  my  most  earnest 
desire  that  he  may  be  enabled  soon  to  return  here, 
and  to  resume  the  performance  of  those  duties  which 
he  has  hitherto  executed  with  so  much  credit  to  him- 
self, and  so  much  real  advantage  to  the  public  service." 

On  the  7th  of  June  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  sent  a  "note 
for  the  information  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte,"  in  which 
he  told  him  that  it  became  part  of  his  duty,  pursuant 
to  the  instructions  he  had  received  from  the  British 
Government,  founded  on  the  protocol  of  the  Congress 
of  Aix-la-Chapelle,  already  communicated  to  Napoleon, 
to  afford  to  the  Commissioners  of  the  Allied  Sovereigns, 
who  were  residing  on  this  island,  an  opportunity  of 
being  enabled  to  fulfil  the  object  of  their  mission 
there  by  seeing  him;   and  that  it  was  his  sincere 


JuKB,  1819.  DECEPTION  AT  LONGWOOD.  167 

desire,  as  it  was  the  instruction  of  his  Government, 
that  this  daty  should  be  performed  with  the  least 
possible  intrusion.  He  begged  therefore  that  Napo- 
leon Bonaparte  would  be  pleased  to  name  any  one 
day  during  the  course  of  the  present  month,  and  every 
ensuing  month,  when  the  Commissioners  might  ac- 
company the  orderly  oflBcer  and  see  him,  at  any  hour 
between  nine  and  twelve  in  the  forenoon,  or  between 
four  o'clock  and  the  hour  at  which  the  sentries  were 
posted  round  the  garden  enclosure  in  the  evening. 

To  show  the  inveterate  habit  of  deception  practised 
at  Longwood,  we  will  here  quote  the  following  pas- 
sages from  a  report  of  the  orderly  oflBcer,  Captain 
Nicholls,  on  the  14th  of  June : — 

"At  about  a  quarter  past  four  o'clock  yesterday 
afternoon  I  waited  on  Count  Montholon  to  request 
his  assistance,  as  I  had  been  for  nearly  two  days  with- 
out seeing  General  Bonaparte.  The  Count  told  me  that 
Napoleon  Bonaparte  was  then  in  bed  (or  on  it),  and 
consequently  I  could  not  see  him.  In  the  course  of 
half  an  hour  after  this  interview  I  unexpectedly  saw 
General  Bonaparte  in  the  lower  walk  of  Longwood 
garden :  he  was  in  the  act  of  leaning  against  a  tree, 
and  full  dressed^  in  a  cocked  hat,  green  coat,  white 
breeches  and  stockings.  The  Bertrands  joined  him 
soon,  and  they  walked  together  for  a  considerable 
time.'* 

It  is  no  doubt  possible  that  during  the  half-hour 
that  elapsed  after  Montholon's  statement  Bonaparte 
may  have  risen  and  walked  out ;  but  the  excuse  of 
illness,  or  being  in  bed,  or  in  his  bath,  was  so  univer- 
sal, that  it  requires  some  charity  to  believe  that  the 
Count  was  not  trying  on  this  occasion  to  mislead  the 
orderly  ofl&cer  into  the  belief  that  Napoleon  could  not 


168  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXIV. 

be  seen  that  morning.  And  so  Captain  Nicholls 
understood  his  assertion,  for  he  said  he  mentioned  the 
occurrence  "  to  show  the  deception  which  these  people 
are  at  times  in  the  habit  of  practising  towards  me." 

That  the  Governor  was  not  unmindful  of  the  com- 
fort of  his  prisoners,  and  was  alive  to  acts  of  courtesy 
and  politeness,  although  his  conduct  has  been  repre- 
sented as  deficient  in  both,  appears  from  numerous 
instances  of  attention  which  he  paid  them,  notwith- 
standing the  small  encouragement  he  received.  Thus 
we  find  him  sending  pheasants  for  the  use  of  Bona- 
parte's table ;  and  Madame  Bertrand  returning  thanks 
for  a  donkey  which  he  sent  for  her  little  boy,  and 
for  a  picture  in  tapestry  which  had  been  detained 
from  her  by  a  person  in  the  island,  and  which  the 
Gk^yemor  instantly  procured  for  her.  These  are 
trifles  in  themselves,  but  they  are  trifles  which  indicate 
kindness ;  and  a  man's  disposition  and  character  are 
often  more  clearly  shown  in  little  things  than  in 
matters  of  more  serious  import.  He  then  acts  as  it 
were  upon  a  stage  before  the  public,  and  we  cannot 
always  be  sure  that  he  is  not  merely  playing  a  part 
to  secure  applause. 

The  Countess  Montholon  quitted  St.  Helena  at  the 
beginning  of  July,  and  just  after  she  had  sailed  a  note 
was  brought  to  the  Governor  for  her  from  her  husband, 
which  contained  the  following  paj9sage : — "L'Empereur 
temoigne  un  grand  regret  de  ton  depart :  ses  larmes 
ont  coule  pour  toi,  peut-etre  pour  la  premiere  fois  de 
sa  vie !"  On  her  leaving  Longwood,  Napoleon  had 
presented  her  with  the  ivory  and  other  ornaments 
which  had  been  sent  to  him  by  Mr.  Elphinstone. 


July,  1819.    DIFFICULTIES  OF  ORDERLY  OFFICER.  169 


CHAPTER  XXV. 

OBSTINATE  REFUSAL  OF  BONAPARTE  TO  SHOW  HIMSELF  TO  THE 
ORDERLY  OFFICER  —  DIFFICULTIES  RESPECTING  MEDICAL 
ATTENDANCE  —  COURT-MARTIAL  ON  MR.  8T0K0E  —  THEODORE 
hook's  •  FACTS  FROM  ST.  HELENA  '  —  ARRIVAL  OF  DR.  ANTOM- 
MARCHI  AND  TWO  PRIESTS — COUNT  BERTRAND's  BEHAVIOUR — 
O'MEARA's  •  EXPOSITION.' 

From  the  1st  to  the  4th  of  July  Captain  Nicholls 
continued  to  see  Bonaparte  occasionally ;  but  failing 
to  do  so  on  the  5th,  he  applied  the  next  day  to  Count 
Montholon,  who  told  him  that  Napoleon  often  walked 
in  the  billiard-room  after  dinner,  at  which  times  it  was 
probable  he  might  see  him,  and  that,  if  he  could  not 
do  so  through  the  window,  he  could  see  him  through  the 
keyhole  1  "I  told  the  Count,"  says  Captain  Nicholls, 
"  that  I  certainly  should  not  adopt  such  a  plan,  and 
we  parted." 

On  the  21st  the  unfortunate  orderly  officer,  who 
.  had  been  constantly  baffled  in  his  attempts  to  perform 
his  duty,  reported  as  follows : — 

"  Yesterday  I  was  upon  my  feet  at  least  ten  hours 
walking  about  Longwood  garden,  but  had  no  oppor- 
tunity given  me  of  seeing  General  Bonaparte.  I 
heud  persons  talking  in  his  billiard-room  at  about 
six  o'clock  in  the  afternoon.  This  evening,  since 
seven  o'clock,  I  have  been  employed  in  the  like  manner. 

The  weather  at  present  is  so  very  bad,  that  I 

fear  my  health  will  be  greatly  injured  if  I  am  under 
the  necessity  of  continuing  the  system  of  walking 
round  Longwood  House  and  garden  in  the  execution 


170  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXV. 

of  my  duty  as  orderly  oflBcer,  in  order  to. procure  a 
sight  of  General  Bonaparte." 

In  the  afternoon  of  that  day,  however,  Bonaparte 
appeared  out  of  doors  at  five  o'clock,  accompanied 
by  Count  Montholon.  "I  saw  him,"  says  Oaptain 
Nicholls,  "in  the  front  of  Bertrand's  house  with  his 
hat  off,  looking  at  the  new  building.  Napoleon  walked 
firm,  and  appeared  in  good  health." 

On  the  25th  he  made  the  following  report ; — 

"  I  am  sorry  that  I  have  not  been  able  to  get  a  sight  of 
General  Bonaparte  to-day,  and  that  since  eight  o'clock 
this  morning  I  have  passed  six  or  seven  hours  walking 
Longwood  garden,  in  order,  if  possible,  to  obtain  a 
view  of  him.  At  about  the  middle  of  the  day  I  met 
Count  Montholon  returning  from  Count  Bertrand's, 
and  I  mentioned  to  him  that  I  had  not  seen  General 
Bonaparte  to-day.  The  Count  told  me  that  he  had 
learnt  from  Bertrand  that  Napoleon  was  unwell,  and 
that  he  was  then  going  to  visit  him.  The  Count 
further  added,  that  it  was  probable  Napoleon  would 
appear  out  in  the  course  of  the  afternoon.  Count 
Montholon  dined  in  General  Bonaparte's  quarters  to- 
day, and  I  believe  that  I  heard  him  reading  half  an 
hour  ago  in  the  General's  billiard-room." 

On  Mr.  Stokoe's  arrival  in  England  the  Admiralty 
determined  to  send  him  back  to  St.  Helena,  that  he 
might  be  tried  by  a  court-martial  for  disobedience  of 
orders  in  his  proceedings  at  Longwood  in  the  preceding 
January.  This  was  made  known  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe 
by  a  letter  from  Mr.  Goulburn,  dated  the  8th  of  April, 
which  reached  him  on  the  26th  of  June.  The  fact  of 
Mr.  Stokoe's  being  sent  back  to  St.  Helena  was 
known  long  before  the  cause  was  made  public,  and 
O'Meara  was  in  such  complete  ignorance  on  the  sub- 


Aua.1810.  UNEXPECTED  MEETING.  171 

ject,  that  he  says  in  his  *  Exposition,'^  which  appeared 
about  that  time,  "The  universal  burst  of  public 
opinion  which  has  led  to  Ministers  sending  Mr. 
Stokoe  ba?k  to  St  Helena,  amply  proves  that  those 
principles  of  justice  to  which  Napoleon  Bonaparte 
continues  to  appeal  are  not  extinct  in  the  British 
nation,  however  they  may  have  been  deviated  from 
by  a  few  isolated  individuals,"  - 

Strange  as  it  may  seem,  the  Governor  of  St.  Helena 
during  the  whole  period  of  his  command  there  saw 
almost  as  little  of  his  prisoner  as  if  the  ocean  had  rolled 
between  them.  Indeed,  a  chance  voyager  upon  the 
seas  was  more  likely  to  obtain  a  sight  of  Napoleon 
Bonaparte  than  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  himself;  for  his 
vessel  might  happen  to  touch  at  the  island,  and  it 
was  sometimes  possible  to  procure  an  invitation  to 
Longwood.  But  after  the  last  interview  in  1816, 
when  he  was  so  grossly  insulted.  Sir  Hudson  Lowe 
never  attempted  to  visit  Napoleon ;  indeed,  no  man 
who  had  a  proper  sense  of  self-respect  could  have 
done  so  after  being  treated  with  such  indignity ;  and 
delicacy  prevented  him  from  seeking  opportunities  of 
seeing  Napoleon  unobserved,  merely  to  gratify  his 
curiosity.  It  deserves  therefore  to  be  chronicled  as 
an  event  in  the  captivity,  that  on  the  4th  of  August 
this  year  the  Governor  had  a  sight  of  Bonaparte, 
and  this  was  owing  to  an  accident  of  which  he  gives 
the  following  account  in  a  letter  to  Earl  Bathurst : — 

**  I  had  on  the  4th  instant  a  most  distinct  view  my- 
self of  his  person.  I  had  repaired  to  Longwood  to 
give  directions  about  some  alterations  he  had  himself 
desired  in  his  garden,  when  I  suddenly  found  myself 
quite  close  to  him.    He  had  his  back  turned  to  me, 

»  p.  189. 


172  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Cuap.  XXV. 

and  he  had  a  long  stick  like  a  wand  in  his  hand,  was 
dressed  in  his  usual  uniform,  looked  as  lusty  as  I 
had  ever  seen  him,  but  walked  with  a  gait  that  bore 
somewhat  the  appearance  of  infirmity-  The  children 
of  Count  Bertrand  were  with  him.  The  rencontre  was 
wholly  unexpected  on  my  part." 

It  is  needless  to  add  that  not  a  word  of  recogni- 
tion passed  between  them ;  Napoleon  had  observed 
Sir  Hudson  approaching,  and  moved  away,  or,  as 
Captain  NichoUs  expresses  it,  "made  play"  up  a 
path,  before  the  Governor  came  to  the  spot  where  he 
was  standing. 

The  whole  history  of  this  month  may  be  said  to 
embrace  only  one  subject,  and  that  is  the  series  of 
vain  attempts  made  by  the  orderly  officer  to  see 
Napoleon  according  to  his  duty.  It  is  impossible  to 
read  the  reports  of  Captain  Nicholls  without  a  mingled 
feeling  of  the  painful  and  the  ludicrous.  Every  means 
that  tact  and  delicacy  could  suggest  were  employed  to 
get  a  sight  of  the  captive  without  success,  and  the 
unfortunate  officer  upon  whom  the  irksome  task  de- 
volved, and  whose  difficulties  were  increased  by  his 
total  ignorance  of  the  French  language,  was  obliged 
to  hang  about  the  house  and  knock  at  doors  which  he 
almost  always  found  locked,  like  a  menial  or  a  beggar. 
It  is  wonderful  that  he  exhibited  so  much  patience, 
and  the  Governor  so  much  forbearance.  A  more 
stern  and  peremptory  line  of  conduct  would  not  only 
have  been  justified,  but  would  instantly  have  brought 
the  French  at  Longwood  to  their  senses.  Napoleon 
thought  that  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  would  not  dare  to 
employ  force,  and  he  resolved  to  throw  every  obstacle 
in  the  way  of  a  peaceable  execution  of  the  Governor's 
instructions.     It  became  a  difficult  matter  to  ensure 


Aug.  1819.    INSTRUCTIONS  TO  ORDERLY  OFFICER.  173 

the  transmission  to  the  hands  of  Napoleon  of  any 
letter  or  document  which  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  might 
wish  him  to  read;  and  on  one  occasion  Captain 
Nicholls,  who  had  to  deliver  a  packet  from  the  Groverr 
nor  addressed  to  "Nj^leon  Bonaparte,"  tendered  it 
in  vain  to  Montholon,  Bertrand,  and  the  valet  Mar- 
chand  successively,  who  all  refused  to  receive  it. 
The  following  instructions,  given  by  Colonel  Wynyard 
to  Captain  Nicholls  on  the  11th  of  August,  in  con- 
sequence of  their  conduct,  will  best  show  the  state  of 
siege  in  which  Bonaparte  chose  at  this  time  to  place 
himself : — 

**  Finding  I  cannot  gain  admission  into  the  house 
by  the  principal  entrance,  and  knowing  the  necessity 
of  the  letter  being  either  presented  to  Napoleon  Bona- 
parte or  left  in  the  room  nearest  to  him  that  you 
may  be  enabled  to  reach,  I  request  you  (being  in 
fact  part  of  the  establishment)  will  enter  the  house 
by  the  offices,  and  proceed  towards  his  dressing-room 
or  such  room  as  you  have  reason  to  suppose  he  is  in, 
knocking  at  every  door  that  may  be  closed  before 
you  open  it;  and  should  you  find  them  barred  or 
bolted,  or  any  personal  obstacle  opposed,  merely  pat 
the  letter  down  on  a  table,  and,  in  the  latter  case,  tell 
the  person  or  persons  opposing  your  progress  they 
are  responsible  for  the  delivery  of  the  letter,  giving 
it  to  them,  or,  if  they  will  not  receive  it,  putting  it 
down  by  them." 

Count  Bertrand  told  Captain  Nicholls  that  Napo- 
leon would  consider  any  person  as  an  assassin  who 
should  enter  his  private  apartments  without  his  con- 
sent ;  and  we  know  from  O'Meara  that  he  declared  he 
would  shoot  the  intruder,  although  he  paid  the  penalty 
of  his  own  life.    These  however  were  big  words,  and 


174  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXV. 

must  not  be  literally  understood,  A  limit  at  last 
came  to  the  patience  of  the  Governor,  and  he  directed 
Sir  Thomas  Reade  to  issue  instructions  to  the  orderly 
dflficer  how  he  was  in  future  to  proceed.  After 
alluding  to  Bonaparte's  conduct  in  suffering  Captain 
Nicholls  to  remain  "outside  his  doors,  exposed  to  the 
inclemency  of  the  weather  in  the  worst  season  of  the 
year,  sometimes  for  ten  hours  during  the  day,  to  pro- 
cure an  opportunity  of  seeing  him,"  Sir  Thomas 
Reade  said, — 

"  If  therefore  it  should  on  any  day  occur  that  you 
do  not  see  him  before  ten  o'clock  in  the  forenoon,  you 
will  (unless  any  extraordinary  case  should  arise  to 
require  a  different  instruction  to  be  conveyed  to  you) 
announce  to  any  of  the  persons  who  may  be  in  imme- 
diate attendance  upon  Napoleon  Bonaparte  your  desire 
of  being  admitted  to  him,  and  request  that  such  desire 
may  be  made  known  to  him. 

"  You  will  on  such  occasion  proceed  to  the  hall  of 
his  apartments,  and  wait  there  a  sufiBcient  time  to 
admit  the  message  being  delivered,  and  his  reply 
being  received ;  and  if  he  does  not  present  to  you  an 
opportunity  of  seeing  him,  or  reply  in  such  way  as  to 
justify  a  delay  on  your  part  (which  can  only  be  in 
case  of  indisposition,  upon  which  a  rule  will  be  found 
adverted  to  in  the  concluding  paragraph  of  this  letter), 
you  will  proceed  yourself  to  his  inner  apartments, 
knocking  at  every  door  before  you  open  it,  not 
opening  any  door  until  you  find  that  it  is  not  opened 
to  you,  or  that  you  are  not  desired  to  enter ;  and  on 
arriving  at  the  room  in  which  he  may  himself  be,  you 
will,  on  seeing  him,  make  your  salute  and  retire." 

Still  the  greatest  reluctance  was  felt  to  do  anything 
offensive  to  Bonaparte,  and  the  orderly  officer  endea- 


Aug.  1819.  HIS  "  DECLARATION."  175 

vonred  to  satisfy  himself  of  his  presence  by  stealthy 
glimpses  of  his  person.  In  his  Journtd  Captain 
Nicholls  says, — **  August  13th :  I  saw  General  Bona- 
parte this  morning,  quarter  to  eleven,  up  to  his  neck 
in  water  in  a  bath.  He  had  a  most  ghastly  appear- 
ance. Marchand,  his  chief  valet,  attending  him." 
This  feat  was  accomplished  by  peeping  through  an 
open  window  at  the  suggestion  of  Bertrand. 

On  the  16th  Bertrand  wrote  to  !he  Governor,  en- 
closing a  "  declaration  "  signed  by  Napoleon,  which 
he  requested  him  to  forward  to  Lord  Liverpool,  and 
he  begged  that  if  Mr.  Stokoe,  who  was  expected  at 
St.  Helena,  had  arrived,  he  might  be  sent  to  Long- 
wood  as  soon  as  possible  ;  or  that,  if  the  report  of  his 
coming  out  was  unfounded,  the  G<>vemor  would  au- 
thorize some  English  doctor  chosen  by  the  "Emperor" 
to  sign  the  same  conditions  as  had  been  accepted  by 
Mr.  Stokoe.  This,  said  Bertrand,  was  the  only  person 
who  in  the  present  state  of  health  of  the  Prince  (dans 
Tetat  de  santfe  ou  se  trouve  ce  Prince)  could  be 
admitted  to  attend  him.  The  paper  with  Napoleon's 
signature  consisted  of  a  protest  against  what  he  called 
the  violation  of  the  privacy  of  his  house  by  the  orderly 
oflScer,  who  had  frequently,  according  to  his  instruc- 
tions, entered  the  rooms  he  found  open  for  the  pur- 
pose of  ascertaining  the  presence  of  Bonaparte,  but 
had  invariably  been  stopped  before  he  eflFected  his 
object  by  finding  some  inner  door  locked.  It  also 
contained  a  complaint  that  Napoleon  had  been  de- 
prived of  both  his  medical  attendants,  and  he  was 
left  to  struggle  under  the  attacks  of  disease,  having 
had  for  two  years  chronic  hepatitis ;  and  ended  by 
expressing  his  resolution  never  to  take  notice  of  or 
receive  any  despatch  or  packet  which  was  addressed 
in  a  manner  contrary  to  the  form  that  had  been  for 


176  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXV. 

four  years  observed,  during  which  all  correspondence 
with  him  had  been  carried  on  through  the  medium  of 
his  oflBcers.  If  this  form  was  not  adhered  to,  Napo- 
leon said  he  would  throw  the  packets  into  the  fire  or 
out  of  the  windows- 

The  Grovernor  replied  to  this  communication  by  the 
following  note,  which  was  addressed, — 

"  Note  for  the^nformation  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte. 

"  In  addition  to  the  extracts  from  Earl  Bathurst's 
instructions  of  28th  September  and  30th  November, 
1818,  and  6th  October,  1818,  transmitted  in  duplicate 
on  the  11th  instant,  the  (governor  has  the  honour  to 
enclose,  for  the  perusal  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  du- 
plicates or  copies  of  the  further  papers  which  were 
transmitted  for  his  information  with  the  above  ex- 
tracts on  the  21st  and  25th  March  last. 

"  The  Grovernor  has  also  the  honour  to  enclose 
copy  of  his  replies  to  certain  propositions  made  by 
Count  Montholon  on  the  part  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte, 
in  respect  to  the  terms  upon  which  he  was  disposed 
to  receive  the  assistance  of  a  British  medical  attend- 
ant; in  conformity  to  which  replies,  or  upon  the 
simple  and  wholly  unobjectionable  oflFer  contained  in 
Earl  Bathurst's  letter  of  the  16th  May,  1818,  it  rests 
solely  with  Napoleon  Bonaparte  to  have  recourse  to 
such  assistance  whilst  awaiting  the  arrival  of  the 
medical  attendant  whose  selection  has  been  left  to  a 
member  of  his  own  family,  as  announced  in  a  note 
from  the  Governor,  transmitting  the  information  con- 
veyed to  him  from  Earl  Bathurst  on  the  4th  Novem- 
ber last. 

"  The  Gk>vernor  has  also  the  honour  to  enclose 
copy  of  a  letter  he  addressed  to  Count  Montholon  on 
the  4th  April  last,  in  reply  to  a  suggestion  that  the 


Aug.  1819.  THE  GOVERNOR'S  "NOTE."  177 

Gt)vernor  would  address  himself  to  Count  Bertrand  as 
a  channel  of  communication  to  Napoleon  Bonaparte. 

"  In  enclosing  these  papers  the  Governor  feels 
himself  called  upon,  from  the  obstacles  he  so  un- 
ceasingly experiences  in  the  discharge  of  his  duties, 
with  whatever  regard  it  has  been  his  endeavour  to 
have  them  executed,  to  declare  that  upon  all  the 
points  which  have  formed  the  subject  of  his  communi- 
cations on  the  11th  instant,  as  well  as  on  the  present 
occasion,  the  determinations  he  has  taken,  being  in 
strict  conformity  to  the  instructions  of  his  Govern- 
ment, and  considered  with  every  attention  that  cir- 
cumstances have  admitted  to  the  particular  situation 
of  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  and  to  the  conduct  of  the 
persons  around  him,  are  and  must  remain  unalterable, 
whilst  he  is  equally  resolved  not  to  receive  a  com- 
munication from  any  person  in  attendance  upon  Napo- 
leon Bonaparte,  on  matters  that  relate  to  him,  wherein 
it  is  not  most  explicitly  declared  by  the  person  who 
writes  that  he  addresses  the  Gt)vernor  by  the  orders 
or  directions,  and  in  the  name,  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte 
himself. 

"  H.  Lowe. 

"  Cagtle,  James  Town,  August  17,  1819." 

At  the  same  time  the  Gt)vernor  ordered  Dr.  Yerling 
to  go  at  once  to  Counts  Montholon  and  Bertrand,  and 
request  them  to  acquaint  Bonaparte  that  he  was  at 
all  times  ready  to  aflford  medical  assistance  to  him 
if  he  was  disposed  to  accept  it.  Montholon,  being 
confined  to  his  room  by  sickness,  requested  Dr.  Yer- 
ling to  address  himself  to  Bertrand.  He  accordingly 
went  to  the  house  of  the  latter,  and  made  a  tender 
of  his  services.  Bertrand  replied  that  Napoleon  would 
not  see  any  physician,  who  did  not  previously  sign  the 

VOL.  III.  N 


178  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXV. 

conditions  agreed  to  by  Mr.  Stokoe;  and  was  pro- 
ceeding to  explain  the  nature  of  those  conditions, 
when  Dr.  Yerling  told  him  that  he  could  not  enter 
into  any  discussion  upon  the  subject,  and  requested 
Count  Bertrand  to  make  the  message  known  to  Bona- 
parte. 

He  saw  Bertrand  again  the  same  day,  who  told 
him  that  he  had  informed  Bonaparte  of  the  message, 
and  that  he  was  directed  to  reply  that  the  Emperor 
was  willing  to  choose  a  physician  whenever  the  Go- 
vernor would  authorize  whoever  might  be  selected  to 
sign  the  conditions  agreed  to  by  Mr.  Stokoe,  and  that 
he  would  not  see  any  person  who  declined  signing 
these  conditions.  Napoleon  was  also  informed  that 
Dr.  Amott,  the  principal  medical  oflBcer  on  the  island, 
would  be  ready  to  attend  immediately  to  any  call  that 
might  be  made  upon  him  for  his  services ;  and  on  the 
21st  of  August  Dr.  Amott  went  to  Longwood  and 
saw  Count  Bertrand,  to  whom  he  made  the  offer  of 
his  professional  aid  to  Bonaparte.  The  Count  took  a 
paper  out  of  his  pocket,  and,  having  read  a  series  of 
conditions,  asked  Dr.  Arnott  if  he  was  willing  to 
assent  to  them.  Dr.  Arnott  replied  that  he  would 
enter  into  no  conditions  whatever;  that  it  was  a 
matter  of  course,  if  he  visited  Bonaparte,  that  he 
should  have  the  full  benefit  of  his  professional  abili- 
ties, whatever  they  might  be,  but  that  he  would 
enter  into  no  other  engagement.  The  interview  then 
ended. 

On  Mr.  Stokoe's  arrival  at  St.  Helena  he  was  im- 
mediately put  under  arrest,  and  brought  before  a 
court-martial,  pursuant  to  the  orders  of  the  Admiralty. 
He  was  tried  upon  several  charges,  which  were  for 
warded  in  writing  by  the  Lords  of  the  Admiralty 
and  of  which  the  principal  were  the  following : — 


Aug.  1819.        COURT-MARTIAL  ON  MR.  8T0K0E.  179 

1st.  That,  having  on  the  17th  of  January  last  been 
ordered  by  Rear- Admiral  Plampin  to  visit  Longwood, 
for  the  purpose  of  aflFording  medical  assistance  to 
General  Bonaparte,  he  had  communicated  with  him 
or  his  attendants  upon  subjects  not  at  all  connected 
with  medical  advice,  contrary  to  standing  orders  in 
force  for  the  governance  of  His  Majesty's  naval  oflBcers 
at  St.  Helena. 

2nd.  That  he  had,  on  receiving  communications, 
both  in  writing  and  verbally,  from  some  of  the  French 
prisoners  at  Longwood,  taken  notice  of  and  given  an 
answer  to  such  communications  previous  to  making 
the  same  known  to  the  Commander-in-Chief,  contrary 
to  the  said  standing  orders. 

3rd.  That  he  had  signed  a  paper  purporting  to  be 
a  bulletin  of  General  Bonaparte's  health,  and  delivered 
the  same  to  the  General  or  his  attendants,  contrary  to 
the  said  orders. 

4th.  That  he  had  in  such  bulletin  stated  facts  re- 
lative to  the  health  of  General  Bonaparte  which  did 
not  Ml  under  his  own  observation,  and  which,  as  he 
afterwards  confessed,  were  dictated  or  suggested  to 
him  by  the  General  or  his  attendants. 

5th.  That  he  had,  contrary  to  his  duty,  which  was 
to  aflFord  medical  advice  only,  communicated  to  Gene- 
ral Bonaparte  or  his  attendants  information  relative 
to  certain  books,  letters,  and  papers  said  to  have  been 
sent  from  Europe  for  them,  and  which  had  been  inter- 
cepted by  the  Governor  of  St.  Helena. 

6th.  That  he  had,  contrary  to  his  duty  and  to  the 
character  of  a  British  naval  officer,  communicated 
to  General  Bonaparte  or  his  attendants  an  infamous 
and  calumnious  imputation  cast  upon  Lieut.-General 
Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  Governor  of  St.  Helena,  by  Barry 
O'Meara,  late  a  surgeon  in  the  Royal  Navy,  implying 

N  2 


180  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXV. 

that  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  had  practised  with  the  said 
O'Meara  to  induce  him  to  put  an  end  to  the  existence 
of  General  Bonaparte. 

7th.  That  he  had  in  the  whole  of  his  conduct  in  the 
transactions  evinced  a  disposition  to  thwart  the  inten- 
tions and  regulations  of  the  Governor  and  the  Rear- 
Admiral,  and  to  further  the  views  of  the  French  pri- 
soners in  furnishing  them  with  false  or  colourable 
pretences  for  complaint. 

All  these  charges  were  found  proved,  and  Mr. 
Stokoe  was  sentenced  to  be  dismissed  from  the  Navy, 
but,  in  consideration  of  his  very  long  services,  he  was 
recommended  by  the  Court  to  tiie  favourable  consider- 
ation of  the  Lords  of  the  Admiralty,  with  the  view  of 
his  being  put  upon  half-pay.  One  of  the  members 
of  the  Court  wa^  Commander  Sir  William  Wiseman, 
Bart.,  a  son-in-law  of  Sir  James  Mackintosh,  and  in 
a  despatch  to  Lord  Bathurst,  dated  the  15ih  of  Sep- 
tember this  year.  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  alluding  to  him, 
said, — "  He  told  me,  after  the  Court  Martial  was  over, 
he  believed  there  had  never  a  Court  Martial  assembled 
where  the  deliberation  had  been  more  fiill  and  im- 
partial, or  where  the  members  had  taken  more  pains 
to  inform  themselves  on  every  point,  and  to  form 
their  judgment  without  any  motives  of  prejudice.  He 
had  been  here  a  very  short  time  before.  He  expressed 
his  astonishment  at  the  infamous  falsehoods,  as  he 
termed  them,  which  had  been  circulated  in  England 
respecting  the  system  observed  here." 

It  was  no  doubt  a  severe  disappointment  to  Napo- 
leon and  the  French  to  be  thus  deprived  of  the  attend- 
ance of  Mr.  Stokoe,  on  which  they  had  calculated ; 
and  as  he  still  refused  to  see  either  Dr.  Yerling  or 
Dr.  Amott,  or  aflFord  any  facilities  to  the  orderly 
oflBcer,  a  note  was  addressed  to  him  by  the  Governor, 


Sept.  1819.  'FACTS  FROM  ST.  HELENA,'  181 

in  which  he  told  him  that  he  was  under  the  painful 
but  unavoidable  necessity  of  making  known  to  him 
that,  pursuant  to  his  instruction  from  Lord  Bathurst, 
he  had  granted  to  the  orderly  oflBcer  such  means  as  it 
might  be  found  necessary  to  employ  for  removing  any 
obstruction  opposed  to  his  obtaining  daily  access  to 
the  place  where  Napoleon  Bonaparte  might  be  seen. 
He  was,  however,  to  have  recourse  to  force  only 
when  he  found  that  he  could  not  obtain  admission 
without  it. 

In  the  early  part  of  the  month  a  pamphlet  which 
had  been  published  in  London  anonymously,  called 
*  Facts  from  St.  Helena,'  *  came  into  the  hands  of  the 
GK)vernor.  The  author  was  Theodore  Hook,  who 
stopped  at  St.  Helena  on  his  way  from  the  Mauritius, 
and  the  brochure  created  some  sensation  at  the  time. 
It  was  extremely  favourable  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe, 
and  attacked  O'Meara,  who  in  consequence  published 
his  *  Exposition '  by  way  of  answer.  Writing  to 
Lord  Bathurst  on  the  8ih  of  August,  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe  thus  spoke  of  Theodore  Hook's  performance : — 
"  I  have  not  yet  seen  Count  Las  Cases'  last  publica- 
tion, and  it  is  only  two  days  since  I  obtained  a  copy 
of  Uie  *  Facts '  illustrative  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte's 
treatment  at  St.  Helena.  I  know  the  author,  but  not 
in  his  capacity  as  such,  nor  indeed  have  I  ever  had 
any  further  acquaintance  with  him  than  the  casual 
one  which  is  formed  in  general  with  the  passengers 
from  the  East.  I  am,  however,  very  sensible  of  his 
good  intentions,  although  he  appears  to  have  drawn 
some  matters  in  rather  too  glowing  colours.  His  in- 
formation he  did  not  obtain  from  me,  but  I  believe 

*  'Facts  illustrative  of  the  Treatment  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte  in  St. 
Helena,  being  the  result  of  minute  inquiries  and  {personal  research  in  that 
island.' 


182  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXV; 

must  have  got  it  from  some  naval  friend,  which  may 
account  for  any  inaccuracy  into  which  he  may  have 
faUen." 

Poor  Captain  Nicholls  was  not  only  ignorant  of 
the  French  language,  but  seems  to  have  been  puzzled 
about  French  customs.  With  amusing  naivetS  he 
wrote  to  Major  Gorrequer  on  the  13th  of  September, — 
"  I  have  not  seen  General  Bonaparte  to-day.  At  this 
moment  there  is  a  person  sitting  in  the  General's 
billiard-room  with  a  cocked  hat  on.  I  however  can 
only  see  the  hat  moving  about.  If  the  French  are 
accustomed  to  sit  at  dinner  with  their  hats  on,  pro- 
bably this  is  Napoleon  Bonaparte  at  his  dinner." 
The  Major  replied  with  becoming  gravity,  "  There  is 
in  fact  no  other  person  of  the  establishment  at  Long- 
wood  in  the  habit  of  wearing  a  cocked  hat,  and  conse- 
quently it  is  more  than  probable  that  you  did  see 
him."  And  so  they  were  obliged  on  this  occasion  to 
content  themselves  with  the  inference  drawn  from  the 
cocked  hat;  although,  perhaps,  if  the  French  had 
known  the  degree  of  faith  reposed  in  this  signal  of 
Bonaparte's  presence,  and  he  had  himself  wished  to 
make  the  attempt  to  escape,  it  would  not  have  been 
difficult  to  use  it  as  a  means  of  deceiving  the  orderly 
officer,  and  by  a  simple  stratagem  make  him  believe 
that  his  prisoner  was  at  Longwood,  although  actually 
gone. 

To  the  great  satisfaction  of  the  Governor,  Professor 
Antommarchi,  the  surgeon  who  was  chosen  by  Car- 
dinal Fesch  to  attend  upon  Bonaparte,  arrived  on  the 
20th  of  September.  The  same  vessel  brought  out,  as 
chaplains  to  the  French,  the  Abbe  Buonavita,  an 
elderly  priest,  who  had  been  for  many  years  a  mission- 
ary in  Mexico,  and  whose  recommendation  for  this 
new  office  was  that  he  had  previously  been  confessor 


Skpt.  1819.      MADAME  BERTH AND'S  COMPLAINTS.  183 

to  Napoleon*s  mother,  and  the  Abbe  Vignali ;  also 
Causal  the  new  maitre-d'hotel,  and  Chaudelin  the 
cook.  All  these  persons  had  before  they  left  Eng- 
land signed  a  declaration  to  the  same  effect  as  had 
been  required  from  Napoleon*s  other  followers.  They 
reached  Longwood  on  the  evening  of  the  20th,  and 
were  admitted  into  Bonaparte's  presence  the  next  day. 

Madame  Bertrand  was  however  the  only  lady  now 
left  to  enliven  by  her  presence  the  society  at  Long- 
wood,  and  she  naturally  felt  oppressed  by  the  dulness 
of  the  place.  The  conduct  of  Napoleon  in  shutting 
himself  up  from  all  visitors  had  greatly  increased  the 
ermid  of  a  residence  there,  and  in  a  note  she  wrote 
about  this  time  to  the  Grovernor  she  complained 
of  the  privation  she  felt,  as  though  it  were  his  fault 
that  they  had  not  more  society.  Sir  Hudson,  how- 
ever, reminded  her  that  he  had  consented,  at  Count 
Bertrand's  suggestion,  to  the  proposal  that  the  latter 
should  present  a  list  of  fifty  persons  for  the  Governor's 
approval,  who  might  be  allowed  to  visit  Longwood 
without  any  pass  from  him  upon  the  invitation  of 
Napoleon.  He  said  that,  the  list  not  having  been  pre- 
sented, he  had  proposed  to  Count  Montholon  to  frame 
one,  but  they  had  not  availed  themselves  of  this  offer. 
He  added, — "Of  the  society  which  most  generally 
meets  at  Sir  Hudson  Lowe's  own  house,  there  have 
been  never  less  than  twelve  persons  who  have  been  at 
liberty  to  visit  at  Longwood  without  any  pass  from 
him.  This  number  will  now  however  be  augmented, 
and  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  will  make  known  to  the  per- 
sons comprehended  in  it  that  there  will  be  no  objec- 
tion to  their  visits  on  his  part." 

Madame  Bertrand  immediately  forwarded  a  list  of 
names,  which  she  begged  the.  Governor  to  send  to  the 
orderly  officer  with  instructions  to  allow  those  persons 


184  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXV. 

to  come  and  visit  her  without  a  pass,  and  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe  courteously  assented.  It  is  pleasing  to  be  able 
to  state  that  the  Countess  seems  to  have  won  the 
good  will  and  regard  of  all  who  knew  her.  She  was  a 
very  agreeable,  and  had  been  a  remarkably  handsome 
woman,  and  her  presence  at  Longwood  must  have  in 
no  slight  degree  alleviated  the  tedium  and  discomfort 
of  the  captivity.  We  wish  we  could  say  anything  so 
favourable  of  her  husband,  but  his  influence  was 
invariably  exerted  for  evil,  and  his  behaviour  to  the 
Governor  was  intolerable.  In  a  despatch  from  Lord 
Bathurst,  brought  by  the  same  vessel  that  conveyed 
Antommarchi  and  the  priests  to  St.  Helena,  he  said, — 

"  The  conduct  of  Count  Bertrand  makes  it  unfit 
that  you  should  any  longer  address  yourself  to  him  in 
any  communications  which  you  may  have  occasion  to 
make  to  General  Buonaparte ;  in  the  event  therefore 
of  Count  Montholon's  departure,  you  will  address 
yourself  to  the  Abbe  Buonavita,  or  to  either  of  the 
two  other  gentlemen  who  go  out  with  him." 

In  another  despatch,  which  reached  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe  at  the  same  time.  Lord  Bathurst  said, — 

"I  have  not  thought  it  advisable  to  direct  any 
prosecutions  against  the  'Morning  Chronicle,*  or  Mr. 
O'Meara's  publications ;  not  because  I  felt  any  in- 
difference on  the  subject,  but  because  London  juries 
are  very  uncertain  in  their  verdicts ;  and  one  ill-dis- 
posed juryman  would  be  able  to  acquit  the  parties, 
which  would  give  occasion  for  triumph,  and  appear 
to  justify  the  complaints  which  have  been  made  against 
you.  As  it  is,  you  will  have  had  the  satisfaction  of 
seeing  that,  after  all  their  publications  and  all  their 
threats,  not  one  person  has  ever  opened  his  mouth  in 
Parliament  in  favour  of  Buonaparte. 


Sept.  1819.        INSTRUCTIONS  FROM  ENGLAND.  185 

"You  are  acting  with  great  prudence  in  avoiding 
if  possible  any  scene  with  Buonaparte ;  and  I  trust 
that  the  apprehension  of  the  orderly  officer  coming 
into  his  room  will  induce  him  to  show  himself,  so  as 
to  make  a  scene  unnecessary.  You  will  find  I  think 
Abbe  Buonavita  a  very  harmless  man.  The  surgeon 
is  reckoned  very  intelligent,  but  I  think  will  not  be 
disposed  to  be  troublesome,  as  he  is  apparently  in- 
clined to  make  advances  to  the  Grovernment,  by  pre- 
paring to  dedicate  the  work  he  is  completing  to  the 
Prince  Regent. 

"Nothing  could  have  been  more  fortunate  than 
Mr.  Ricketts's  visit  at  St.  Helena.  He  has  given  the 
most  satisfactory  reports  concerning  the  real  state  of 
the  business,  and  saw  through  all  the  manoeuvres 
which  were  practised  to  impose  upon  him.  I  have 
not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  Dr.  Baxter, 
but  I  expect  to  see  him  in  a  day  or  two. 

**  With  respect  to  Mr.  Balcombe  you  will  let  it  be 
known  that,  in  the  event  of  his  arriving  at  St.  Helena, 
you  have  orders  to  send  him  away.  His  partners 
must  not  be  allowed  to  continue  their  contract  if  his 
name  is  in  it. 

"July  13. 

"  P.S. — I  see  by  the  newspapers  that  Mr.  Hutchin- 
son yesterday  said  something  about  Buonaparte  in  the 
House  of  Commons,  but  it  produced  no  eflfect,  and 
was  not  attended  to." 

In  order  to  introduce  and  circulate  in  the  island 
copies  of  O'Meara's  *  Exposition,*  which  was  full  of 
the  grossest  calumnies  against  the  Governor,^   the 

*  I  should  like  to  quote  what  Count  Montholon  said  to  his  wife  in  a 
letter  respecting  this  publication  of  O'Meara,  but  I  cannot  satisfy  myself 
that  it  ought  to  be  made  use  of.  Eetters  written  by  a  husband  to  a  wife, 
or  by  a  wife  to  her  husband,  in  all  the  confidence  of  that  intimate  and 


186  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXV. 

following  expedient  was  adopted  by  him  and  his 
friends.  Eighteen  sets  of  the  work  were  put  on  board 
a  vessel  about  to  sail  for  St.  Helena,  in  small  sealed 
packets,  addressed  to  officers  and  inhabitants  on  the 
island.  The  Captain  thought  they  were  religious 
tracts,  and  sent  them  on  shore  without  making  any 
manifest  as  the  regulations  required,  and  they  were 
afterwards  delivered  to  the  several  persons  to  whom 
they  were  addressed.  They  were  not  however  re- 
tained by  a  single  individual,  but  sent  back  to  the 
publisher  with  the  leaves  uncut. 

As  a  specimen  of  the  veracity  of  this  work  we 
may  quote  the  assertion^  there  made,  that  the  Rev. 
Mr.  Vernon,  in  February  1817,  informed  Count  and 
Countess  Bertrand,  that  both  himself  and  his  wife 
would  come  very  often  to  see  them,  were  it  not  that 
the  Governor  obliged  every  person  who  visited  Longwood 
to  undergo  a  long  interrogation  prior  to  granting  a  pass ^ 
and  that  on  their  return  they  were  obliged  to  make  a  re- 
port of  everything  they  had  seen  or  heard.  When  Mr. 
Vernon's  attention  was  called  to  this  paragraph  by 
Major  Gorrequer,  he  wrote  the  following  letter  on  the 
7th  of  September  in  answer  to  it : — 

"  The  note  in  Mr.  O'Meara's  publication  with  which 
you  have  favoured  me  is  of  a  piece  with  the  rest  of 
his  assertions.  May  I  beg  you  to  assure  the  Governor 
that  it  is  an  infamous  fabrication  ? 

"No  conversation,  of  such  nature  as  Mr.  O'Meara 
represents,  was  ever  held  by  me  to  Count  or  Countess 
Bertrand. 


affectionate  relatioDship,  and  not  intended  to  meet  tbe  public  eye,  ought  to 
be  held  sacred.    The  passage  from  one  of  Count  Montholon's  letters  to  the 
Countess,  quoted  in  a  previous  page  (see  p.  168,  ante),  is  obviously  one 
which  neither  could  object  to  being  printed. 
*  See  p.  109  of  the  *  Exposition.' 


Sept.  1819.  LONGWOOD  HONESTY.  187 

"  Madame  Bertrand  once  or  twice  intimated  to  me 
her  intention  of  pajing  Mrs.  Yernon  a  visit,  adding, 
that,  having  seen  her  once  at  Admiral  Malcolm's,  she 
thought  her  very  much  like  a  sister  of  hers,  and  was 
desirous  of  seeing  her  again ;  upon  which  I  remember 
expressing  my  regi*et  that  Mrs.  Vernon  was  unable  to 
undertake  so  long  a  ride. 

"  To  the  second  question,  I  must  declare  that  the 
only  *  interrogation  previous  to  my  obtaining  a  pass 
from  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  to  visit  at  Longwood '  came 
from  me  to  the  Governor^  viz.  '  Will  you  be  kind 
enough  to  give  me  a  pass  to  visit  Count  Bertrand  ?' 
The  invariable  answer  to  which  was,  *  Certainly,  Mr. 
Vernon.' 

"And  upon  my  return  from  such  visits,  I  can 
declare  that  the  Governor  never  asked  me  any  ques- 
tions ;  except  once  or  twice,  simply,  whether  I  had 
succeeded  in  my  endeavours  to  see  Bonaparte. 

"Once,  indeed,  at  Plantation  House,  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe  asked  me  what  had  passed  between  M.  Las 
Cases  and  myself  at  Longwood,  in  reference  to  a 
conversation  that  had  occurred  some  time  before,  and 
which  at  the  express  desire  of  M.  Las  Cases  I  had 
communicated  to  the  Governor." 

Sir  Hudson  Lowe  learnt  from  the  foreign  Com- 
missioners about  this  time  that  the  French  officers  at 
Longwood  had  spoken  to  them  of  a  design  to  poison 
Napoleon.  When  Count  Montholon  mentioned  it  to 
the  Marquis  de  Montchenu,  the  latter  expressed  his 
utter  disbelief  of  such  a  thing,  upon  which  Count 
Montholon  observed,   ^^  We  do  not  believe  it  ourselves^ 

BUT  IT  IS  ALWAYS  WELL  TO  SAY  SO."^ 

'  "  Nous  ne  le  croyons  pas  nous-mdmes,  mais  c'est  toujoura  bon  K  dire. 


188  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXVI, 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 

NAPOLEON  CEASES  TO  SECLUDE  HIMSELF  IN  HIS  APARTMENTS  — 
HIS  FONDNESS  FOR  GARDENING  —  DR.  ANTOMMARCHI  —  EN- 
LARGEMENT OF  THE  LIMITS  —  INSTRUCTIONS  FROM  EARL 
BATHURST  —  ORDERLY  OFFICER'S  REPORTS  —  NAPOLEON 
TAKES  TO  GOAT-SHOOTING  —  PLAYING  AT  SOLDIERS  —  BALL 
PRACTICE. 

In  October  this  year  a  material  change  took  place  in 
Bonaparte's  conduct.  Instead  of  shutting  himself  up 
in  his  apartments,  and  vexatiously  preventing  the 
orderly  officer  from  seeing  him,  he  walked  out  nearly 
every  day,  and  found  amusement  in  superintending 
some  alterations  in  his  little  garden.  From  this  period 
a  decided  improvement  appeared  in  his  health  and 
spirits;  and  his  undignified  struggle  to  prevent  the 
Governor  fi*om  obeying  his  instructions  having  ceased, 
the  relations  between  them  assumed  a  much  more 
agreeable  character. 

On  the  3rd  of  October  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  wrote  to 
Lord  Bathurst,  and  said  that,  although  there  had  been 
no  change  of  importance  in  the  general  system  upon 
which  he  had  proceeded  from  the  first  moment  of  his 
arrival  on  the  island,  viz.  that  of  combining  the  pre- 
cautions for  security  with  every  proper  regard  and 
attention  to  the  wants  and  comforts  of  the  person 
under  his  charge,  there  was  now  apparently  no  direct 
opposition  to  the  exercise  of  his  duty,  and  that  he 
now  received  from  the  Commissioners  of  the  Allied 
Sovereigns  every  proof  of  accord  in  the  maintenance 
of  the  principles  by  which  he  had  always  hitherto. 


Oct.  1819.  ABANDONS  HIS  SECLUSION.  189 

although  sometimes  so  unsuccessfully,  endeavoured  to 
conduct  his  relations  towards  them,  as  well  as  towards 
Bonaparte  himself.  And  in  a  private  letter  to  Lord 
Bathurst,  written  the  same  day,  Sir  Hudson  said, — 

"In  making  my  official  acknowledgments  to  your 
Lordship  for  the  high  favour  conferred  on  me  by  His 
Royal  Highness  the  Prince  Regent's  gracious  appro- 
bation of  my  conduct,  I  have  taken  occasion  to  com- 
ment upon  the  present  favourable  appearance  of  mat- 
ters in  general.  I  wish  to  be  understood,  however,  as 
speaking  only  of  the  present.  It  may  perhaps  behove 
me  to  be  as  much  on  my  guard  against  the  ad- 
vances that  may  be  eventually  made  to  me  as  against 
the  attacks  and  complaints  that  may  be  still  medi- 
tating. I  shall  endeavour  to  hold  myself  equally  pre- 
pared for  either.  I  have  been  much  gratified  to  learn 
that  the  accounts  brought  by  Mr.  Ricketts  conveyed 
so  much  satisfaction.  Had  he  been  enabled  to  remain 
here  a  short  time  longer,  I  have  little  hesitation  to 
say  he  would  have  seen  matters  more  clearly.  I  feel, 
however,  only  the  more  sensible  of  his  obliging  atten- 
tion, and  of  the  pains  he  took  to  inform  himself  with 
so  much  accuracy  in  so  very  short  a  stay." 

On  the  16th  he  wrote,  "General  Bonaparte  con- 
tinues to  show  himself  daily,  and  is  now  occupied  in 
directing  some  little  improvements  in  his  garden^ 
principally  of  such  nature  as  to  procure  shade  with 
retirement,  and  hide  the  view  of  his  windows." 

Soon  after  the  arrival  of  Antommarchi,  Dr.  Yerling, 
who  had  resided  at  Longwood  more  than  fourteen 
months,  although  never  permitted  by  Napoleon  to 
visit  him,  applied  for  leave  to  return  to  England,  and 
he  received  the  highest  testimonials  from  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe  as  to  his  conduct,  especially  in  the  irksome  and 


190  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXVI. 

painful  si£uation  which  the  proposals  of  Count  Mon- 
tholon  in  April,  and  the  refusal  of  Bonaparte  to  re- 
ceive him  professionally  unless  he  acquiesced  in  them, 
had  placed  him.  His  departure  was  much  regretted 
by  Madame  Bertrand,  who  applied  to  the  Governor 
to  authorize  or  direct  him  to  continue  his  medical 
attendance  upon  her  and  her  family.  On  being  told 
by  Dr.  Yerling  that  he  was  about  to  quit  the  island, 
she  expressed  much  concern,  and  said  she  should 
apply  for  the  attendance  of  Mr.  Henry,  assistant  sur- 
geon of  the  66  th  regiment,  a  gentleman  of  distin- 
guished ability,  the  author  of  *  Events  of  a  Military 
Life,*  a  work  which  has  been  frequently  quoted  in 
the  course  of  the  narrative. 

Dr.  Antommarchi  applied  for  permission  to  attend 
the  hospitals,  for  the  purpose  of  studying  the  diseases 
most  prevalent  in  the  island.  This  was  readily 
granted ;  and  that  no  restraint  might  be  placed  on  his 
communications  with  the  British  medical  officers,  the 
officer  who  attended  him  to  the  town  was  directed  to 
leave  him  while  he  was  thus  professionally  engaged 
with  any  other  medical  man.  However,  the  restriction 
of  being  accompanied  from  Longwood  to  the  town  by 
an  officer,  and  the  circumstance  that  he  and  the  Abbe 
Buonavita  were  once  obstructed  by  a  sentry  on  re- 
turning to  Longwood  from  a  walk  after  gun-fire,  were 
made  the  subject  of  a  personal  complaint  by  Dr. 
Antommarchi  to  the  Governor  on  the  following  day. 
Sir  Hudson  Lowe  expressed  his  regret  at  the  circum- 
stance, and  promised  to  have  it  investigated,  but  he 
said  he  was  surprised  to  find  that  the  French  officers 
had  not  made  him  and  the  priests  acquainted  with  the 
regulations,  and  added  that  he  would  send  them  a 
copy  of  them.  Dr.  Antommarchi  then  begged  to  be 
exempted  from  the  attendance  of  an  officer  whenever 


Oct.  1819.  ANTOMMAKCHI.  191 

he  went  into  the  town ;  but  this  request  was  refused. 
As  this  affair  of  the  sentry  was  as  usual  made  the 
subject  of  exaggerated  complaint  and  misrepresent- 
ation, we  will  give  Sir  Thomas  Readers  report  of  the 
inquiry  instituted  immediately  after  the  occurrence 
happened.    He  said, — 

"  Having  examined  the  sergeant  of  the  guard  and 
the  sentries,  relative  to  the  complaint  made  by  Mr. 
Antommarchi,  it  appears  that  he  and  the  Abbe 
Buonavita  had  been  walking  on  Deadwood,  and  re- 
mained there  after  it  was  dark,  when  upon  their 
return  they  endeavoured  to  pass  the  sentry  at  the 
new  building,  who,  agreeably  to  his  orders,  stopped 
them,  and  desired  they  would  go  round  by  the  Long- 
wood  guard,  as  it  was  contrary  to  the  regulations  for 
any  person  to  enter  the  grounds  of  Longwood  after 
dark,  unless  by  the  entrance  where  the  guard  is  sta- 
tioned. They,  however,  did  not  go  as  far  as  the 
guard,  as  Mr.  Antommarchi  states,  but  got  over  the 
fence  betwixt  the  new  building  and  the  guard-house. 
The  sentry  positively  denies  either  charging  his  bayo- 
net or  attempting  to  load  his  firelock ;  he  merely  told 
them  it  was  contrary  to  orders  to  pass  his  post  after 
dark.  The  oflBcer  of  the  guard  was  posting*  his  sen- 
tries on  the  Fisher's  Valley  side  when  the  occurrence 
took  place.  Major  Goldie  and  some  other  officers  of 
the  66th  observed  that  it  was  dark  when  Mr.  Antom- 
marchi and  the  priest  left  Deadwood." 

In  the  course  of  conversation  with  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe,  Dr.  Antommarchi  mentioned  that  he  had  urged 
Napoleon  to  take  horse-exercise  as  absolutely  neces- 
sary to  his  health,  but  he  objected  to  it  on  account,  as 
he  said,  of  an  apprehension  that  he  might  be  inter- 
fered with  by  the  guards  or  sentries,  and  he  therefore 


192  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXVI. 

would  not  expose  himself  to  the  risk  of  being  thus 
interrupted  in  his  rides.  The  Grovernor  here  ex- 
pressed his  conviction  that  Napoleon  Bonaparte  him- 
self, or  the  persons  about  him,  never  believed  there 
was  any  such  risk  to  be  apprehended ;  it  was  one  of 
the  many  calumnies  that  had  been  directed  against 
him.  He  then  quoted  0*Meara*s  assertion,  in  his 
*  Exposition,'  that  the  sentries  had  orders,  in  case  of 
Napoleon  Bonaparte  going  beyond  the  boundaries,  to 
fire  at  him,  which  he  declared  was  an  infamous  false- 
hood.^ He  said  that,  if  Napoleon  Bonaparte  was 
really  apprehensive  of  being  interrupted  on  his  return 
home  by  the  sentries,  he  had  it  in  his  power  to  relieve 
himself  from  this  apprehension  by  acceding  to  the 
propositions  which  had  been  made  to  him  for  not 
posting  them  until  between  9  and  11  o'clock  at  night. 
The  GrOvernor  then  explained  the  offer  made  to  Bona- 
parte of  the  range  of  the  whole  island  for  taking  exer- 
cise unaccompanied  by  a  British  officer  (excluding 
merely  such  parts  as  led  to  the  sea,  the  town,  or 
batteries,  &c.),  under  the  simple  condition  of  showing 
himself  at  certain  hours,  and  that  it  rested  with  him 
alone  to  give  eflfect  to  it  as  soon  as  he  pleased ;  by 
which  arrangement  also  the  posting  of  the  sentries 
around  the  house,  which  was  now  done  when  it  be- 
came dark,  would  be  protracted  to  a  later  hour,  viz. 
between  9  and  11  o'clock.  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  au- 
thorized Dr.  Antommarchi  to  state  to  Napoleon  what 
he  had  just  said,  adding  that,  when  Dr.  Antommarchi 

*  "  Dr.  Antommarclii's  first  letters  to  England  speak  of  *  gli  amici 
O'Meara  e  Holmes,*  and  a  letter  proceeding  by  this  occasion  speaks  of  the 
latter,  *  11  banchiere  Holmes,*  as  his  agent  in  London.  Without  ascribing 
any  improper  intentions  at  the  outset  to  Mr.  Antommarchi  it  may  still  l^ 
naturally  supposed  that  the  above-mentioned  friend  and  agent  will  have 
pointed  out  to  him  those  persons  residing  in  the  town  who  were  most  in 
their  confidence.**— ^o/c  hy  Sir  Hudson  Lowe, 


Oct.  1819.  DR.  ANTOMMARCHI.  193 

spoke  of  difficulties,  he  ought  to  consider  at  the  same 
time  on  which  side  they  existed,  and  such  as  pro- 
ceeded on  the  part  of  Napoleon  himself  must  not  be 
ascribed  to  him.  Dr.  Antommarchi  evinced  surprise 
at  hearing  that  Bonaparte  had  it  in  his  own  power 
to  extend  his  limits  and  defer  the  posting  of  the 
sentries.  He  said  he  had  not  heard  anything  on  this 
subject  before,  and  he  declared  that  he  had  no  inten- 
tion of  interfering  in  anything  but  his  professional 
avocations;  he  knew  nothing  of  politics,  and  would 
never  intermeddle  with  matters  of  such  a  nature.  He 
had  never  taken  interest  in  political  aflfairs;  but,  as 
Napoleon  had  mentioned  the  cause  of  his  objection  to 
take  horse-exercise  when  he  strongly  recommended 
riding  as  necessary  to  his  health,  he  conceived  it  his 
duty  to  mention  it  to  the  Gk)vemor.  Having  so  done, 
he  left  it  to  his  consideration,  and  would  say  nothing 
further  on  that  point.  The  Governor  recommended 
him  to  continue  to  urge  on  Napoleon  Bonaparte  the 
necessity  of  taking  exercise,  and  repeated  to  him  an 
observation  made  by  O'Meara,  viz.  that  if  he  would 
take  horse-exercise  for  a  fortnight  he  would  be  cured 
of  all  his  complaints.  Antommarchi  replied,  this  might 
have  been  the  case  at  the  commencement  of  his  com- 
plaint; he  had  himself  only  begun  the  treatment  of 
Napoleon  as  his  patient  from  the  1st  of  October,  not 
having  been  sufficiently  settled  after  his  arrival  to 
undertake  it  before ;  he  was,  however,  aware  that  the 
principal  object  was  to  prevail  upon  him  to  ride  and 
take  exercise,  and  he  would  recommend  it  as  strongly 
as  he  could  on  all  occasions.  The  Grovernor,  in  con- 
clusion, told  Dr.  Antommarchi  that,  in  the  orders 
given  to  the  several  guards  and  sentries,  it  was  im- 
possible to  push  personal  regard  to  Napoleon  Bona- 
parte any  &rther,  and  that  he  was  absolutely  secured 

VOL.  III.  0 


194  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXVI. 

by  them  firom  any  unpleasant  interruption,  and  so  he 
might  assure  him. 

Towards  the  end  of  the  month  the  Governor  wrote 
to  Lord  Charles  Somerset  at  the  Cape,  and  requested 
him  to  send  to  St.  Helena,  for  the  use  of  the  establish- 
ment at  Longwood,  three  or  four  good  saddle-horses. 
**Two  of  them,"  he  said,  "I  should  wish  to  be  of 
rather  a  better  description  than  the  others ;  middle- 
sized,  strong,  active,  and  sure-footed,  as  also  of  good 
appearance,  rather  than  remarkable  for  either  swift- 
ness or  blood,  which  might  perhaps  enhance  the  price 
without  rendering  them,  in  this  island,  either  more 
useful  or  more  acceptable.  The  two  others  should 
also  be  perfectly  good  riding-horses."  He  mentioned 
that  one  of  them  would  be  required  for  a  lady. 

Some  extracts  from  Captain  Nicholls*s  journal  for 
the  month  of  November  may  be  thought  interesting, 
and  it  is  pleasing  to  find  that  the  vexed  spirit  of 
Napoleon  soothed  itself  in  the  delightful  occupation  of 
gardening,  of  which  Lord  Bacon  has  written  that  "  it 
is  the  purest  of  human  pleasures,  and  the  greatest  re- 
freshment to  the  spirits  of  man."  Napoleon  with  his 
spade  in  his  hand,  digging  amidst  the  Chinese  servants, 
or  amusing  himself  with  Ber^nd's  children  amongst 
the  flower-beds,  might  form  a  companion  picture  to 
one  which  represented  Scipio  and  Laelius  gathering 
shells  on  the  sea-shore,  as  Cicero,  with  a  kind  of  half 
apology  for  telling  so  trivial  an  anecdote  of  such  emi- 
nent men,  informs  us.  The  ex-Emperor,  however, 
had  not  at  St.  Helena  the  royal  ordering  or  platform 
of  a  princely  garden  of  which  Bacon  speaks,  and 
could  not  havb  ^^  statues  and  such  things  for  state  and 
magnificence ;"  but,  Bff  the  great  philosopher  observes, 
these  ^^add  nothing  to  the  true  pleasure  of  a  gard^i." 

In  his  journal  the  orderly  oflScer  says, — 


Nov.  1819.  mS  LOVE  OP  GARDENING.  195 

"  November  2nd.  General  Bonaparte  was  out  to-day 
in  his  favourite  garden.  The  young  Bertrands  were 
playing  round  him.  3rd.  General  Bonaparte  ap- 
peared out  to-day :  he  then  walked  very  stout.  12lJi. 
Gknend  Bonaparte  amused  himself  for  a  considerable 
time  to-day  gardening  among  the  Chinese,  though  the 
Gt)vemor  was  at  the  new  building  at  the  time. 
General  Bonaparte  walked  to  the  gate  in  the  sod  wall 
to  look  at  the  new  building.  19  th.  General  Bona- 
parte passed  some  hours  during  this  day  in  his 
favourite  garden;  at  times  he  had  a  spade  in  his 
hand  at  work.  He  desired  Sowerby  the  gardener 
to  go  to  the  oflScer  for  two  more  pickaxes,  holding 
up  two  of  his  fingers  for  the  number.  He  had  five 
or  six  Chinese  at  work  besides.  Count  Montholon 
stripped  and  hard  at  work,  and  some  of  his  valets. 
The  Governor  came  to  Longwood  and  saw  General 
Bonaparte  at  work.  20th.  General  Bonaparte  out 
at  work  in  his  little  garden  by  seven  o*clock  with 
a  spade,  and  five  or  six  Chinese  and  valets.  The  two 
priests  and  the  surgeon  were  likewise  employed. 
The  General  and  his  three  gentlemen  assistants  after- 
wards breakfasted  together  in  the  garden.  Count 
Montholon  is  unwell  to-day ;  most  probably  he  caught 
cold  working  so  hard  yesterday.  The  General  was 
out  till  late  this  evening."  Bonaparte  continued  to 
employ  himself  in  this  manner  nearly  every  day,  and 
sometimes  visited  the  Count  and  Countess  Bertrand 
in  the  evening.  To  none  was  this  alteration  in  Napo- 
leon's pursuits  more  important  than  to  the  orderly 
officer,  who  had  suffered  so  much  inconvenience 
hitherto  in  the  execution  of  his  duty,  and  he  em- 
phatically recorded  his  satisfaction  in  an  entry  of 
ike  29th.  "General  Bonaparte  was  out  early  this 
morning  employed  in  his  fovourite  garden,  with  a 

0  2 


196  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXVI. 

number  of  assistants — Count  Montholon,  valets,  Chi- 
nese, gardeners,  storemen,  &c.  &c.  He  is  picking 
holes  in  one  part  of  the  garden,  and  raising  mounds 
in  other  parts. 

"The  General  was  in  his  morning-gown  amidst  the 
people  at  work,  directing  them;  takes  a  spade  at 
times,  and  begins  to  put  in  seeds, — messages  to  me 
for  carts,  shovels,  and  spades.  God  send  he  may 
always  continue  in  this  humour  during  my  residence 
at  Longwood!  30th.  This  afternoon  he  stood  in 
Count  Montholon's  little  garden  looking  at  my  ser^ 
vants  watering  some  flowers  at  my  door."     But 

"  medio  de  fonte  leponim 
Surgit  amari  aliquid." 

This  halcyon  state  of  things  was  now  and  then 
interrupted  by  a  fit  of  petulance  on  the  part  of 
Bonaparte.  One  day  a  tradesman  had  come  to  Long- 
wood  for  the  purpose  of  newly  carpeting  and  papering 
the  dining-room  at  his  request,  in  order  that  it  might 
be  used  for  divine  worship ;  but  Bonaparte  wished  the 
billiard-room  to  be  papered  first,  and  because  the 
man  made  some  difficulty  about  it,  as  he  had  no 
orders  to  that  effect,  and  the  orderly  officer  said  he 
would  refer  to  the  Governor,  Bonaparte  gave  orders 
that  nothing  whatever  should  be  done  to  his  house ; 
and  Count  Montholon,  with  his  usual  candour  and 
honesty,  told  Captain  Nicholls  that  Napoleon  could 
not  get  anything  done  that  he  wished ;  on  which  the 
Captain  remarks  in  his  journal, , "  I  here  differed  in 
opinion  with  him,  and  positively  told  him  that  since  I 
had  been  at  Longwood  General  Bonaparte's  applica- 
tions had  always  been  attended  to,  and  that  every- 
thing had  been  done  for  him  as  soon  as  asked." 

To  give  some  idea  of  the  trouble  taken  in  small 


Nov.  1819.  ATTENTION  TO  HIS  WISHES.  197 

matters  to  satisfy  the  wishes  of  the  exiles,  we  will 
quote  the  following  letter  from  Major  Qorrequer  to 
the  orderly  officer,  dated 

"  Dear  Sir,  "Plantation  House,  Nov.  11,  1819. 

"  Be  pleased  to  wait  on  Count  Montholon,  and 
explain  to  him  that  the  door  was  put  in  hand  the 
moment  Napoleon  Bonaparte  desired  to  have  it  done  ; 
that  this  door  is  a  glass  one,  and  takes  time  to  pre- 
pare; that  it  was  thought  advisable  to  have  all  the 
carpenter's  work  completed  before  the  wall  was 
broken  ;  that  the  door,  it  is  believed,  is  now  finished, 
as  also  the  bookcase  required ;  the  garden-tables 
and  the  trellis-work  for  the  walk  in  the  garden'  well 
advanced :  and  that  all  these  little  works,  with  the 
demands  of  Count  Bertrand  for  alterations  also  at  his 
house,  as  well  as  the  employment  of  the  upholsterer 
and  paper-hanger  at  Longwood,  create  very  sensible 
interruption  in  the  progress  of  the  new  building ;  the 
more  so,  as  all  the  naval  carpenters  have  lately  been 
taken  away,  being  wanted  by  the  Admiral.  The 
Governor  desires  Count  Montholon  may  be  rendered 
aware  of  this  circumstance,  in  order  that  complaints 
may  not  hereafter  arise ;  that  what  is  essential  for 
the  old  building,  and  all  that  has  been  demanded  for 
it,  is  executing,  notwithstanding,  as  fast  as  it  can  pos- 
sibly be  done ;  but  in  order  not  to  be  exposed  to  any 
unbecoming  remark  from  a  servant  of  the  establish- 
ment, such  as  what  Noverraz  made  to  you  this 
morning,  *  that  Napoleon  Bonaparte  would  not  have 
his  billiard-room  papered  because  it  had  been  so  long 
delayed,'  when  no  application  had  been  made  to  the 
(jovemor  for  it,  and  that  it  is  impossible  to  know 
what  is  wanted  in  the  house  when  no  one  sees  the 
interior  of  it,   it  is  requisite  that  the  demand  for 


198  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXYI. 

repairs,  where  opportunities  are  not  afforded  to  see 
that  they  are  wanted,  be  made  by  some  oflBcer  of  the 
establishment.  "I  am,  &c. 

**  G.  Gk)RREQUER/' 

On  the  27th  of  November  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  wrote 
to  Lord  Bathurst,  and  said,  "The  circumstance  of 
General  Bonaparte  having  walked  to  the  new  house 
might  lead  to  the  supposition  that  he  intends  to 
occupy  it  when  completed ;  but  in  proportion  as  he 
sees  an  evident  endeavour  to  hasten  its  completion^ 
he  seems  inclined  to  make  improvements  and  altera- 
tions in  his  present  residence.  This  desire  on  his 
part  has  proved  in  several  instances  extremely 
inconvenient,  because  it  tends  to  take  the  workmen 
from  the  new  building,  of  which  inconvenience, 
through  Count  Montholon,  he  has  been  rendered 
frequently  aware.  I  endeavour,  as  fex  as  I  am  able, 
to  meet  his  desires  in  such  a  way  as  to  avoid  com- 
plaint, without  suflfering  them,  however,  to  interrupt 
the  progress  of  the  principal  work." 

And  again  on  the  1st  of  December,  "  Nothing  can 
exceed  the  bustle  and  activity  which  has  been  re- 
cently displayed  by  General  Bonaparte,  in  giving 
directions  about  his  flower-garden,  and  superintending 
the  workmen  employed  at  it.  He  is  hemming  it  in 
all  round  with  as  bushy  trees  and  shrubs  as  he  can 
get  transplanted,  and  with  sod  walls,  so  as  to  screen 
himself  as  far  as  possible  from  external  observa- 
tion." 

Most  of  the  days  in  December  were  passed  by  Na- 
poleon in  his  garden,  superintending  the  workmen; 
and  on  some  occasions  he  dined  and  took  coffee 
under  the  trees.  His  principal  employment  consisted 
in  transplanting  trees,  and  constructing  a  reservoir 


Dsa.  1819.  GARDENINQ  PURSUITS.  199 

in  one  of  the  gardens.  We  again  avail  ourselves 
of  some  extracts  from  the  journal  of  the  orderly 
oflBcer: — "December  3rd.  I  saw  General  Bonaparte 
this  morning ;  he  was  turning  the  cock  of  a  cistern 
to  allow  the  water  to  run  over  the  flowers  in  one  of 
his  little  gardens.  4th.  General  Bonaparte  had  his 
valets,  stablemen,  Chinese,  &c.,  at  work  in  his  fa- 
vourite garden  from  five  o'clock  this  morning.  The 
(Jeneral  is  filling  his  little  garden  with  trees,  I  fancy- 
not  only  to  screen  him  from  the  sun,  but  also  from 
general  view.  6th.  I  saw  Creneral  Bonaparte  this 
afternoon ;  he  was  in  full  dress,  with  a  ste.r  on  his 
side,  walking  with  Count  Montholon.  At  present  he 
does  not  mind  anybody  seeing  him,  provided  they  do 
not  stand  looking  at  him.  He  appears  completely 
occupied  in  gardening  and  planting ;  and  writing  and 

study  seem  quite  out  of  the  question." 

"23rd.  I  saw  General  Bonaparte  in  his  garden. 
The  Governor  and  his  two  daughters-in-law^  came 
to  Longwood  this  afternoon.  The  young  ladies 
wished  to  see  General  Bonaparte,  but  he  did  not 
seem  inclined  to  give  them  an  opportunity.  After 
they  left  Longwood  he  had  dinner  under  the  trees  in 
his  favourite  garden  with  some  of  his  family  between 
five  and  six  o'clock.  He  saw  the  Miss  Johnsons. 
26th.  I  saw  General  Bonaparte  this  after- 
noon in  one  of  his  little  gardens  in  his  dressing- 
gown.  They  are  doing  nothing  but  transplanting 
trees.  Even  this  day,  though  Sunday,  they  are 
moving  peach-trees  with  fruit  on  them.  They  have 
been  moving  young  oaks  in  full  leaf,  and  the  trees 
probably  will  survive,  but  the  leaf  is  fidling  oflf  as  in 
autumn.  .....  27tli.  I  saw  General  Bonaparte  this 

'  i.e,  step-dMic^teny  daaghters  of  lAdy  Lowe  by  her  fonner  husband. 


200  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXVI. 

morning  in  his  little  garden.  For  many  months  past 
there  has  been  a  sentry  placed  over  the  new  building 
when  the  men  were  not  employed  there.  This  even- 
ing General  Bonaparte  visited  Count  Bertrand,  who 
is  sick,  and  the  sentry  stood  looking  I  fancy  at  the 
General,  for  he  sent  Count  Montholon  to  me  to  com- 
plain that  a  sentry  should  be  posted  so  near  him 
during  the  day,  contrary,  as  Montholon  said,  to  Lord 
Bathurst's  directions."  The  next  day  Captain  Nicholls 
went  to  Plantation  House  to  inform  the  Governor  of 
this  circumstance,  and  he  says — 

"The  Governor  desired  me  to  tell  Count  Montho- 
lon that  the  sentry  in  question  had  been  placed  there 
to  take  care  of  the  tools  at  the  new  building,  but,  as  it 
was  disagreeable  to  Napoleon,  he  should  be  discon- 
tinued immediately.  I  acquainted  Count  Montholon 
with  this  message  on  my  return  to  Longwood." 

On  the  19th  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  writing  to  Lord 
Bathurst  said, — "General  Bonaparte  continues  to 
occupy  himself  with  the  improvements  in  his  garden. 
He  caused  three  large  reservoirs  to  be  dug  in  different 
forms,  within  a  few  paces  of  one  another;  it  being 
found  they  did  not  retain  the  water.  Count  Itfontholon 
applied  to  have  them  lined  with  lead.  It  was  calcu- 
lated by  Major  Emmett  of  the  Engineers  this  would 
create  an  immediate  expense  of  near  300Z.  for  an 
appurtenance  merely  to  the  old  building.  I  pro- 
posed, therefore,  that  a  stone  reservoir  should  be 
commenced  in  the  first  instance,  as  such  would  be 
always  found  useful.  In  the  mean  time  General 
Bonaparte  has  himself  caused  a  second  one  to  be 
constructed  of  wood,  in  the  form  of  an  iminense  vat, 
and  he  has  given  up  the  project  of  the  third.  He 
shows  himself  a  good    deal  in  his  garden,  and  I 


Dbo.  1819.  ANTOMMARCHPS  CALUMNIES.  201 

have  myself  lately  seen  him  twice,  but  not  at  such 
near  distance  as  to  observe  anything  further  than 
that  he  appeared  to  walk  as  strong  and  as  well  as  I 
had  ever  seen  him." 

JFrom  the  very  first  Dr.  Antommarchi  became  the 
slave  of  Napoleon,  and,  of  course,  ready  to  misin- 
terpret everything  to  the  disadvantage  of  England. 
When  St.  Helena  first  came  in  view  he  tells  us  that 
the  thought  which  presented  itself  to  his  mind  was 
this — "  There  was  the  Emperor ;  there  English  cruelty 
persecuted  its  victim  with  relentless  fury !  There  the 
sovereigns  of  Europe  were  taking  revenge  upon  that 
great  man  for  ike  errors  of  his  generosity  V*  But  Sir 
Hudson  Lowe  is  the  great  object  of  his  attack,  and  he 
takes  every  opportunity  of  calumniating  him.  His 
malice,  however,  constantly  defeats  itself  by  giving  a 
colour  to  incidents  which  manifestly,  without  any  con- 
futation or  explanation,  they  will  not  bear.  For  in- 
stance, he  tells  us  that  when  he  and  his  companions 
arrived  at  St.  Helena  they  were  extremely  impatient 
to  land,  "but  not  so  Sir  Hudson  Lowe.  It  was 
necessary  to  lay  a  snare  for  us,  and  he  wanted  a  few 
hours  to  meditate  how  to  do  it."  And  what  does  the 
reader  suppose  is  the  proof  which  Antommarchi  ad- 
duces of  this  meditated  snare  ?  He  says  that  several 
boats  came  and  rowed  about  the  ship,  but  he  was  not 
deceived  by  the  stratagem.  What  stratagem  ?  We 
shall  see.  **  *  What  do  these  boats  want  ? '  said  I  to 
the  Captain.  *  They  are  fishing-boats.*  *  Probably  the 
men  have  fish ;  ask  them  to  sell  us  some.'  He  asked 
them,  but  they  had  not  yet  cast  their  nets.  My 
question  had  disconcerted  them,  and  they  went  away."* 
It  certainly  required  some  ingenuity  to  suspect  a  plot 

'  Memoirs  of  Napoleon's  Exile,  vol.  i.  pp.  55,  56. 


202  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXVI. 

in  this,  bat  Antommarchi  means  that  the  boats  were 
sent  to  entrap  the  newly-arrived  strangers  into  sending 
some  letter  or  paper  clandestinely  ashore,  and  thus 
putting  themselves  in  the  power  of  the  Governor, 
This  is  at  the  beginning  of  his  book;  and  after,  a 
tissue  of  misrepresentation  throughout,  it  consistently 
concludes  with  positive  felsehood.  He  pretends  that 
when  he  arrived  in  London  after  the  death  of  Napo- 
leon he  was  sent  for  by  the  Ministry,  or  as  he  calls  it, 
the  Council,  and  that  the  following  colloquy  took  place : 
**  *  What  signifies  after  all  the  death  of  General  Bona- 
parte? It  rids  us  of  an  implacable  enemy,  and 
delivers  him  from  a  painfal  situation  in  which  he 
would  have  remained  for  ever/  *The  assurances 
given  to  us  by  the  Governor,*  answered  I,  *were  not 
of  that  nature/  *The  Governor  I  the  Governor  T 
*  Your  Excellency  does  not  do  him  justice :  he  was  a 
strict  follower  of  his  instructions/  *  If  so,  why  did  he 
not  cause  the  body  of  Bonaparte  to  be  thrown  into 
lime  ?  the  idol  would  then  have  been  completely  de- 
stroyed, and  we  should  have  the  sooner  done  with 
him/  "  These  specimens  enable  us  to  judge  of  the 
value  of  statements  made  by  such  a  writer  in  dis- 
paragement of  others/ 

He  soon  became  an  apt  pupil  in  the  art  of  grum- 
bling. He  disregarded  the  regulations,  and,  when 
stopped  by  the  sentries  on  duty  bitterly  complained. 
One  evening,  on  the  21st  of  December,  he  remained 
in  the  wood  near  Longwood  until  some  time  after  it 

*  The  vanity  of  Antommarchi  is  extremely  ludicrous.  He  actually 
insinuates  that  when  he  was  in  London,  on  his  way  to  St.  Helena,  he  was 
assailed  yrith  offers  and  threats  to  induce  him  to  abandon  his  intention,  in 
order  that  England  might  have  the  benefit  of  the  services  of  so  great  an 
anatomist.  But  he  modestly  adds,  "England  abounds  in  first-rate  practi- 
tioners, and  1  could  not,  therefore,  suppose  that  there  really  existed  any 
intention  to  secure  my  presence  and  my  services," — Ibid,,  vol.  i.  p.  39. 


Deo.  1819.  ANTOMMARCHra  COMPLAINTS.  203 

was  dark,  and  then  attempted  to  pass  the  sentry,  who 
refused  to  allow  him  until  reference  was  made  to  the 
orderly  oflScer.  The  Doctor  made  this  the  subject  of 
a  long  letter  of  remonstrance  to  the  Governor  the 
next  day,  and  he  also  mentioned  another  affront.  He 
had  invited  the  English  medical  o£Bcers  to  dine  with 
him,  and  they  had  declined  to  come.  Dr.  Amott 
pleaded  a  prior  engagement;  Mr.  Livingstone  was 
unwell  and  could  not  go ;  Dr.  Verling  and  Mr.  Henry 
also  sent  excuses.  Whatever  may  have  been  their 
reasons,  the  Governor  had  nothing  to  do  with  it, 
as  he  did  not  interfere  at  all.  Dr.  Antommarchi, 
however,  in  his  letter  attributed  their  refusal  to  the 
**  universal  terror  impressed  on  the  minds  of  the  in- 
habitants of  the  island ; "  and  in  his  reply  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe  said,  after  explaining  the  conduct  of  the  sentry, 
**  In  regard  to  your  remark  as  to  the  difference  be- 
tween the  private  and  public  reception  you  have  met 
from  the  gentlemen  of  your  own  profession  on  this 
island,  these  gentlemen  alone  can  explain  the  cause  of 
such  difference,  if  they  are  themselves  conscious  of  it ; 
but  even  should  they  have  appeared  to  fail  in  any  act 
of  expected  attention  towards  you,  this  cannot  justify 
your  making  a  most  unprovoked  and  indecorous  attack 
upon  me,  such  as  is  conveyed  by  the  following  re- 
flection,— *presi  forse  ancor  loro  dall'  universal  terrore 
impresso  neir  anirao  degli  abitanti  di  quest'  isola;*  a 
reflection  obtruded  under  the  most  false  and  misguided 
impressions,  and  only  affording  an  instance,  which  I 
have  had  real  regret  to  observe,  of  your  readiness  to 
seek  the  first  forced  occasion  that  could  be  availed  of 
to  hold  an  irritating  and  insulting  style  of  language  to 
me.  You  can.  Sir,  have  had  no  opportunity  to  trace 
the  real  causes  which  influence  the  conduct  of  indi- 
viduals on  this  island  in  their  relations  with  Long- 


204  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXYI. 

wood,  and  without  such  knowledge  the  reflection  is 
as  unjust  as  it  is  offensive.  By  the  regulations  com- 
municated to  you  through  the  Abb^  Buonavita,  you 
were  informed  that  no  letters  containing  the  imperial 
title  could  be  received  by  me.  In  your  present  letter 
there  has  been  an  unnecessary,  and  as  it  appears  to 
me,  from  the  particular  subject  of  the  passage  where 
the  title  appears,  a  purposed  disregard  of  this  rule ;  I 
cannot  in  future  receive  any  letter  from  you  where 
this  title  is  employed." 

The  Governor  now  determined,  upon  his  own 
responsibility,  to  make  an  addition  to  the  limits  of 
the  space  hitherto  allowed  to  the  French  at  Long- 
wood  for  taking  exercise,  either  on  horseback  or  on 
foot,  unaccompanied  by  a  British  officer,  nor  liable 
to  interruption  by  any  sentry ;  and  he  specified  the 
new  boundaries  in  the  following  memorandum,  en- 
closed in  a  letter  to  Count  Montholon  on  the  31st  of 
December : — 

**The  limits  to  the  westward  of  the  Alarm-house 
and  Hutt's  Gate  will  be  bounded  in  future  during  the 
day  as  follows  : — 

"From  the  Alarm-house  by  the  road  over  Peak 
Hill  and  Francis  Plain  to  Red  Hill,  from  thence  by 
Merriman*s  Hill  and  Church  Ground  to  Bates*s  Branch, 
over  Sandy  Bay  Ridge,  and  returning  by  the  road 
across  Stick's  Ridge  to  Hutt's  Gate. 

**  The  limits  will  be  closed  at  the  same  time  in  the 
evening  as  heretofore ;  should  any  person,  however, 
accidentally  not  have  returned  before  the  sentries  are 
posted,  the  entrance  will  remain  open  near  Longwood 
New  House,  as  well  as  by  the  Lodge,  to  pass  in  un- 
interrupted, so  long  as  any  twilight  prevails." 

The  year  1820  commenced  very  tranquilly  at  Long- 


Jan.  1820.  GARDENING.  205 

wood.  Napoleon  continued  to  amuse  himself  in  his 
gardens,  where  he  sometimes  spent  the  whole  day 
busily  employed  in  planting  and  making  improve- 
ments. It  will  be  seen  that  he  defended  his  little 
territory  against  invasion  by  animals  with  as  much 
resolution  and  energy  as  he  displayed  in  his  campaigns 
when  at  the  head  of  countless  armies.  The  journal 
of  Captain  Nicholls  supplies' us  with  many  interesting 
notices  of  the  discrowned  Emperor  in  his  new  occupa- 
tion of  nurseryman  and  gardener. 

**  January  1st.  Sowerby  saw  General  Bonaparte  in 
his  favourite  garden  to-day.  He  was  also  out  in  the 
evening  till  gun-fire  (nine  o'clock)  looking  at  the 
boys  and  others  firing  crackers."  The  next  day  he 
was  **  amusing  himself  with  the  pipe  of  the  fire-engine, 
spouting  water  on  the  trees  and  flowers  in  his  favourite 
garden.'* ....  "4th.  I  saw  General  Bonaparte  several 
times  to-day  walking  about  the  large  garden ;  he  still 
amuses  himself  by  gardening,  that  is  superintending ; 
however,  he  at  times  takes  a  watering-pot  in  his  hands," 
&c.  On  the  5th  he  dined  under  the  trees  with  Count 
Montholon.  On  the  9th  he  was  "busily  employed 
amidst  his  valets  gardening;  he  had  on  his  head  a 
large  straw  hat ;  he  did  not  seem  to  mind  a  little  rain 
which  was  falling." 

On  the  10th  the  orderly  ofiBcer  reported, — 
"I  saw  General  Bonaparte  this  morning;  he  was 
amusing  himself  in  one  of  his  favourite  gardens ;  his 
morning  dress  at  present  consists  of  a  white  gown  and 
straw  hat  with  a  long  broad  brim ;  in  the  afternoon  he 
appears  out  in  a  cocked  hat,  green  coat,  and  white 
breeches  and  stockings :  he  walks  a  good  deal  most 
afternoons  in  Longwood  garden,  accompanied  by  either 
Count  Montholon  or  Bertrand,  and  often  pays  a  visit 


206  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXVI. 

to  the  Bertrands  in  the  evenings."  "  12th.  This  day 
the  one-eyed  cooper  came  up  from  James  Town  with 
a  large  tub  (twelve  feet  wide)  for  General  Bonaparte's 
favourite  garden,  to  serve  as  a  reservoir.  The  cooper 
told  me  that  the  General  was  very  much  pleased  with 
the  tub,  and  gave  him  a  glass  of  wine  in  consequence 
with  his  own  hand.  The  old  cooper  seemed  highly 
delighted."  "  18th.  I  saw  General  Bonaparte  in  his 
little  garden  this  morning.  Counts  Bertrand  and 
Montholon  busily  employed  measuring  out  more 
ground  for  the  extension  of  the  garden  for  the  Gene- 
ral. The  General  was  out  a  good  deal  to-day.  The 
day  uncommonly  fine."  On  the  19  th  Bonaparte  was 
employed  "  superintending  the  building  of  a  sod-wall ; 
he  had  Count  Montholon  and  all  his  valets  hard  at 
work.  The  young  Bertrands  carrying  water  to  wet 
the  sods  as  they  were  laid.  The  General's  appear- 
ance was  rather  grotesque  this  morning ;  however,  he 
appeared  highly  amused." 

But  the  menus  plauirs  of  the  ex-Emperor  were  not 
always  quite  so  harmless.  On  the  evening  of  the 
20th  a  goat  and  two  kids  belonging  to  the  Countess 
Bertrand  happened  to  stray  into  his  garden  and  make 
free  with  his  flowers,  on  which  he  took  his  fowling- 
piece  and  shot  one  of  the  animals  on  the  spot.  The 
Countess,  fearing  that  a  like  catastrophe  might  happen 
to  her  other  two  pets,  gave  them  away  to  Mrs.  Kings- 
mill,  the  wife  of  an  oflBcer  of  the  66th  regiment; 
and  this  no  doubt  saved  their  lives,  for  Napoleon 
was  determined  to  guard  his  domain  against  all  in- 
truders. A  few  days  afterwards  he  shot  three  hens, 
and  next  day  a  kid  belonging  to  his  groom,  which 
he  caught  trespassing.  This  kind  of  sport  seemed 
to  afford  him  amusement,   and  he  sent  one  of  his 


Jan.  1820.  PLAYING  AT  SOLDIERS.  207 

servants  to  Sandy  Bay  to  buy  some  young  goats  for 
him  to  shoot. 

Another  favourite  occupation  of  Napoleon  was  one 
more  in  unison  with  his  former  habits.  He  wrote  or 
dictated  a  quantity  of  papers  on  the  subject  of  defen- 
sive operations  by  field-works,  and  the  depth  of  forma- 
tions of  troc^s.  The  French  formed  their  line  three 
deep,  but,  as  the  rear  rank  could  not  fire  over  the  two 
others  in  its  front,  he  preferred  the  English  method  of 
forming  two  deep  only,  so  long  as  effect  could  not  be 
given  to  the  fire  of  the  third  rank.  Count  Bertrand 
mentioned,  shortly  after  his  death,  that  this  question 
had  occupied  his  mind  with  a  particular  degree  of 
^u^estness,  and  that  he  would  get  up  as  often  as 
seven  times  in  the  middle  of  the  night  to  write  notes 
upon  it.  He  frequently  sent  '* billets"  to  Bertrand 
on  the  subject  even  at  night.  He  used  to  trace  out 
all  his  plans  and  field-works  on  the  ground  of  his  little 
garden,  with  his  officers  and  attendants  around  him, 
to  whom  he  pointed  out  his  ideas.  He  described  the 
mode  in  which  he  would  give  effect  to  the  fire  of  a 
line  drawn  up  in  ranks  even  ten  deep,  by  placing  the 
rows  of  men  on  inclined  positions,  or  drawing  them 
up  with  the  men  of  lowest  stature  in  the  front  rank 
and  the  tallest  in  the  rear.  With  these  ranks,  eight  or 
ten  deep,  he  thought  himself  perfectly  unassailable, 
and  he  would  hear  of  no  objection  to  his  plan.  He 
proposed  that  in  those  places  where  the  ground  did 
not  offer  a  slope  the  men  jshould  be  made  to  dig 
away  some  of  the  earth  where  they  were  to  stand, 
so  as  to  form  steps  which  would  give  sufficient  eleva- 
tion to  the  rear  ranks  to  enable  them  to  fire  over 
those  in  front,  and  this  he  said  he  would  have  done  in 
a  minute.  When  Bertrand  asked  for  another  minute, 
he  replied,  "  No  I  in  war  half  a  minute  is  too  much  to 


208  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXVL 

lose ;  you  would  have  the  cavalry  upon  you,  and  be 
cut  in  pieces."  To  prove  the  practicability  of  such 
depths  of  formation,  he  sometimes  called  out,  "  Come 
here,  Noverraz ;  you  are  the  tallest ;  place  yourself 
there :  and  you  others  come  here."  Having  arranged 
them  according  to  size  on  a  declivity,  he  stood  behind, 
saying,  "  I  who  am  the  smallest  will  be  in  the  last 
rank."  **He  then,"  said  Bertrand,  "levelled  a  stick 
and  took  aim  over  our  heads,  exclaiming  in  triumph, 
*  Eh  bien !  don't  you  see  that  I  fired  over  the  head 
of  Noverraz  ?* " 

Count  Montholon  rode  round  the  new  limits  on  the 
3rd  of  January,  accompanied  by  Major  Gorrequer  and 
Captain  Nicholls.  "  We  were  both  there,"  says  the 
latter  in  his  journal,  '*  two  hours  and  a  half;  I  should 
think  the  distance  was  about  thirteen  miles."  During 
the  ride  Major  Gk^rrequer  asked  Montholon  whether 
the  establishment  at  Longwood  was  well  provided 
in  respect  of  supplies,  and  whether  the  articles  were 
of  good  quality,  and  if  Mr.  Ibbetson  gave  them  satis- 
faction on  these  points.  He  answered,  they  were  per- 
fectly well  provided  with  everything ;  that  it  was  impos- 
sible Mr.  Ibbetson  could  be  more  attentive,  or  acquit 
himself  better  than  he  did ;  if  there  ever  was  anything 
to  find  fault  with,  it  was  unavoidable,  and  merely  in 
trifles  not  worth  mentioning ;  everything  was  of  the 
best  quality,  "and  we  can  only  congratulate  ourselves," 
he  said,  *'  at  the  manner  in  which  we  are  served." 

Lord  Charles  Somerset,  the  Governor  of  the  Cape  of 
Good  Hope,  and  two  of  his  daughters,  arrived  at  St. 
Helena  on  the  26tli,  and,  as  he  was  desirous  of  calling 
on  Bonaparte,  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  sent  Major  Gorre- 
quer to  inform  Count  Montholon  of  his  wish.  The 
Count  delivered  the  message,  but  Napoleon  did  not 
vouchsafe  an  answer. 


Jan.  ISao.  THE  ABBl^  BUONAVITA.  209 

Next  day  Lord  Charles  Somerset  and  his  daughters, 
accompanied  by  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  proceeded  to  Long- 
wood  to  see  the  new  buildings  and  grounds.  At  that 
moment,  says  Captain  Nicholls,  **  Bonaparte  was  at 
dinner  in  his  garden  under  the  oak-trees  with  Count 
Montholon.  The  Governor,  Lord  Charles  Somerset, 
and  the  young  ladies,  passed  round  the  garden  in  the 
wood :  however,  as  soon  as  they  were  perceived  from 
the  house,  the  General  rose  from  his  dinner  and  ran 
into  the  house.  The  dinner  was  carried  after  hinj 
into  the  house.  Lord  Charles  did  not  know  that 
General  Bonaparte  was  out,  having  only  walked  round 
the  large  garden,  and  did  not  intrude  near  to  the 
house  out  of  delicacy  to  General  Bonaparte.  After 
Lord  Charles's  party  had  left  Longwood,  General 
Bonaparte  immediately  walked  out." 

On  the  27th  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  wrote  to  Lord 
Bathurst : — ^^  A  newspaper  had  mentioned  the  death 
of  one  of  Count  Montholon's  children.  I  enclosed  the 
paper  with  a  short  note  to  the  Abb6  Buonavita,  whom 
I  thought  the  properest  person  to  break  the  informa*- 
tion  to  Count  Montholon.  The  Abba's  reply  is  the 
most  civilly  expressed  thing  I  had  ever  received  from 
Longwood.  I  had  followed  the  same  course  once 
before  in  enclosing  to  Count  Bertrand  a  letter  which 
mentioned  the  death  of  the  Countess's  mother ;  and 
because,  nearly  a  year  afterwards,  the  Countess  re- 
ceived a  letter  brought  by  a  person  who  came  out  as 
governess  to  her  children,  speaking  of  the  death  of  her 
mother  as  a  long-past  event,  I  am,  under  the  head  of 
*  Brutal  conduct  of  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  to  the  Countess 
Bertrand,'*  accused  of  little  else  than  a  design  upon 
her  life,  in  having  suflfered  the  letter  to  reach  her." 

»  O^Meara's  *  Exposition,'  pp.  152,  153. 
VOL.  III.  I* 


210  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXVI. 

On  the  1st  of  February  Captain  Nicholls  says, — "  I 
saw  General  Bonaparte  tib-day  often  at  his  favourite 
amusement,  viz.  gardening.  He  was  himself  employed 
placing  sods  on  a  bank.  In  short,  his  sole  amusement, 
at  present,  seems  to  be  building  sod  walls,  making 
reservoirs  to  hold  water,  &c.,  and  pulling  down  to- 
day that  which  he  had  reared  the  day  before."  He 
shot  three  fowls  on  the  6th  for  trespassing,  two  of 
which  belonged  to  his  valet  Noverraz;  and  this  so 
offended  his  faithftil  follower  that  he  wished  to  leave 
his  service,  but  was  dissuaded  by  the  GU>vemor. 
On  the  9  th  Captain  Nicholls,  at  his  own  request,  was 
superseded  as  orderly  officer  by  Captain  Lutyens  of 
the  20th  regiment,  whose  daily  reports  supply  the 
loss  of  Captain  Nicholls*s  interesting  Journal.^ 

Captain  Lutyens  was  very  graciously  received  by  all 
the  inmates  of  Longwood,  except  Bonaparte,  who  took 
no  notice  of  his  arrival.  He  reported  on  the  12th 
that  Napoleon  "  was  out  early  this  morning,  and  shot 
a  rabbit  he  had  let  out  on  purpose  for  his  amusement. 
I  have  sent  a  plumber  to  the  General ;  he  is  going  to 
have  a  leaden  tank  in  the  garden  on  the  right  of  the 
house."  In  the  morning  of  the  14th  Bonaparte 
killed  another  goat  at  two  shots,  j^t  six  in  the 
morning  of  the  16th  Bonaparte  and  Count  Montholon 
were  hard  at  work,  the  ex-Emperor  lifting  sods,  and 
the  Count  fixing  them  with  a  mallet. 

It  seems  that  the  ball-practice  of  Napoleon  caused 
some  uneasiness  in  the  minds  of  both  the  Go- 
vernor and  the  Marquis  de  Montchenu,  and  on  the 
12  th  of  February,  when  the  Marquis  called  on  the 
Governor  to  congratulate  him  on  the  birth  of  a  son, 

^  Captain  Nicholls  went  to  England  on  leave  of  absence,  and  bore  with 
him  a  well-merited  testimonial  from  the  Governor  "  for  the  honourable  man- 
ner in  which  he  had  fulfilled  the  duties  of  orderly  officer  at  Longwood.^ 


Fbb.  1820.  BALL  PRACTICE.  211 

the  conversation  turned  on  the  subject  of  Bonaparte's 
new  amusement.  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  said  that  firing 
with  ball  appeared  to  him  a  thing  ^^trha  inconye- 
nable"  for  a  person  in  Bonaparte's  situation.  The 
Marquis  assented,  and  said  he  had  no  doubt  the 
Grovemor  must  have  been  struck  with  it,  but  that,  if 
any  accident  should  occur,  and  a  man  were  shot 
instead  of  a  goat,  he  could  do  nothing  with  him,  only 
perlu^  confine  him  more  closely.  **I1  est  le  pri- 
sonnier  de  TEurope ;  U  sait  cela,  et  que  vous  ne  feriez 
rien  avec  lui,  sans  instruction,  si  cet  ^gard."  Sir 
Hudson  replied,  **  I  do  not  like  to  anticipate  cases 
which  have  not  occurred.  I  believe  he  will  take  good 
care  not  to  place  himself  in  such  a  predicament." 

It  would  be  a  curious  subject  of  speculation  to  con- 
sider what  might  have  been  the  consequences  if  Bona- 
parte in  firing  carelessly  had  killed  a  person  under 
circumstances  which  would  amount  to  manslaughter 
according  to  the  English  law.  Could  he  have  been 
tried  for  the  oflfence  ?  and,  if  found  guilty,  what  would 
have  been  the  punishment?  The  question  was  ac- 
tually submitted  to  the  law  officers  of  the  Crown  in 
England,  as  Mr.  Goulbum  wrote  and  informed  Sir 
Hudson  Lowe,  but  a  copy  of  their  opinion  has  not  been 
found  amongst  the  papers  to  which  the  author  has  had 
access.  Happily,  however,  no  such  fatality  occurred, 
and  a  few  goats  and  poultry  with  the  rabbit  before 
mentioned,  and  a  bullock  as  will  be  noticed  hereafter, 
were  the  only  victims  of  Napoleon's  gun. 

The  following  are  extracts  from  Captain  Lutyens' 
reports: — "17th.  At  seven  o'clock  this  morning  I 
saw  Creneral  Bonaparte  walking  in  his  garden  for  some 
time,  in  conversation  with  Count  Bertrand.  The 
Count  kept  his  hat  in  his  hand  the  whole  time.  This 
form  I  never  observed  between  Count  Montholon  and 

p  2 


212  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.         Chap.XXVL 

the  General.  Yesterday  they  planted  a  row  of  peach- 
trees  in  a  line  with  the  green  rails,  facing  towards  the 
officers'  guard." 

^^20th.  In  passing  the  lawn  opposite  the  billiard- 
room,  I  observed  a  small  pen,  in  which  was  confined 
a  few  goats  and  three  sheep ;  the  pen  was  so  small 
that  I  immediately  collected  what  conld  be  spared  of 
the  invisible  fence,  sufficient  to  go  twice  across  the 
lawn,  and  had  it  conveyed  to  the  place  where  it  was 
wanted.  They  saw  what  I  was  doing.  I  had  not  left 
it  half  an  hour  before  they  came  out,  and  fixed  the  en- 
closure as  they  wished.  During  the  night  one  of  the 
goats  got  out  into  the  garden,  in  consequence  of  which 
the  poor  animal  became  a  victim,  for  at  seven  o'clock 
this  morning  General  Bonaparte  shot  it  on  the  lawn 
with  a  double-barrelled  gun:  he  after  this  fired  five  . 
times  at  a  bottle.  There  was  no  one  with  the  General 
but  the  servants.*' 

"  25th.  I  saw  General  Bonaparte  at  seven  o'clock 
this  morning  in  the  garden  which  his  bed-room  opens 
into ;  he  was  playing  with  a  little  girl  of  the  name  of 
Snell ;  the  child  is  staying  a  few  days  with  Gentilini." 

On  the  26th  Count  Montholon  told  Captain  Lut- 
yens  "in  confidence,"  that  Bonaparte  was  much  dis- 
pleased when  he  first  saw  the  new  path :  "  not  but  the 
path  was  exactly  what  the  General  intended  to  have 
made ;  but  he  conceived  the  gardener  a  servant  of  his 
own,  and  that  no  interference  was  to  be  made  with 
any  little  arrangement  he  was  making  in  the  gardens. 
Count  Montholon  said,  if  there  was,  the  General  was 
of  so  violent  a  disposition  that  he  in  all  probability 
would  knock  down  all  the  railing,  and  leave  the 
ground  open,  and  again  retire  to  his  house.  At  pre- 
sent the  General  found  a  great  fimd  of  amusement  in 
his  gardens.    Count  Montholon  further  said  that  now 


Feb.  1820.  BBBTRAND'S  SADDLES.  213 

everything  went  on  very  well,  and  that  he  thought 
the  General  would  soon  appear  more  than  he  had  ever 
yet  done/'* 

On  the  same  day  two  saddles,  made  by  one  of  the 
first  makers  in  London,  were  sent  back  firom  Long- 
wood  as  not  being  sufficiently  good,  the  stirrup-irons 
not  being  plated,  and  the  flaps  not  ornamented. 
They  were  intended  for  Bertrand,  but  Archambaud, 
the  groom,  said  they  were  not  fit  for  the  Marshal  to 
ride  on.  The  Governor  directed  the  orderly  officer  to 
make  it  known  that,  if  any  saddles  of  a  peculiar  de- 
scription were  wanted  for  Napoleon  Bonaparte's  own 
use,  and  he  would  be  pleased  to  cause  the  pattern  to 
be  described,  they  would  be  immediately  written  for. 

'  Captain  Lutyens'  report. 


214  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.         Chap.  XXVH. 


CHAPTER  XXVIL 

OFFENCE  TAKEN  BY  NAPOLEON  AT  THE  IRON  RAILINa  OF  THE 
NEW  HOUSE  —  RECAL  OF  THE  RUSSIAN  COMMISSIONER  —  A 
BULLOCK  SHOT  BY  BONAPARTE — NEWS  OF  THE  ASSASSINATION 
OF  THE  DUC  DE  BERRI  —  ITS  RECEPnON  AT  LONQWOOD  — 
CONVERSATION  BETWEEN  COUNT  MONTHOLON  AND  THE  FRENCH 
COMMISSIONER  —  NAPOLEON'S  OPINION  OF  EVENTS  IN  FRANCE 
—  HE  COMBiENCES  HORSE  EXERCISE  —  SECRET  CORRESPOND- 
ENCE WITH  ENGLAND  —  COUNT  MONTHOLON'S  REMARKS  ON 
THE  POSSIBIUTY  OF  ESCAPE  —  ABBE  VIGNALI  PERSONATING 
NAPOLEON. 

On  the  10th  of  March  Napoleon,  whose  fondness  for 
warm  baths  has  been  frequently  mentioned,  varied  his 
usual  custom,  and  took  a  healthy  plunge  in  the  cold 
water  of  the  stone  reservoir  in  the  garden.  Count 
Montholon  was  with  him,  and  two  servants  assisted 
him  in  dressing.  On  the  26th  Captain  Lutyens  says, — 
**  I  mentioned  to  Count  Montholon  what  Countess 
Bertrand  had  said  to  me  on  the  subject  of  the  barracks 
being  removed  out  of  sight  of  the  new  building.  He 
said  she  had  told  him  that  she  had  spoken  to  me 
about  the  removal,  and  that  he  was  confident  it  was 
not  the  wish  of  General  Bonaparte  that  the  barracks 
should  be  removed  out  of  sight ;  on  the  contrary,  the 
General  felt  amusement  in  constantly  looking  to  the 
barracks  with  his  glass.  Although  the  General  did 
not  like  a  sentry  exactly  at  his  door,  to  remind  him 
that  he  was  a  prisoner,  he  felt  pleasure  in  looking  to 

[at]  a  barrack  or  camp  of  brave  soldiers 

I  remarked  that  I  believed  General  Bonaparte  had 


Harch,  1820.  THE  IRON  RAILING.  215 

never  been  in  the  new  house.  He  said,  No,  biit  the 
Greneral  knew  very  well  what  it  was,  from  having 
looked  in  from  the  outside,  and  he  thought  it  a  very 
nice  house ;  the  only  thing  the  Greneral  disapproved 
of  was  the  iron  rails,  which  formed  a  perfect  iron 
cage,  and  he  always  said,  and  says,  he  will  not  in- 
habit the  house  until  they  are  done  away  with  (except 
by  force) :  that,  if  the  railing  is  put  up  for  the  security 
of  his  person,  they  (i.  e.  the  rails)  disgust  him ;  if  for 
ornament,  it  does  not  accord  with  his  taste ;  and  if  there 
is  occasion  for  a  fence,  a  wooden  rail  would  answer. 
That  General  Bonaparte  would  have  frequently  visited 
the  house,  and  given  some  directions,  had  it  not  been 
for  the  iron  rails.  Greneral  Bonaparte  would  be  very 
happy  to  occupy  the  new  house,  which  appeared  to 
him  so  comfortable,  for  his  present  residence  was  very 
miserable  and  in  very  bad  repair,  was  it  not  for  the 
iron  rails." 

The  railing  which  was  so  much  complained  of  was 
of  ike  same  simple  kind  that  is  put  up  before  houses 
in  England,  and  it  had  been  placed  at  such  a  distance 
in  front  of  the  new  house  as  to  form  a  semicircle  of 
about  four  hundred  yards,  under  a  terrace  before  the 
building,  so  as  not  to  be  seen  from  it.  However,  as 
soon  as  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  heard  of  Napoleon's  dislike 
to  it,  he  directed  the  orderly  officer  to  acquaint  Count 
Montholon  that  he  would  not  continue  the  railing  any 
further  round  the  house,  but  that  Bonaparte's  objec- 
tions to  what  had  already  been  done  should  have  been 
made  known  to  him  earlier.  In  mentioning  the  cir- 
cumstance in  a  letter  to  Lord  Bathurst  the  Governor 
said, — "  There  is  no  species  of  enclosure  that  ought  so 
completely  to  answer  General  Bonaparte's  own  con- 
venience, from  the  triple  advantage  of  not  obstructing 
his  view,  having  the  sentries  removed  at  a  distance 


216  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.         Chap.  XXVIL 

from  the  house,  and  keeping  his  terrace  and  garden 
effectually  free  from  trespass  by  cattle." 

Some  despatches  arrived  from  England  in  the  ooorse 
of  this  months  and  in  one  of  them  was  announced  the 
recal  of  Count  Balmain,  on  the  grounds  that  the 
period  of  three  years  had  expired  during  which  the 
Emperor  of  Bussia  intended  him  to  remain,  and  that 
he  had  himself  solicited  permission  to  return  to  Europe. 
Before,  however,  he  left  St.  Helena,  he  married  Miss 
Johnson,  Lady  Lowers  eldest  daughter  by  her  former 
husband.  Dining  one  day  about  this  time  with  the 
Gk)vemor  at  Plantation  House,  he  s^d  that  Count 
Montholon  had  told  him  that  a  great  improvement 
had  taken  place  in  Bonaparte's  health,  but  he  had 
been  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  medicine  at  intervals. 
Count  Balmain's  departure  left  the  Marquis  de  Mont- 
chenu  the  sole  representative  of  the  Allied  Powers  of 
the  Continent  at  St  Helena ;  or,  to  use  the  lively 
expression  of  the  Count  on  taking  leave  of  him, 
"  Vous  voilk  reste  veu^  Monsieur  le  Marquis  !'* 

Count  Balmain  said  that  Montholon  told  him  they 
had  no  reason  to  complain  of  anything  at  present ; 
they  were  much  gratified  with  the  extension  given  to 
their  limits  for  riding,  but  Napoleon  and  the  whole 
of  them  felt  a  great  deal  of  ennui  in  their  solitude. 
Count  Balmain  also  mentioned  that  he  asked  Madame 
Bertrand  why  she  had  not  called  on  Lady  Lowe, 
when  she  replied  that  her  situation  was  so  very  pe- 
culiar— "  You  know,"  she  said,  "  that  no  English 
officer  speaks  to  my  husband.**  For  Count  Bertrand 
himself  we  have  no  pity.  His  conduct  had  been  uni- 
formly discourteous  and  ojfifensive,  and  he  deserved 
this  state  of  isolation ;  but  it  is  impossible  not  to  feel 
sympathy  for  the  lively  and  agreeable  Countess,  who 
must  have  spent  many  a  weary  day  at  Longwood, 


Mabch,  1830.  A  BULLOCK  SHOT.  217 

with  recollection  busy  retracing  the  scenes  of  her 
former  life,  and  contrasting  the  solitude  of  Longwood, 
rarely  interrupted  by  the  arrival  of  a  chance  visitor, 
with  the  brilliant  company  that  thronged  her  salons 
in  Paris. 

Under  the  date  of  the  5th  of  April,  Captain  Lutyens 
mentions  an  anecdote  which  shows  how  promptly  Na- 
poleon punished  any  insubordination  in  his  house- 
hold:— "  The  four  Chinese  who  have  constantly  been 
employed  in  the  garden  got  sulky  at  the  General 
having  given  a  bottle  of  wine  to  each  of  the  Chinese 
that  are  employed  in  the  house,  who  worked  at  the 
sod  wall,  and  did  not  give  them  the  same  indulgence ; 
they  therefore  refused  doing  what  the  General  wanted 
them  to  do,  which  put  him  in  a  great  rage,  and  he 
ordered  them  off  instantly."  He  adds, — "General 
Bonaparte  is  hard  at  work  this  morning  in  the  same 
garden ;  he  has  cut  a  large  hole  like  an  embrasure  in 
tiie  sod  wall,  feeing  my  side-window,  in  which  they 
are  now  fixing  a  large  tub  half  up  the  wall,  to  form  a 
sort  of  cascade  into  the  long  tank  in  the  garden." 

The  necessity  for  some  kind  of  enclosure  round  the 
new  building,  not  for  "caging"  Napoleon,  but  for 
keeping  off  cattle  and  other  animals,  was  soon  made 
i^parent,  for  on  the  16th,  as  he  was  walking  in  one 
of  the  gardens  with  Montholon,  he  discovered  two 
bullocks  belonging  to  the  adjoining  farm  in  the  outer 
garden,  and  immediately  ordered  his  two  fowling- 
pieces  to  be  brought  out  loaded  with  ball,  both  of 
which  he  fired,  and  killed  one  of  the  oxen,  the  ball 
passing  through  its  neck.  Count  Montholon  told  the 
orderly  officer  that  the  Emperor  was  determined  to 
adopt  the  same  plan  if  he  again  saw  cattle  in  the 
garden.  Captain  Lutyens  replied  that  it  was  very 
dangerous  to  fire  with  ball  there,  and  that  Bonaparte 


218  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.        Chap.  XXVU. 

might  have  killed  one  of  the  seDtries ;  upon  which  the 
Count  said  that  the  Emperor  took  the  precaution  of 
going  round  and  firing  towards  the  house. 

On  the  21st  of  April  the  news  arrived  at  St.  Helena 
of  the  death  of  King  George  UL,  and  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe  wrote  to  the  Abbe  Buonavita,  requesting  him 
to  make  known  the  intelligence  to  Napoleon.  The 
Abb6  acknowledged  the  communication  in  a  most 
courteous  letter,  in  which  he  lauded  the  deceased 
monarch  to  the  skies,  for  his  piety,  his  fidelity  to  his 
oaths,  and  his  magnanimous  protection  of  the  liberty 
and  safety  of  his  subjects. 

On  the  9  th  of  May  the  orderly  officer  reported  that 
Bonaparte  had  got  "  a  large  bell,  which  he  rings ;  im- 
mediately upon  this  signal  all  the  servants  turn  out 
to  work  in  the  gardens."  On  the  19  th  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe  wrote  to  Lord  Bathurst  and  mentioned  the  par- 
ticulars of  a  conversation  he  had  lately  had  with  the 
Marquis  de  Montchenu.  Captain  de  Gors,  the  aide- 
de-camp  of  the  latter,  had  dined  with  the  Governor, 
and  the  Marquis  said, — 

"  He  wiU  have  told  you  of  the  deep  aflfiiction  into 
which  General  Bonaparte  had  been  thrown  on  hearing 
of  the  assassination  of  the  Due  de  Berri,  that  he  had 
shut  himself  up  in  his  apartment  for  twenty-four  hours, 
giving  way  to  his  grief,  repeatedly  crying  out.  Oh! 
pauvre  France !  '* 

In  his  letter  to  Lord  Bathurst  Sir  Hudson  Lowe 
said, — 

**  I  told  the  Marquis  de  Montchenu  these  demon- 
strations did  not  accord  with  what  I  myself  had  an 
occasion  to  know  of  his  proceeding  on  the  day  he 
received  this  information.  I  had  sent  him  a  series  of 
newspapers,  the  most  full  of  important  information 


Mat,  1820.      ASSASSINATION  OF  DUG  DE  BERRI.  219i 

that  had  come  to  this  island  since  my  arrival  here,  for 
the  months  of  January  and  February  of  this  year. 
He  remained  within  doors  for  the  greater  part  of  the 
day  after  receiving  them,  which  was  necessary  to 
afford  him  time  to  have  them  read  or  translated  to 
him ;  but  he  had  walked  out  in  his  garden  as  usual 
in  the  afternoon,  and  consequently  had  not  confined 
himself  through  grief  to  his  apartments  for  twenty- 
four  hours,  as  Count  Montholon  had  stated. 

"  The  Marquis  immediately  said,  *  I  had  a  much 
stronger  proof  than  what  you  say  of  the  real  effect 
which  the  news  produced.  Count  Montholon  was 
accompanied  during  his  visit  by  Napoleon  Bertrand  * 
(the  eldest  son  of  Count  Bertrand,  a  boy  of  eleven 
years  of  age).  *  I  had  asked  Count  Montholon  and 
him  to  partake  of  a  d^eAner.  We  had  been  sitting 
for  some  time,  when,  the  boy  appearing  impatient  and 
tired,  I  said  to  him,  "  Come,  my  little  man,  you  are 
weary  here;  you  had  better  go  and  run  about,  but 
don't  go  into  the  street^ — take  care  of  that ;  you  can 
go  about  the  house  as  much  as  you  like ;  there  is  my 
French  servant,  who  will  show  it  you."  The  little 
boy,'  the  Marquis  continued,  *  remained  away  for 
some  time,  and  when  he  came  back  Count  Mon^olon 
and  himself  had  left  the  dining-parlour,  and  were  in 
the  sitting-room.'  Young  Napoleon  Bertrand,  looking 
up  to  the  portrait  of  Louis  XVIII.,  said,  *  Qui  est  ce 
gros  pouf  ?  •  *  C'est  le  Roi,'  the  Marquis  replied. 
*  Ah!  c'est  un  grand  coquin,*  answered  immediately 
Napoleon  Bertrand.  *  Et  qui  est  cet  autre  ? '  *  C*est 
le  Due  de  Berri,'  said  the  Marquis.  *  Ah !  il  est  tue ; 
€*e8t  un  grand  gtieux  de  mains.* "  ^ 

'  Count  Montholon  said  it  was  the  decided  opinion  of  Bonaparte  that 
the  assassination  of  the  Dnc  de  Berri  was  not  simply  the  act  of  an  indi* 
▼idual  inspired  by  personal  malice  or  revenge,  but  that  he  had  been  the 
instrument  of  a  party. 


220  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.        Chap.  XXVH. 

Captain  de  Qors  had  repeated  to  the  Governor 
some  observations  made  by  Count  Montholon  respect- 
ing the  Memoirs  of  Napoleon  edited  by  O'Meara,  the 
ninth  book  of  which  had  recently  arrived  at  St. 
Helena ;  and  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  continued, — 

"  He  (the  Marquis)  said  that  Count  Montholon,  in 
speaking  of  the  book,  exclaimed,  *  But  what  is  it  that 
that  rascal,  that  beggar  (ce  coquin,  ce  gueux)  has  done  ? 
— ^to  publish  a  preface  as  if  he  had  acted  by  the  orders 
of  the  Emperor,  and  compromise  him  and  so  many 
other  persons.  If  he  had  wanted  money  we  would 
have  given  him  a  thousand  louis  (on  lui  aurait  donne 
mille  louis).  It  spoils  the  whole  book  to  publish 
extracts  in  that  manner.  The  glory  of  the  Emperor 
Napoleon  is  limited  to  the  history  of  the  year  1815, 
and,  besides,  the  work  is  not  by  him.  It  is  I  who 
have  the  original  in  my  hands,  dictated  by  himself, 
and  signed  by  me  at  every  page.  I  do  not  say,  how- 
ever, that  that  which  is  printed  is  not  true — ^nine 
parts  of  it  are  absolutely  so,  and  perhaps  the  tenth. 
If  you  doubt  it  I  can  send  you  the  original.  *  If  we 
had  published  it  we  would  not  have  inserted  the 
names  of  persons  to  compromise  them.' 

"  I  told  the  Marquis  tiiiere  could  be  no  doubt  of  the 
work  being  the  dictature  of  General  Bonaparte,  for 
that  the  publisher  had  offered  to  show  tiie  original 
manuscript  to  any  person  who  would  call  to  see  it ; 
and  had  even  said  that  Ministers  might  assure  them- 
selves of  its  being  original  by  comparing  it  with  the 
letter  addressed  to  Lord  Liverpool ;  that  it  was  pro- 
bably in  the  handwriting  of  St.  Denis,  one  of  General 
Bonaparte's  principal  domestics,  and  his  amanuensis ; 
that  the  address  of  the  letter  to  Lord  Liverpool,  to 
the  best  of  my  recollection,  had  been  in  his  hand- 
writing (all  the  papers  I  have  received  signed  *  Napo- 


May,  1820.  MONTHOLON'S  EXPECTANCIES.  221 

leon  *  have  been  in  the  handwriting  of  St.  Denis).  It 
was  evident,  however,  from  Count  Montholon's  method 
of  speaking  to  the  Marquis,  it  was  not  his  intention 
to  disavow  the  work,  but  merely  to  aflfect  disapproval 
of  the  manner  of  its  publication ;  so  there  can  be  little 
doubt  that  Gkneral  Bonaparte  had  authorized  its  pub- 
lication, and  also  he  may  have  approved  all  except 
the  preface  and  the  notes  of  the  editor." 

Sir  Hudson  Lowe  then  told  Lord  Bathurst  that  he 
mentioned  to  the  Marquis  de  Montchenu  the  constant 
attempts  made  by  Bertrand  and  Montholon  to  mfringe 
the  regulations  by  sending  packets  clandestinely  to 
Europe,  and  thus  continued, — 

**  *  Oh,'  said  the  Marquis,  *  they  are  prisoners,  and 
of  course  will 'endeavour  to  evade  your  regulations; 
it  is  your  business  to  prevent  them.  You  cannot 
hinder  them  from  intriguing.' 

"  *They  all  signed  a  declaration,'  I  answered,  *to 
subject  themselves  to  the  regulations  in  force  on  the 
island,  during  their  residence  upon  it;  this  is  the 
condition  upon  which  they  were  allowed  to  remain 
here,  and  consequently  what  has  been  said  would  jus- 
tify me  in  turning  them  off  the  island.' 

"  *  What  good  would  that  do?'  said  the  Marquis, 
*it  is  precisely  what  the  Count  and  Countess  Ber- 
trand Imve  desired.' 

**  The  Marquis  did  not  appear  to  be  struck  with  the 
impropriety  of  allowing  Count  Montholon  to  hold  such 
conversation  with  him ;  but  as  he  was  then  repeating 
what  the  Count  had  said,  I  did  not  frirther  interrupt 
him.  He  went  on,  that  Count  Montholon  expected 
to  be  left  a  million  of  pounds  sterling  by  General 
Bonaparte.  On  my  expressing  surprise  at  his  expect- 
ing so  enormous  a  sum,  the  Marquis  informed  me  that 


222  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.        Chap.  XXVH. 

General  Bonaparte  possessed,  in  difiPerent  banks  in 
Europe,  two  hundred  millions  of  pounds  sterling. 

"This  communication  led  to  a  long  conversation  as 
to  the  way  in  which  he  could  have  acquired  so  enor- 
mous a  sum. 

"  I  expressed  my  disbelief  of  his  possessing  it ;  that 
the  Marquis  must  certainly  mean  livres,  and  not 
pounds  sterling.  He  said,  No,  that  Count  Montholon 
had  told  him,  not  at  this  visit,  but  on  a  former  occa- 
sion, that  General  Bonaparte  was  worth  two  hundred 
millions  of  pounds  sterling,  sufficient  to  produce  ten 
millions  pounds  sterling  *  de  rente.'  I  said  again,  the 
thing  appeared  to  me  impossible :  that  the  civil  list  of 
the  King  of  England  was  only  a  million  of  pounds 
sterling ;  that  what  Bonaparte  himself  enjoyed  when  at 
the  head  of  the  French  Government  did  not  much  ex- 
ceed that  sum.  The  Marquis  still  contested  the  point 
of  his  immense  riches,  and  produced  the  following 
arguments  in  proof  of  what  he  said." 

It  is  unnecessary  to  repeat  these  arguments,  for 
nobody  can  believe  that  Montholon  spoke  seriously  if 
he  asserted  that  Bonaparte  was  in  possession  of  such 
an  immense  sum.  He  no  doubt  wished  to  give  the 
Marquis  de  Montchenu  an  exaggerated  idea  of  the 
vast  resources  of  the  ex-Emperor.  But  it  turned 
out  that  the  Marquis  was  mistaken  in  the  amoimt 
which  Montholon  said  he  expected  as  a  legacy  from 
his  master,  for  he  met  the  Governor  in  the  street  a 
day  or  two  afterwards,  and  told  him  that  instead  of  a 
million  pounds  he  ought  to  have  said  one  hundred 
thousand  pounds  sterling.  And  most  probably  a  simi- 
lar kind  of  mistake  was  made  by  him  when  repeat- 
ing what  Montholon  said  respecting  Napoleon's 
wealth. 

Sir  Hudson  Lowe  proceeded  in  his  letter  to  say, — 


May,  1820.  THE  "  HARICOT  •»  QUESTION.  223 

*'  The  circumstances  most  in  confirmation  of  what 
the  Marquis  has  said  are  the  offer  made  by  Count 
Montholon  to  Dr.  Verling  of  a  draft  of  12,000Z. 
on  the  house  of  Baring,  and  the  offer  also  of  one  for 
600;.  to  Captain  Ripley  of  the  Regent  East-Indiaman, 
upon  the  house  of  Sir  John  Lubbock,  by  a  person 
whom  he  could  not  name,  if  he  would  take  charge  of 
a  letter/ 

Count  Montholon  spoke  a  good  deal  to  the  Marquis 
about  the  Duke  of  Orleans,  and  said,  General  Bona- 
parte had  observed,  the  principal  contest  after  the 
death  of  the  King  would  be  between  the  Duke  of 
Orleans  and  his  son ;  that  the  King  himself  might  not 
live  to  see  the  overthrow  of  his  house,  but  he  would 
say  to  himself,  "  C'est  Taffaire  de  mes  successeurs ;  je 
puis  r^sister  moi-meme,  mais  eux  ils  seront  ecras^s/' 

This  prophecy  has  been  fully  verified  by  the  event. 

The  Governor  then  mentioned  that  Count  Montho- 
lon spoke  to  the  Marquis  of  the  success  they  had  had 
in  raising  vegetables,  and  pressed  him  to  accept  a  few 
"des  haricots  verts,"  or  "des  haricots  Wanes;"  to 
which  the  Marquis  answered  that  he  might  send  him 
a  little  of  both. 

Sir  Hudson  Lowe  adds, — "Whether  the  *  haricots 
blancs '  and  *  haricots  verts '  bear  any  reference  to 
the  ^drapeau  blanc'  of  the  Bourbons,  and  the 
*  habit  vert '  of  Greneral  Bonaparte  himself,  and  the 
livery  of  his  servants  at  Longwood,  I  am  unable  to 
say ;  but  the  Marquis  de  Montchenu,  it  appears  to 
me,  would  have  acted  with  more  propriety  if  he  had 
declined  receiving  either,  or  limited  himself  to  a  de- 
mand for  the  white  alone.  He  is  not  aware  how 
much  the  question  that  was  put  by  Count  Montholon 

»  See  p.  165,  ante. 


224  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.        Chap.  XXVn. 

to  Count  Balmain  may  be  made  to  apply  to  his  pro- 
ceeding on  this  occasion."^ 

In  another  letter  to  Lord  Bathorst,  dated  the  22nd 
of  May  this  year,  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  said  that,  speak- 
ing of  Count  Montholon  in  conversation  with  the 
Marquis  de  Montchenu,  he  told  the  latter  that  ^4t 
was  impossible  for  a  person  to  express  himself  more 
clearly,  or  to  explain  himself  with  more  correctness^ 
than  Count  Montholon  did  when  he  thought  it  neces- 
sary to  do  so ;  but  if  he  wished  to  insinuate  anything 
— to  drop  any  remark — ^to  state  any  doubtful  circum- 
stance upon  which  he  was  desirous  to  evade  reply,  his 
pronunciation  became  rapid,  indistinct,  and  he  spoke 
in  so  muttering  a  tone,  that  it  became  difficult  to 
catch  his  meaning,  or  to  follow  exactly  what  he  said ; 
it  was  more  than  probable,  however,  he  would  pro- 
ceed afterwards  to  his  own  apartment,  write  down  all 
he  had  said,  **et  rediger  une  espece  de  proc^ 
verbal,"  and  perhaps  refer  to  it  in  a  year  or  two 
afterwards  as  an  official  communication;  that  I 
thought  it  right  to  guard  against  anything  of  this 
nature,  with  respect  to  myself,  by  always  having  a 
second  person  present,  but  I  had  reason  to  believe  he 
had  fr^uently  spoken  in  this  way  to  the  orderly 
officer  at  Longwood,  who  very  likely,  while  he  was 
thus  discoursing,  may  not  have  been  able  to  under- 

^  What  this  question  was  I  am  unable  to  say.  It  certainly  does  seem 
ludicrons  to  suppose  that  there  could  have  been  any  otocealed  motive  in 
the  offer  of  a  few  bean-stalks,  whether  white  or  green ;  and  it  may  be 
thought  that  it  would  have  been  caricaturing  caution  to  have  declined,  on 
political  grounds,  Count  Montholon's  polite  offer.  But  Sir  Hudson  Lowe 
thought  the  matter  of  some  importance,  and  again  alluded  to  it  in  another 
letter  to  Lord  Bathurst.  It  appears  that  Montholon  and  the  Marquis  had 
some  conversation  about  the  fidelity  of  parties  to  their  colours — ^blancs  " 
or  "  verts ;"  and  the  offer  of  "  des  haricots  verta"  or  "  des  haricots  Wanes" 
following  immediately  upon  this,  was  a  little  suspicious.  The  classical 
reader  will  be  reminded  of  the  oracular  warning  of  Pythagoras,  Kua/MP 
c{T/x«0'0f ,  **  abstain  from  beans  I  *' 


Mat,  1820.    HIS  REMARKS  ON  EVENTS  IN  FRANCE.         225 

stand  what  he  said,  or  attached  any  consequence  to 
it." 

He  added  some  further  particulars  of  conversation 
between  Montholon  and  the  Marquis,  which  the  latter 
repeated  to  him.  "General  Bonaparte  had  said,  *  It 
is  a  great  misfortune  for  France  that  my  son  lives, 
because  he  has  great  rights.'  He  deprecated  exceed- 
ingly the  return  of  all  the  proscribed  persons  to  France, 
particularly  such  as  had  been  members  of  the  Conven- 
tion, and  were  known  for  their  republican  principles ; 
he  considered  they  were  all  likely  to  be  hostile  to 
him  ;  he  was  much  vexed  that  their  return  had  been 
permitted ;  they  were  all  Jacobins,  and  as  such  would 
be  constantly  opposed  to  the  present  system  of  go- 
vernment. He  had  been  not  sorry  to  see  some  of  his 
old  generals  in  high  employment,  *  mais,  a  present  que 
le  Jacobin  ministre  (le  Comte  de  Cazes)  est  dfechu,  il 
feut  qu'ils  sortent  aussi.'  General  Bonaparte  added, 
*  When  they  are  out  of  place  they  will  lose  their  influ- 
ence, for  it  is  the  circumstance  alone  of  their  being 
employed  which  gives  them  consequence.'  He  had 
also  spoken  with  great  indignation  of  the  regulations 
at  present  existing  in  France  with  respect  to  the 
advancement  of  officers,  and  particularly  of  that  which 
prevents  officers  from  holding  the  rank  of  colonel 
until  they  have  attained  their  fortieth  year ;  it  was  a 
shameful  thing  to  attempt  to  restrict  the  King  in  the 
selection  of  his  own  officers,  it  was  an  act  of  *  lese- 
Majeste  '  on  the  part  of  the  minister  who  had  dared  to 
ms^e  the  proposition ;  had  any  minister  made  such  a 
proposition  to  him  whilst  he  was  on  the  throne,  *  il 
Taurait  fait  punir  comme  un  traitre  k  son  Souverain  :* 
that  the  natural  consequence  of  the  way  in  which 
the  promotion  was  regulated  in  the  army  would  be  to 
exclude  men  of  birth,   education,   and  talent  from 

VOL.  III.  Q 


226  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXVU. 

entering  it;  that  no  man  of  rising  abilities  or  influ- 
ence would  now  make  the  profession  his  study ;  the 
army  would  soon  be  officered  only  by  sans  culottes : 
that  the  regulation  and  the  law  of  elections  were 
highly  derogatory  to  the  interests  of  royalty  and  the 
rights  of  the  Sovereign ;  for  by  the  law  of  election,  as 
it  at  present  stood,  *  c*est  toujours  par  la  canaille  que 
les  deputes  seront  choisis/  " 

Sir  Hudson  Lowe  added  in  his  letter, — "  As  an  in- 
stance of  the  principles  in  which  the  younger  part  of 
the  establishment  at  Longwood  are  brought  up,  the 
Marquis,  in  addition  to  what  has  been  repeated  by 
[him  as  to]  young  Napoleon  Bertrand's  remarks  re- 
specting the  Due  de  Berri,  mentioned  that  it  was  incon- 
ceivable the  abhorrence  which  Mademoiselle  Hortense 
Bertrand  evinced  every  time  she  saw  his  *cocarde 
blanche;'  it  was  with  great  difficulty,  when  the 
Countess  Bertrand  with  her  family  fell  in  with  him, 
which  has  been  rarely,  except  at  the  race  meetings, 
that  the  Countess  prevailed  on  her  daughter  (a  young 
girl  of  about  nine  or  ten  years  of  age)  to  make  any 
reply  to  him,  or  to  behave  herself  with  common  ci- 
vility ;  the  sight  of  his  *  cocarde  blanche '  struck  her 
with  a  kind  of  pain  or  horror  she  could  not  over- 
come." 

The  letter  thus  went  on  : — 

"May  29,  The  following  alteration  has  recently 
been  observed  in  the  etiquette  which  is  still  aflfected 
to  be  maintained  at  Longwood.  Professor  Antom- 
marchi,  who  had  been  in  the  habit  of  paying  his 
daily  visits  to  G-eneral  Bonaparte  in  a  common  morn- 
ing dress,  with  pantaloons  and  boots,  has  during  tiiis 
month  past  changed  this  dress  for  that  of  black 
breeches,   silk  stockings,   and  shoes ;    he  pays  his 


May,  1820.  RESUMES  HORSE-EXERCISE.  227 

visit  to  General  Bonaparte  thus  attired  at  about  ten 
o'clock  every  morning,  remains  with  him  from  about 
five  to  ten  minutes,  returns  to  his  own  apartments,  re- 
sumes his  pantaloons  and  boots,  and  does  not  see  the 
General  during  the  remainder  of  the  day. 

"  A  material  change  has  also  taken  place  in  General 
Bonaparte's  own  habits.  On  the  26th  instant,  Archam- 
baud,  his  head  groom,  brought  a  small  horse  out  to 
him  which  had  been  purchased  from  Lord  Charles 
Somerset,  having  a  saddle  with  crimson  housings, 
when  General  Bonaparte,  for  the  first  time  during 
these  four  years  past,  mounted  and  took  a  ride,  in 
what  is  commonly  ciJled  the  wood,  followed  by  his 
groom  alone.  He  has  now  ridden  three  days  suc- 
cessively, going  out  at  six  o'clock  every  morning,  and 
returning  at  about  eight,  accompanied  l>y  no  other 
person  than  his  groom,  and  confining  his  ride  (as  if  to 
avoid  observation)  to  the  wood,  where  he  had  been 
always  able  to  take  as  much  exercise  as  he  pleased, 
without  the  interruption  even  of  being  seen  by  hardly 
any  other  persons  than  those  of  his  own  household." 

This  circumstance  is  also  noticed  in  the  report  of 
the  orderly  oflScer,  who  under  the  date  of  the  28th  of 
May  says, —  "  General  Bonaparte  on  Friday,  yester- 
day, and  this  morning  a  little  after  six  o'clock,  walked 
towards  the  stable,  when  Archambaud  brought  out 
Miss  Somerset's  horse,  saddled  with  a  red  velvet, 
which  the  General  mounted  and  rode  into  the  wood 
for  about  three  quarters  of  an  hour  each  day,  accom- 
panied only  by  Archambaud."  On  the  same  day 
Count  Montholon  told  Captain  Lutyens  that  he  would 
be  obliged  if  he  would  make  an  application  for  the 
last  number  of  the  *  Edinburgh  Review.' 

It  must  now  be  perfectly  clear  that,  notwithstanding 
all  the  Governor's  vigilance,  the  French  at  Longwood 

a  2 


228  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.        Chap.  XXVH. 

found  little  diflBculty  in  corresponding  secretly  with 
England.  And  conversing  one  day  at  the  beginning 
of  June  with  Montholon,  the  Marquis  de  Montchenu 
endeavoured  to  extract  from  him  some  information  as 
to  the  mode  in  which  Bonaparte  had  been  enabled  to 
transmit  papers  to  Europe,  referring  in  particular 
to  those  which  had  been  published  in  his  name  by 
O'Meara.  The  Count  said,  "  You  know  that  in  the 
month  of  August  last  we  experienced  much  perse- 
cution. We  believed  that  force  would  be  used ;  and 
as  Napoleon," — *'  it  is  thus,"  observed  the  Marquis  in 
repeating  the  conversation  to  the  Gk)vernor,  **that 
Count  Montholon  always  speaks  of  General  Bona- 
parte, calling  him  *  Napoleon,'  and  not  'TEmpereur,' 
except  when  he  talks  of  events  that  occurred  prior  to 
the  abdication  in  1815,  when  alone  the  word  *Em* 
pereur '  is  introduced," — "as  Napoleon  has  great 
bundles  of  papers  and  memoirs  in  his  room,  he  be- 
came very  uneasy  from  a  fear  lest  they  might  be 
searched ;  and  in  order  to  put  some  of  them  out  of 
the  reach  of  all  danger  he  sought  means  to  send  them 
by  a  sure  hand  to  England.  It  cost  us  a  good  deal 
to  find  a  person  who  would  take  charge  of  them,  but 
at  last  money  accomplished  it."  The  Count  also  told 
the  Marquis  that  they  had  received  things  by  the 
same  channel  as  they  had  sent  papers  by.  In  men- 
tioning this  conversation  to  Earl  Bathurst,  Sir 
Hudson  liowe  said, —  "  The  persecution,  as  Count 
Montholon  called  it,  which,  in  fact,  was  nothing 
more  than  the  intimation  made  to  General  Bonaparte 
of  the  necessity  of  his  aflFording  to  the  orderly  officer 
an  opportunity  of  seeing  him,  had  commenced  before 
the  Countess  Montholon  left  this  island  in  the  month 
of  July,  consequently  it  is  not  impossible  the  manu- 
script may  have  been  conveyed  about  her  person,  or 


June,  1820.  FLEURY  DE  CHABOULON.  229 

among  her  dresses."  If,  however,  this  were  So,  what 
Count  Montholon  said  about  money  would  be  non- 
sense, for  he  could  not  have  meant  that  his  wife 
required  to  be  largely  bribed  to  take  the  papers  with 
her  to  England. 

On  the  7th  the  Governor  wrote  to  Lord  Bathurst 
and  said, — "  T  enclose  a  paper  in  the  handwriting  of 
St.  Denis,  General  Bonaparte's  principal  amanuensis, 
in  order  that  your  Lordship  may  compare  it  with  the 
writing  of  the  letter  to  Lord  Liverpool,  and,  whether 
it  is  in  the  same  handwriting  or  not,  that  your  Lord- 
ship may  be  enabled  to  make  the  trial  which  the  pub- 
lisher of  Mr.  O'Meara's  book  has  provoked,  of  proving 
its  originality  as  the  production  of  General  Bona- 
parte ;  and  if  the  enclosed  is  in  the  same  handwriting 
as  the  manuscript  in  Sir  R.  Phillips's  possession, 
there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  letter  was  written 
under  the  dictation  of  General  Bonaparte  himself,  and 
it  may  be  interesting  to  ascertain  this  fact,  as  Mar- 
shal Grouchy  is  much  more  violently  attacked  in  this 
work  than  in  either  that  of  General  Gt)urgaud,  or  of 
Fleury  de  Chaboulon." 

With  reference  to  the  work  of  Fleury  de  Chaboulon,^ 
which  had  recently  appeared.  Count  Montholon  told 
Sir  Hudson  Lowe  in  the  course  of  conversation  that 
he  was  a  man  who  had  never  been  particularly  known 
to  Bonaparte  until  they  met  at  Lyons  in  1815 ;  he 
had  been  before  that  time  "un  secretaire  au  Conseil 
d'Etat,  enquatrieme ;"  but  this  gave  him  no  particular 
facility  of  access  to  Napoleon,  who  might  however 
possibly  have  dictated  occasionally  a  few  lines  to  him. 
He  said  his  work  might  cause  some  effect  in  England, 
but  it  would  be  discredited  in  France. 

*  M^moires  pour  servir  k  rHistoire  du  Retour  et  du  R^e  de  Napol^n 
en  1815.    London,  1820. 


230  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.         Chap.  XXVII. 

At  another  period  Montholon  told  the  Marquis  de 
Montchenu  that  Bonaparte  felt  the  greatest  indigna- 
tion at  Fleury  de  Chaboulon  for  having  dared  to 
represent  Ney  and  Grouchy  as  traitors — "Grouchy 
especially — the  most  honourable  man  in  the  world, 
a  man  whom  the  Emperor  loves  and  esteems." 

We  may  here  mention  a  pleasing  instance  of  Bona- 
parte's kindness.  A  non-commissioned  officer  had  by 
mistake  or  carelessness  stopped  and  demanded  the 
names  of  some  of  the  servants  of  the  establishment  at 
Longwood  while  they  were  within  the  limits,  and 
Captain  Lutyens  on  the  13  th  of  the  month  wrote  to 
Major  Gorrequer,  and  said, — 

"  Count  Montholon  has  this  moment  been  with  me. 
He  said  he  had  mentioned  the  circumstance  of  the 
Serjeant  of  the  picquet  having  demanded  the  name  of 
some  of  the  servants  of  the  establishment  who  passed 
within  the  limits,  and  that  Napoleon  had  ordered  him 
to  call  on  me  immediately,  that  I  might  make  known 
to  the  Governor  his  request  that  the  Serjeant  should 
not  be  punished,  and  requested  Count  Montholon 
would  give  Archambaud  a  severe  reprimand  for  pre- 
suming to  say  a  word  on  the  subject.  Count  Mon- 
tholon also  said  to  me,  *  You  may  be  certain  that 
Napoleon  is  perfectly  satisfied  with  everything  the 
Governor  has  lately  done,  by  his  having  ordered  me 
to  call  twice  at  Plantation  House  within  a  short 
period.' " 

Matters  now  went  on  smoothly  at  Longwood.  No 
complaints  were  made,  and  the  relations  between  the 
Governor  and  his  captives,  if  not  of  a  cordial,  were  at 
all  events  of  an  amicabk  nature.  And  yet  it  deserves 
to  be  particularly  noticed  that  in  no  respect  had  Sir 
Hudson  Lowe  changed  his  line  of  conduct.    He  had 


July,  1820.  AMICABLE  UNDERSTANDING.  231 

indeed  granted  more  extensive  limits  to  Bonaparte's 
saite  in  the  preceding  January,  but  this  could  not 
have  produced  such  an  agreeable  alteration  in  their 
master's  deportment.  So  that  Sir  Hudson  was  quite 
justified  in  saying  to  Lord  Bathurst,  when  he  wrote 
and  alluded  to  the  circumstance,  **  There  has  been  no 
more  cause  afforded  for  expressing  satisfaction  at  the 
present  moment  than  at  any  former  period  of  my 
governing  here,"  He  added,  "  In  one  point  of  view 
I  have  been  even  opposing  somewhat  more  diflSculty 
than  heretofore  to  what  I  have  conceived  their  prin- 
cipal object  at  Longwood,  by  refiising  passes  (except 
very  rarely  and  on  particular  occasions  when  no 
vessels  are  sailing)  to  tradespeople  from  the  town  to 
go  thither,  with  the  view  to  check  as  much  as  possible 
all  means  of  clandestine  communication." 

At  the  end  of  June  Lieut.-Colonel  Wynyard,  who 
had  discharged  the  duties  of  chief  military  secretary 
with  the  greatest  zeal  and  assiduity,  returned  to  Eng- 
land, and  Major  Gorrequer  was  appointed  to  the  office 
in  his  place. 

Bonaparte's  health  was  not  quite  so  good  in  July 
this  year.  He  had  a  bilious  attack,  and  was  at  times 
feverish.  On  the  27th  Count  Montholon  told  the 
orderly  officer  that,  although  the  Emperor  was  not 
Yery  unwell,  he  was  very  low  and  in  bad  spirits, 
which  made  him  very  cross,  and  he  was  so  restless 
that  he  changed  from  one  bed  to  another  frequently 
during  the  day  and  night.  "  Count  Montholon,"  says 
Captain  Lutyens,  "  had  endeavoured  to  persuade  him 
to  get  up,  which  he  refused,  saying  it  was  a  horrid 
windy  day." 

Sir  Hudson  Lowe  reported  to  Lord  Bathurst  the 
particulars  of  a  conversation  which  the  Marquis  de 
Montchenu  had  had  with  Count  Montholon,  when  the 


232  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.         Chap.  XXVU. 

latter  entered  freely  upon  the  subject  of  the  possibility 
of  escape  from  the  island.  The  Marquis  said  that  the 
question  of  evasion  was  spoken  of  by  Montholon  as 
a  thing  which  they  conceived  not  absolutely  impos- 
sible, but  very  diflBcult,  not  merely  from  its  physical 
difficulties,  but  owing  to  the  **  morale  "  of  Bonaparte 
himself,  whose  mistrust  was  such  that  he  would 
never  confide  his  person  to  any  one  but  a  member 
of  his  own  family,  or  some  individual  amongst  his 
former  servants  in  whom  he  had  equal  confidence ;  for, 
said  Montholon,  "if  he  got  on  board,  who  knows 
whether,  when  he  was  three  leagues  distent  from  land, 
he  might  not  be  thrown  into  the  sea.  Besides,**  added 
the  Count,  **he  is  strongly  impressed  with  the  idea 
that  if  he  was  caught  in  any  attempt  to  escape  they 
would  blow  his  brains  out.*'  This  opinion  the  Mar- 
quis said  had  teken  the  deepest  hold  of  him. 

Napoleon  showed  his  present  fretfulness  of  temper 
in  his  usual  manner,  by  confining  himself  more  closely 
to  the  house  and  affording  few  facilities  to  the  orderly 
officer  for  assuring  himself  of  his  actual  presence  at 
Longwood.  The  Governor  ascribed  his  ill-humour 
chiefly  to  his  having  been  baffled  in  his  attempt  to  re- 
establish Marshal  Bertrand  as  the  medium  of  intro- 
ductions to  and  communications  with  him. 

In  the  course  of  the  month  Rear- Admiral  Plampin 
left  the  stetion  and  was  succeeded  in  his  command 
by  Rear- Admiral  Lambert.  Before  the  former  sailed 
he  made  known  at  Longwood  his  wish  to  teke  leave 
of  Bonaparte  and  introduce  his  successor,  but  Bona- 
parte declined  to  receive  the  new  Admiral  unless  he 
applied  for  an  introduction  through  Count  Bertrand. 

A  curious  circumstance  now  occurred  in  an  ap- 
parent attempt  on  the  part  of  the  Abbfe  Yignali  to 
personate  Napoleon   and    thus  deceive   the   orderly 


JiTLY,  1820.  A  COUNTERFEIT  NAPOLEON.  233 

officer.  On  the  22nd  of  July  it  was  reported  to  the 
Grovernor  that  Bonaparte  had  been  riding,  but  it 
turned  out  that  it  was  Vignali  mounted  on  one  of  the 
ex-Emperor's  horses,  attended  by  his  groom,  and 
dressed  nearly  in  the  same  manner  as  himself.  And 
it  was  not  an  unimportant  fact  that  Bonaparte  did  not 
leave  his  house  that  day  at  all.  The  following  morn- 
ing he  attended  mass  in  his  own  apartments,  and  was 
seen  there  by  one  of  the  English  servants.  Next  day 
Vignali  rode  out  attired  and  attended  in  the  same  way 
as  before,  but,  being  watched  on  his  return  by  the 
orderly  officer,  he  seemed  a  good  deal  disconcerted  at 
meeting  him  near  a  place  where  he  had  dismounted, 
apparently  in  order  to  avoid  being  observed. 

The  following  is  Captain  Lutyens'  account  of  the 
incident : — 

**  A  short  time  before  seven  o'clock  this  morning 
I  saw  Archambaud  go  to  priest  Vignali's  window; 
soon  after  which  I  saw  the  priest  come  out,  dressed  in 
a  nankeen  jacket,  something  like  the  one  worn  by 
General  Bonaparte,  black  breeches,  with  brown  top 
boots,  a  straw  hat,  but  not  in  the  least  like  the  hat 
worn  by  the  General;  it  was  lined  with  green,  and 
bought  lately  at  Mr.  Ritchie's.  I  saw  him  mount 
Major  Obin's  horse  in  the  wood,  which  was  in  readi- 
ness ;  Archambaud  mounted  Miss  Somerset's  chestnut 
horse :  they  then  rode  round  the  farm-fields  down  to 
the  quarry,  and  were  returning  by  the  left  of  Colonel 
South's  cottage  when  they  perceived  many  of  the 
officers  and  men  on  the  look-out :  they  immediately 
turned  their  horses  and  galloped  up  the  race-course, 
and  returned  to  Longwood  by  the  quarry-road,  en- 
tered the  wood,  and  dismounted.  I  then  showed 
myself  at  a  little  distance,  and  returned  to  my  room 


234  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.        Chap.  XXVII. 

before  the  priest  could  get  to  his :  he  came  up  the  gar- 
den walk  facing  the  guard-house,  and  sent  young 
Bertrand  to  look  if  he  could  see  me.  When  the 
priest  got  clear  of  the  comer  of  the  sod-wall,  which 
he  had  been  waiting  behind,  I  left  my  room  on  pur- 
pose that  he  should  see  that  I  knew  him.  He  looked 
very  foolish." 

It  must  have  been  an  amusing  sight  to  see  the 
priest  equipped  in  riding  costume,  and  trying  to  pass 
himself  off  for  the  great  military  chief.^ 

'  This  was  not  the  only  disguise  practised  in  the  island,  for  not  long 
afterwards  an  officer  of  the  66th  regiment  was  tried  by  a  court-niartial,  and 
cashiered,  for  bringing,  while  in  eommand  of  the  Longwood  gnard,  a  mid- 
shipman belonging  to  an  East-Indiaman,  dressed  in  the  uniform  of  the 
20th  regiment,  along  with  him  on  his  visit  to  the  sentinels  posted  round 
the  house.  The  court,  however,  recommended  him  for  a  pardon,  and  Sir 
Hudson  Lowe  supported  their  merciful  suggestion. 


Aug.  1820.  GOAT-SHOOTING.  235 


CHAPTER  XXVIIL 

APPLICATIOSr  FOR  EXTENSION  OF  LIMITS  —  DESPATCH  FROM  EARL 
BATHURSrr  —  LETTER  TO  LORD  LIVERPOOL  —  THE  FRENCH 
COMMISSIONER,  THE  MARQUIS  DE  MONTCHENU  —  NAPOLEON 
AT  A  PIC-NIC  —  CAPTAIN  SPENCER'S  CONVERSATIONS  WITH 
BERTRAND  AND  MONTHOLON  —  CHANGE  FOR  THE  WORSE  IN 
napoleon's  health  —  APPREHENSIONS  OF  THE  ENGLISH 
GOVERNMENT  AS  TO  A  MEDITATED  ESCAPE. 

During  the  month  of  August  Napoleon  resumed  horse- 
exercise,  and  rode  out  very  frequently  with  Bertrand 
and  Montholon,  and  sometimes  Madame  Bertrand 
formed  one  of  the  party.  His  steed  was  gaily  capa- 
risoned in  housings  of  scarlet  and  gold,  and  he  was 
himself  usually  in  fall  dress.  But  he  did  not  give  up 
goat-shooting.  One  day  he  sent  for  a  he-goat  belong- 
ing to  him,  which  the  orderly  officer  had  kept  for 
some  time  with  his  own  flock,  and  had  it  turned  out 
on  the  lawn,  where  he  killed  it  at  the  second  shot. 
Pleased  with  his  success,  he  then  ordered  another  to 
be  brought,  which  he  fired  at  but  missed,  and  the 
animal  escaped  unhurt.  At  another  time  he  busied 
himself  with  giving  directions  about  a  Chinese  summer- 
house  which  he  was  building  in  his  garden. 

He  was,  however,  anxious  still  further  to  extend 
his  limits,  in  order  to  obtain  greater  variety  in  his 
rides;  and  Count  Montholon  had  one  or  two  con- 
versations with  the  Gk>vernor  on  the  subject.  As 
Montholon  said  Napoleon  wanted  distraction  and 
change  of  scenery.  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  told  him  that 
he  could  not  increase  the  limits  in  the  way  desired 
without  the  authority  of  his  Gk>vemment ;  and  that 


236  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.        Chap.  XXVIH. 

such  ample  informatioa  about  St.  Helena  had  been 
given,  and  so  many  plans  made  of  it,  that  it  was  as 
well  known  in  Europe  as  on  the  spot,  so  that  the  pro- 
priety of  an  extension  of  limits  could  be  judged  of  as 
well  in  England  as  in  this  island.  But,  although  he 
felt  himself  unable  to  comply  with  this  request,  he 
readily  acceded  to  several  suggestions  made  by  Mon- 
tholon  as  to  a  more  convenient  mode  of  posting  some 
of  the  sentries  to  keep  them  out  of  view  ;  and  he  him- 
self proposed  to  put  in  repair  a  road  called  **  le  chemin 
militaire,"  which  would  give  Napoleon  the  command 
of  more  varied  and  agreeable  scenery.  It  passed  over 
the  crest  of  some  hills,  the  prospect  from  which  was 
the  best  in  the  island. 

In  the  course  of  the  conversation  Count  Montholon 
remarked,  that  the  Governor  had  shown  so  much 
courtesy  and  consideration  in  all  that  he  had  done  for 
a  good  while  past,  that  he  felt  very  certain  he  would 
be  equally  inclined  on  this  occasion  to  do  all  in  his 
power  which  might  contribute  to  their  comfort.  Sir 
Hudson  Lowe  here  adverted  to  the  obstacles  which 
Bonaparte's  own  conduct  had  always  opposed,  on 
which  the  Count  said  it  was  not  so  now ;  that  Bona- 
parte had  perceived  for  some  time  past  so  much 
"  bienveillance  et  des  soins  si  gracieujc "  on  the  part 
of  the  Governor  in  everything  that  related  to  their 
welfare  or  accommodation,  that  he  viewed  matters  at 
present  in  a  very  diflFerent  light.  The  Governor  re- 
plied that  there  had  been  no  change  in  his  own  senti- 
ments or  in  the  principles  that  had  always  guided  him, 
and  he  was  not  sensible  that  there  had  been  any 
change  in  his  conduct;  it  depended  entirely  on  the 
way  of  looking  at  things.  He  had  always  endeavoured 
to  put  himself  entirely  out  of  the  question  in  all  that 
he  had  done* 


Aug,  1820.  QUALITY  OF  PROVISIONS.  237 

Count  Montholon  answered  that  he  must  himself, 
notwithstanding,  say  that  the  Grovemor  had  appeared 
to  show  more  attention  in  anticipating  their  wishes  for 
some  time  past  than  formerly,  on  which  Sir  Hudson 
repeated  that  the  principles  of  his  conduct  had  always 
been  the  same. 

In  truth  there  was  no  real  difference,  but  the  French 
wer6  now  in  better  humour,  wearied,  probably,  of 
prolonging  a  contest  of  which  they  must  have  often 
felt  themselves  ashamed,  and  they  were  disposed  to 
take  in  good  part  oflBces  of  courtesy  which  formerly 
they  contemptuously  and  petulantly  rejected. 

In  taking  leave  of  the  Governor,  Count  Montholon 
called  the  attention  of  Major  Gorrequer  to  the  inferior 
quality  of  the  provisions  supplied  at  Longwood.  The 
bread,  he  said,  had  much  fallen  off;  the  beef  was  not 
so  good ;  the  beer  not  so  drinkable ;  and  there  was 
not  a  suflSciency  of  fish.  Their  Burgundy  also  had 
become  very  sour  and  bad.  There  seems  to  have 
been  some  ground  for  these  complaints;  and,  after 
making  inquiry  on  the  subject.  Sir  Hudson  Lowe 
caused  a  severe  letter  of  reprimand  to  be  written  to 
the  purveyor,  telling  him  that  the  failure  of  any 
article  of  ordinary  and  expected  supply  was  not  for  a 
single  day  to  be  withheld  from  his  information.  With 
reference  to  the  beer,  the  purveyor  was  directed  to  pro- 
cure some  casks  of  **  what  is  called  Hodson's  pale  ale." 

On  the  23rd  of  August  a  vessel  arrived  from  Eng- 
land, which  brought  out  Brigadier-General  Coffin  as 
successor  to  Sir  George  Bingham,  and  by  the  same 
ship  appears  to  have  come  a  despatch  from  Lord 
Bathurst,  which  is  worth  quoting  as  a  proof  of  the 
really  anxious  desire  on  the  part  of  the  British  Go- 
vernment to  contribute  to  the  happiness  and  amuse- 
ment of  their  illustrious  prisoner : — 


238  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.        Chap.  XXVIII. 

"  To  Lieut.-Genebal  Sir  Hotwon  Lowe,  K.C.B. 
"  Sir,  "  Downing  Street,  June  2,  1820. 

"  It  appearing  from  your  recent  despatches  that 
General  Buonaparte  has  of  late  found  much  amuse- 
ment in  the  improvement  of  the  garden  at  Longwood 
and  in  the  cultivation  of  plants  and  shrubs,  I  have 
thought  it  advisable  that  you  should  take  an  early 
opportunity  of  expressing  to  him  the  satisfaction  which 
His  Msyesty's  Government  would  derive  from  con- 
tributing by  every  means  in  their  power  to  his  grati- 
fication in  this  particular.  I  have  therefore  to  desire 
that  you  would  take  a  fit  opportunity  of  communi- 
cating this  to  General  Buonaparte,  and  of  assuring 
him  that,  if  there  are  any  plants  either  at  the  Cq)e  or 
at  any  other  British  settlement,  or  in  this  country, 
which  he  may  wish  to  add  to  his  present  collection, 
no  effort  on  my  part  shall  be  wanting  to  procure  and 
forward  them  to  St.  Helena  in  the  manner  best  cal- 
culated to  insure  their  safe  arrival. 

"  I^  in  consequence  of  this  communication,  General 
Buonaparte  should  express  any  wish  to  receive  either 
seeds  or  plants  from  the  Cape  or  the  Mauritius,  you 
will  consider  yourself  authorised  at  once  to  addr^s 
the  Governors  of  those  colonies,  who  will,  I  am  sure, 
lose  no  time  in  giving  effect  to  any  wish  which  you 
may  express  with  respect  to  them. 

"  I  have  the  honour  to  be,  &c. 

"  Bathurst." 

On  the  2nd  of  September  Count  Bertrand  forwarded 
to  the  Governor  a  letter,  written  and  addressed  by 
him,  in  the  name  of  the  Emperor,  to  Lord  Liverpool, 
in  which  he  complained  of  the  state  of  Napoleon's 
health,  and  demanded  his  removal  to  Europe.  He 
said  that  the  Emperor  had  been  suffering  under  an 


Sept.  1820.  THE  FBENCH  COMMISSIONER.  239 

attack  of  chronic  hepatitis  since  the  month  of  October 
1817;  that  no  remedies  applied  could  combat  the 
malignity  of  the  climate  of  St.  Helena ;  that  he  re- 
quired the  use  of  mineral  waters,  and  was  exhausted 
by  his  five  years'  residence  in  that  frightful  climate, 
deprived  of  everything,  and  a  prey  to  the  worst  treat- 
ment; he  therefore  demanded  to  be  transferred  to 
Europe  as  the  only  means  of  diminishing  his  sufferings. 

As  this  letter  ostentatiously  made  use  throughout 
of  the  imperial  title,  the  Gk)vemor  felt  himself  obliged 
to  return  it,  but  he  first  had  an  accurate  copy  of  it 
taken,  which  he  forwarded  to  Lord  Bathurst. 

We  have  frequently  had  occasion  to  allude  to  the 
trouble  given  by  the  foreign  Commissioners,  although 
the  reader  has  been  spared  details  of  the  tedious  and 
troublesome  disputes  in  which  they  involved  them- 
selves with  the  Governor.  These  arose  wholly  fit>m 
their  anomalous  and  somewhat  ridiculous  position. 
Bonaparte  had  absolutely  refused  to  receive  them  in 
their  official  and  representative  character,  and  they 
would  not  visit  him  as  private  individuals.  Hence 
they  had  literally  nothing  to  do  but  gossip  and  cabal, 
and  had  given  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  much  trouble  by 
their  repeated  attempts  at  unauthorised  communica- 
tions with  the  French  families  at  Longwood.  The 
Russian  and  Austrian  Commissioners  were  now  gone, 
and  the  whole  dignity  of  their  office  was  represented 
by  the  Marquis  de  Montchenu,  who  was  inflated  with 
rather  an  exaggerated  sense  of  his  own  dignity  and 
the  importance  of  the  functions  he  had  to  perform. 
Early  in  September  he  informed  the  Governor  of  his 
determination  to  carry  into  effect  the  instructions  he 
had  received  from  the  Duke  de  Richelieu,  in  April 
1819,  directing  him  to  visit  the  French  at  Longwood 
for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  information  respecting 


240  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.        Chap.  XXVIIL 

Bonaparte.  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  however,  wa^  firm 
in  his  refiisal  to  allow  this,  and  the  poor  Marquis 
tried  to  frighten  him  by  a  long  letter  on  the  7th,  in 
which,  after  dwelling  upon  his  own  "  inviolability^"  and 
his  being  "responsible  only  to  the  King  his  master,** 
he  declared  in  due  form  his  solemn  resolution  to  go 
to  Longwood  **the  first  fine  day,"  and  said,  "I^  con- 
trary to  all  likelihood,  you  cause  the  gate  to  be  closed 
by  a  sentinel,  you  know  that  I  do  not  understand 
English,  and  should  not  comprehend  what  he  says; 
but  I  will  pass  on,  even  if  he  were  to  fire  at  me  a 
shot  which  would  soon  re-echo  through  the  whole  of 
Europe!" 

He  was,  however,  mistaken  in  the  character  of  the 
man  with  whom  he  had  to  deal.  The  Gk)vemor  would 
not  give  way,  and  the  result  was  that  the  crest&llen 
Marquis  made  pacific  overtures  —  told  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe  that  he  attached  great  value  to  his  esteem,  and 
desisted  from  his  magniloquently-announced  purpose. 

The  report  of  the  orderly  officer  on  the  12th  of 
September  illustrates  the  obstinacy  of  Napoleon^s 
character,  and  his  determination  rather  to  punisb 
himself  than  not  carry  a  point  on  which  he  had  set 
his  heart.  Captain  Lutyens  says, — "General  Bona- 
parte was  in  the  garden  the  whole  of  yesterday  evening 
in  his  fiill  dress  with  Count  Bertrand.  I  have  this 
moment  seen  Count  Montholon  and  informed  him  that 
a  cartload  of  trees  had  arrived  for  the  plantation,  and 
requested  him  to  give  me  some  hint  where  he  wonld 
like  to  have  them  planted.  He  said  he  had  beea 
ordered  (only  yesterday)  not  to  give  any  directicms 
whatever,  in  consequence  of  his  having  then  men- 
tioned that  he  had  spoken  to  me  about  planting,  at 
which  General  Bonaparte  was  very  angry,  and  ordered 
him  not  to  give  any  directions  if  the  iron  railing  re- 


toPT.  1820.      OFFER  TO  REPLACE  ATTENDANTS.  241 

Sdained,  and  even  requested  him  not  to  walk  about 
ike  new  house." 

Happily,  however,  he  no  longer  kept  himself  a  close 
prisoner  at  Longwood  House.  On  the  morning  of  the 
18th,  soon  after  six  o'clock,  Bonaparte,  attended  by 
two  grooms,  quitted  the  precincts  of  Longwood  on 
horseback,  for  the  first  time  during  four  years,  and 
rode  round  the  entire  circuit  of  his  limite,  as  they 
were  originally  established ;  he  then  returned  home, 
after  being  out  two  hours  and  a  half.  Next  day  he 
drove  out  in  a  small  phaSton,  but  did  not  pass  beyond 
the  grounds  of  Longwood.  Count  Montholon  said 
that  he  was  much  &tigued  and  exhausted  with  the 
exercise  he  had  taken  the  preceding  day,  having 
walked  a  good  deal  as  well  as  ridden. 

Next  day  Count  Montholon  came  up  to  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe  on  tiie  race-course  and  asked  him  if  he  could 
give  him  any  information  relative  to  the  oflFer  made 
by  the  Britidi  Grovemment  to  send  out  a  person  to 
replace  him  or  Count  Bertrand.  The  Count  said 
that  his  wife  had  written  to  inform  him  that  such  an 
oflfer  had  been  made.  As  the  Gk>vernor  had  sent  to 
Napoleon  by  the  hands  of  Montholon  himself  an  exact 
copy  of  Lord  Bathurst's  letter  of  the  16th  March, 
communicating  the  King's  intention  to  accede  to  any 
request  which  Bonaparte  might  make  with  respect  to 
tie  choice  of  a  person  to  replace  Count  Montholon  or 
Count  Bertrand,  he  told  the  former,  in  reply,  that  he 
had  made  a  notification  on  the  subject  to  Bonaparte, 
and  had  delivered  it  to  him  (Montholon).  "  What, 
llien  I "  said  the  Count,  "  it  was  the  letter  you  gave  to 
me  for  him?"  Sir  Hudson  answered  that  it  was  an 
exact  copy  of  the  information  he  had  himself  received, 
and  he  lost  no  time  after  receiving  it  in  communicating 
it  to  Bonaparte.     "  Eh  him  donc^''  replied  Count  Mon- 

VOL,  III.  R 


242  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.       Chap.  XXVIH. 

tholoB,  'HI nous  Va  cachJ—U  ne  nous  ma  pasdii  un 
moC  The  Gk)vernor  then  said  that  Moniholon  had 
at  all  events  an  opportunity  of  bringing  the  subject 
under  the  notice  of  Napoleon  by  showing  him  the 
letter  he  had  received  from  his  wife.  The  Count 
mentioned  that  he  had  done  so,  but  that  Bonaparte 
answered  that  he  had  received  no  communication  on 
the  subject ;  and  Montholon  added  that  perhaps  this 
was  said  from  his  determination  to  take  no  cognizance 
of  any  paper  addressed  to  him  by  the  Governor,  but 
that,  at  all  events,  he  was  interested  in  keeping  Count 
Bertrand  and  him  there,  and  would  not  make  known 
to  them  the  communication  he  had  received* 

We  must  now  describe  Napoleon  Bonaparte  enjoy- 
ing a  picnic,  and  it  has  an  additional  interest  from 
the  fact  that  it  was  the  first  visit  he  ever  paid  in  the 
island,  and  the  last  time  he  ever  took  a  meal  in  the 
presence  of  strangers,  or  anywhere  except  amongst 
his  own  followers  in  the  seclusion  of  Longwood. 
About  five  miles  from  that  place  stood  the  house 
and  grounds  of  Sir  William  Doveton,  called  Mount 
Pleasant,  which,  at  Napoleon's  special  request,  had 
been  recently  included  within  his  limits.  Sir  Wil- 
liam was  a  native  of  St.  Helena,  who  had  been  for 
many  years  Member  of  Council  there,  and  having 
visited  England  a  year  or  two  previously  he  had 
received  the  honour  of  knighthood.*  On  the  morning 
of  the  4th  of  October,  as  the  old  gentleman  was 
taking  his  usual  walk  before  breakfast,  he  observed 

*  This  is  the  gentleman  of  whom  Theodore  Hook  tells  the  story,  thal;» 
happening  accidentally,  on  his  arriyal  in  London,  to  meet  a  lady  whom  he 
knew  in  one  of  the  crowded  streets,  he  asked  whether  they  had  not  better 
defer  their  conversation  until  the  proeesaion  had  patted!  The  natives  of 
St.  Helena  were  called  by  the  English  there  "  Tamstocks,'*  and  had  the 
reputation  of  being  very  unsophisticated.  A  lady  of  the  island  once  in- 
quired whether  London  was  not  very  dull  after  the  China  fleet  had  sailed. 


Oct.  1820.  THE  PICNIC.  243 

several  persons  on  horseback  coming  towards  his 
house,  and^  on  reconnoitring  them  with  his  spyglass, 
perceived  they  were  the  party  from  Longwood. 
Count  Montholon  dismounted  from  his  horse,  and  Sir 
William  went  to  the  door  to  receive  him ;  the  Count 
informed  him  that  the  Emperor  presented  his  compli- 
ments, and  requested  he  might  come  and  rest  himself. 
Sir  William  replied^  that  he  should  be  glad  to  see 
him,  and  that  any  accommodation  his  house  afforded 
was  at  General  Boiu^rte's  service.  Montholon  then 
mounted  his  horse,  and,  having  joined  the  party,  they 
all  entered  the  lawn.  Unfortunately  the  venerable 
knight  was  quite  ignorant  of  the  French  language, 
and  could  only  communicate  through  the  medium  of 
Count  Bertrand,  whose  knowledge  of  English  was 
not  as  perfect  as  it  might  have  been.  However,  Sir 
William  made  his  compliments  in  the  best  manner  he 
could,  and,  as  Bonaparte  appeared  a  good  deal  fa- 
tigued, he  requested  that  he  would  walk  in  and  rest 
himself,  upon  which  the  ex-Emperor  advanced  towards 
the  door,  and  on  coming  up  the  steps  was  assisted  by 
Bertrand's  arm.  He  sat  on  the  so&*,  and  entered  into 
conversation  with  his  host,  through  Bertrand  as  inter- 
preter. Observing  Sir  William's  eldest  granddaughter 
in  the  room,  he  said  he  supposed  she  was  about  ten 
years  old.  He  was  told  she  was  only  seven,  and  he 
called  her  to  him,  placed  two  of  his  fingers  over  her 
nose,  and  gave  her  a  piece  of  liquorice,  which  he  took 
from  a  smaJl  tortoiseshell  box.  Sir  William  Doveton 
begged  Bertrand  to  inform  Bonaparte  that  he  hoped 
he  would  stop  and  breakfast  with  him ;  but  this  the 
illustrious  visitor  declined,  saying,  they  had  brought 
their  own  breakfast,  and  preferred  taking  it  on  the 
lawn.  Sir  William  endeavoured  to  dissuade  him  from 
this,  saying  that  the  house,  and  whatever  accommoda- 

E  2 


244  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.         Chap.  XXVni. 

tion  he  could  afford,  was  at  their  service,  and  he  took 
Bonaparte  and  Bertrand  into  the  dining-room,  where  he 
pointed  to  a  large  pat  of  fresh  butter  on  the  breakfast 
table,  saying  it  was  at  the  service  of  his  guests.  Upon 
this  Bonaparte  smiled,  and  gently  took  hold  of  his 
host's  right  ear,  as  was  his  custom  when  he  wished  to 
signify  his  approval.  They  then  returned  to  the 
drawing-room,  and  Bonaparte  resumed  his  seat  on  the 
sofa.  Soon  afterwards  one  of  Sir  William's  daughters, 
Mrs.  Greentree,  came  into  the  room  with  her  youngest 
child  in  her  arms,  and  Napoleon  rose  and  pointed  to 
the  sofa  as  a  sign  that  she  was  to  sit  there.  Two 
of  hef  little  girls  had  each  their  noses  taken  hold  of 
by  the  affable  visitor,  and  received  from  him  a  small 
piece  of  liquorice.  In  the  mean  time  Count  Montholon 
had  got  a  table  and  laid  it  on  the  lawn.  Sir  William 
Doveton  sent  out  a  variety  of  good  things,  and  then 
the  Count  came  in  and  announced  that  breakfast  was 
ready.  Their  host  was  requested  to  go  and  share 
their  meal,  which  he  did,  taking  with  him,  he  says,  a 
pint  bottle  of  Mount  Pleasant  water  (alias^  orange 
shrub),  made  by  his  daughter,  and  four  liqueur- 
glasses.  Bonaparte  reserved  for  him  a  chair  on  his 
right  hand,  and  desired  him  to  sit  there.  After  doing 
justice  to  some  substantial  viands,  Bonaparte  filled  a 
small  tumbler  of  champagne  for  Sir  William  and  an- 
other for  himself,  and  he  afterwards  drank  a  glass  of 
the  shrub.  Coffee  was  then  brought,  and  Bonaparte 
requested  that  Mrs.  Greentree  would  come  and  par- 
take of  it.  After  she  had  tasted  the  coffee,  which  she 
found  acid  and  disagreeable,  Bonaparte  filled  a 
liqueur-glass  with  shrub  and  offered  it  to  her.  The 
party  then  rose,  and  Bonaparte  handed  Mrs.  Green- 
tree  into  the  house,  where  he  took  his  former  seat  on 
the  sofis  with  her  beside  him.    In  the  course  of  con- 


Oct.  1820.  THE  PICNIC.  245 

versation  he  put  his  fevourite  question  to  Sir  William 
Doveton,  and  asked  him,  through  Count  Bertrand, 
whether  he  ever  got  drunk  ?  To  which  Sir  William 
replied,  rather  equivocally,  "  I  like  a  glass  of  wine 
sometimes."  He  then  turned  to  Mrs.  Greentree,  and 
inquired,  "How  often  does  your  husband  get  drunk  ? 
— ^is  he  so  once  a  week  ?  "  She  answered^  "  No.**  "  Is 
he  once  a  fortnight?"  She  again  replied,  "No." 
"Once  a  month?"  "Noj  it  is  some  years  since  I 
saw  him  so."  Bonaparte  then  said  "Bah!"  and 
changed  the  conversation.*  After  sitting  some  time 
he  rose  and  took  leave,  holding  Bertrand's  arm  as  he 
went  down  the  steps. 

"The  breakfast,"  Sir  William  tells  us,  " consisted 
of  a  cold  pie,  potted  meat^  cold  turkey,  curried  fowl, 
ham  or  pork,  I  could  not  tell  which ;  coffee,  dates, 
almonds,  oranges,  and  a  very  fine  salad.  From  every 
appearance  but  his  pale  colour,  it  might  be  concluded 
that  Cleneral  Bonaparte  was  in  good  health ;  his  face 
is  astonishingly  fat,  aud  his  body  and  thighs  very 
round  and  plump."  Indeed,  to  use  the  good  knight's 
own  words,  which  are  more  expressive  than  elegant, 
"  he  looked  as  fat  and  as  round  as  a  China  pig." 

Bonaparte  on  his  return  to  Longwood  was  met  at 
Hutt's  Gate  by  his  phaeton,  and  drove  home  in  it. 
He  was  rather  animated  while  on  horseback  going  to 
Mount  Pleasant,  but  in  the  carriage  appeared  a  good 
deal  fatigued  and  drowsy,  which  was  perhaps  caused 
by  the  length  of  the  ride  he  had  taken, — about  ten 
miles  in  a  very  hilly  country.    He  now  frequently 

*  It  is  little  oomplimentaTy  to  our  national  character  at  that  time 
that  Napoleon  so  frequently  asked  this  question,  and  it  is  humiliating  to 
think  that  he  was  so  often  justified  in  asking  it. 

"  pudet  h»c  opprobria  nobis 
Et  did  potuisse  et  non  potuisse  refelli." 


/,w 


246  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.        Chap.  XXYHI. 

drove  out  in  his  pha6ton  within  the  grounds  of  Long- 
wood,  where  some  avenues  had  been  cut  through  the 
wood,  so  that  he  was  able  to  vary  the  direction  of  his 
drives  and  rides  on  level  ground  within  a  space  of 
about  four  miles,  an  advantage  of  which  he  might 
have  always  availed  himself  for  taking  exercise  unob- 
served and  uninterrupted,  and  which  he  could  not 
have  enjoyed  to  the  same  extent,  or  in  the  same  way, 
had  his  residence  been  established  in  any  other  part 
of  the  island. 

On  the  25th  of  October  H.  M.  S.  Owen  Glendower, 
commanded  by  the  Hon.  Robert  Spencer,  arrived  at 
St.  Helena.  Although  belonging  to  a  Wily  whose 
political  opinions  were  in  opposition  to  the  Ministry,  he 
was  not  honoured  with  an  interview  by  Bonaparte, — 
apparently  because  he  declined  to  apply  for  an  intro- 
duction through  Count  Bertrand, — ^but  he  had  one  or 
two  long  conversations  with  the  latter  and  Madame 
Bertrand,  and  they  both  spoke  freely  to  him,  under 
the  idea  that  he  belonged  to  a  paxty  in  England 
which  espoused  their  views.  Their  chief  if  not  sole 
complaint  now  was  the  want  of  society,  which  Ber- 
trand, as  has  been  before  mentioned,  brought  entirely 
upon  himself  by  his  improper  conduct.  Captain 
Spencer  also  saw  and  conversed  with  Count  Montho- 
lon,  and  he  remarked  to  the  Governor  the  disregard 
of  truth  evinced  in  what  was  told  him  by  the  two 
French  Generals.  He  said  that  several  statements 
had  been  made  by  them  which  he  knew  to  be  untrue, 
and,  when  he  showed  by  his  replies  that  he  felt  this, 
they  began  to  retract  and  qualify  what  they  had  just 
asserted. 

On  the  7th  of  November  Sir  Hudson  writing  to 
Lord  Bathurst  said, — "Captain  Spencer's  visit  has 
formed  much  such  another  epoch    as  that  of   Mr 


Nov.  1820.         HIS  HEALTH  BECOMES  WORSE.  247 

Ricketts  and  Lord  Amherst,  with  this  difference,  that 
Captain  Spencer  came  here  with  all  those  prepos- 
sessions that  prejudiced  or  party  views  may  have 
endeavoured  to  excite  in  General  Bonaparte's  favour, 
and  to  lead  to  the  opinion  of  his  being  harshly  and 
severely  treated  here,  and  he  has  quitted  the  island, 
as  I  have  every  reason  to  suppose,  entirely  the  con- 
vert to  a  diflFerent  opinion.  He  did  not  hesitate,  in 
fact,  to  avow  as  much  to  me,  seeming  to  think  that,  if 
the  precautions  erred  in  any  way,  it  was  more  on  the 
side  of  indulgence  than  imnecessary  restraint.  He 
rode  round  the  limits,  and  acknowledged  they  in- 
cluded all  that  could  be  fairly  desired." 

A  melancholy  change  now  took  place  in  the  state 
of  Napoleon's  health.  Symptoms  of  the  fetal  disease 
which  at  last  carried  him  off  began  unequivocally  to 
i4)pear  in  frequent  vomitings  and  pains  of  the  sto- 
madu  His  extremities  became  white  and  chilly 
owing  to  deficient  circulation,  and  he  often  kept  his 
bed  in  consequence  of  a  feeling  of  oppressive  drowsi- 
ness which  came  over  him.  He  found  some  relief 
from  the  use  of  salt-water  baths,  and  Dr.  Antom- 
marchi  was  constantly  in  attendance.  He,  however, 
still  refused  to  see  Dr.  Amott. 

In  writing  to  Lord  Bathurst  Sir  Hudson  Lowe 
said, — "  In  reply  to  the  offer  I  made  of  Dr.  Arnott's 
assistance,  the  orderly  ofi&cer  was  desired  to  acquaint 
me  that  General  Bonaparte  did  not  conceive  either 
the  British  Government  or  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  appeared 
sufficiently  interested  about  the  state  of  his  health,  as 
Count  Bertrand  sent  some  time  since  a  letter  to  the 
Governor  for  Lord  Liverpool,  containing  the  opinion 
of  Dr.  Antommarchi,  and  the  immediate  wish  of 
General  Bonaparte  himself,  for  the  information  of  the 


248  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.       Chap.  XXYHT. 

British  Ministry;  which  letter  had  been  returned 
in  consequence  of  Count  Bertrand  having  made  use  of 
the  term  *  Emperor  Napoleon/  " 

The  reports  of  the  orderly  officer  for  the  month  of 
November  assume  almost  the  character  of  a  medical 
journal,  and  the  reader  may  be  spared  the  mention  of 
minute  details  which  marked  the  progress  of  Bona- 
parte's disorder.  He  sometimes  drove  out  in  his 
carriage,  but  he  looked  pale,  and  his  gait  in  walking 
was  slow  and  feeble. 

On  one  of  these  occasions  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  again 
unexpectedly  met  him,  and  he  thus  describes  tike 
rencontre : — **  I  was  returning  through  the  grounds 
of  Longwood,  towards  Longwood  House,  when  I  ob- 
served a  phaeton  drawn  by  four  horses  with  General 
Bonaparte  and  Count  Montholon  in  it.  As  soon  as 
they  perceived  me,  the  drivers  were  desired  to  turn 
off  by  another  road,  but  this  could  not  be  done  so 
soon  as  to  prevent  my  having  a  good  view  of  General 
Bonaparte's  side  face,  at  about  thirty  yards  distance. 
He  wore  a  round  hat,  and  green  surtout  buttoned 
close  over  his  breast.  He  appeared  much  paler  thfui 
when  I  had  last  seen  him,  but  not  fallen  away.  I 
should  have  inferred^  however,  a  looseness  of  fibre 
and  inability  at  the  moment  of  any  active  exertion. 
A  sallow,  colourless  look  is  characteristic  of  his  ap- 
pearance in  general,  and  any  degree  of  indisposition 
would  naturally  add  to  it."  He  was,  however,  as 
eager  as  ever  for  news  from  Europe,  and  when  any 
newspapers  arrived  became  so  absorbed  in  them  as 
sometimes  to  delay  his  dinner  for  four  or  five  hours 
beyond  the  usual  time. 

In  his  report  on  the  21st  of  November  Captain 
Lutyens  mentioned  that  Bonaparte  had  said  to  Count 
Montholon,  in  allusion  to  the  iron  railing,  of  which 


Peo.  1820.  HIS  SICKNESS  INCREASES.  249 

part  still  remained  at  the  back  of  the  new  house, 
"  You  may  tell  the  Captain  officially  from  me,  that  I 
do  not  like  any  of  the  railing,  and  I  never  will  go  to 
live  in  the  house  until  it  is  done  away  with,  unless  by 
force ;"  and  he  requested  the  Count  not  to  mention 
the  house  to  him  while  the  railing  remained. 

His  sickness  in  the  mean  time  continued  to  increase ; 
and  early  in  December  after  taking  carriage  exercise 
he  fainted  on  his  return  to  the  house.  His  stomach 
frequently  rejected  food,  and  he  seemed  to  be  percep- 
tibly weaker.  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  now  determined  to 
remove  every  possible  objection  to  Dr.  Amott's  being 
called  in,  and  he  directed  a  note  to  be  written  to  Count 
Montholon,  stating  that  that  medical  officer  would 
be  allowed  to  attend  Bonaparte  as  an  ordinary  private 
patient,  which  had  been  originally  the  captive's  own 
proposal.  StQl,  however,  the  offer  was  declined,  and 
Napoleon  in  the  debility  of  sickness  and  exhaustion 
of  pain  continued  to  display  his  inflexible  obstinacy  of 
character.  It  is  a  circumstance  worth  notice  that 
from  the  time  when  he  began  to  be  really  ill  he 
showed  no  disinclination  to  be  seen  by  the  orderly 
officer;  whereas,  while  O'Meara  attended  him  and 
constantly  gave  out  that  he  was  sujBFering  from  liver 
complaint,  he  eluded  observation  as  much  as  possible. 
The  inference  is  plain.  The  reports  of  0*Meara  were, 
if  not  altogether  untrue,  grossly  exaggerated,  and 
every  opportunity  which  wa9  afforded  of  seeing  Na- 
'poleon  tended  to  discredit  them;  but  now  that  the 
patient  was  seriously  unwell  he  had  no  motive  for  con- 
cealing himself  from  view.  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  alluded 
to  this  change  of  tactics  in  a  letter  to  Earl  Bathurst 
of  the  12th  of  December.    He  said, — 

"  The  first  confirmation  I  almost  ever  received  of 
General  Bonaparte's  having  been  indisposed,  from  the 


250  CAPTivrrT  op  napoleon,     chap.  xxvm. 

actual  personal  observaHon  of  the  orderly  officer,  was  in 
his  report  to  me  of  the  7th  November  last,  where, 
speaking  of  General  Bonaparte,  he  mentions,  that  ^  his 
fece  had  every  appearance  of  his  being  lately  indis* 
posed,'  and  it  was  remarkable  that  upon  this  occasion 
Count  Montholon  should  have  apprised  the  orderly 
officer  of  General  Bonaparte's  intention  to  take  an 
airing,  that  he  might  thus  have  an  opportunity  of 

seeing  him 

"My  meeting  with  him  the  following  day  was 
wholly  unexpected,  and  admitted  not  time  for  any 
previous  thought.  The  disposition  he  shows  to  move 
out  and  take  drives  in  his  phaeton  shows  that  he 
now  looks  to  air  and  exercise,  the  opportunity  for 
which  he  had  before  so  much  neglected,  as  the  principal 
means  of  his  re-establishment,  and  meanwhile,  what- 
ever difficulties  he  may  have  formerly  opposed  to 
being  seen,  when  stated  to  be  suffering  under  indis- 
position, these  now  no  longer  appear  to  operate,  ex- 
cept as  to  the  rejecting  professional  aid,  and  thus  still 
resisting  the  means  of  observation  which  that  might 
afford." 

The  English  Grovemment,  however,  not  yet  aware 
of  what  was  passing  at  Longwood,  were  possessed 
with  the  idea  that  Bonaparte  meditated  escape,  as 
appears  from  the  following  extract  from  a  letter  which 
Lord  Bathurst  wrote  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  on  the  30th 
of  September  this  year : — 

"  The  reports  which  you  have  recently  made  of  the 
conduct  of  General  Buonaparte  and  of  his  followers 
make  me  suspect  that  he  is  beginning  to  entertain 
serious  thoughts  of  escaping  from  St.  Helena,  and  the 
accounts  which  he  will  have  since  received  of  what  is 
passing  in  Europe  will  not  fail  to  encourage  him  in 


Dec.  1820.        FEARS  OP  ATTEMPTS  AT  ESCAPE.  251 

this  project.  The  overthrow  of  the  Neapolitan  Gro- 
vemmeEt,  the  revolutionary  spirit  which  more  or  less 
prevails  over  all  Italy,  and  the  donbtM  state  of 
France  itself,  must  excite  his  attention,  and  clearly 
show  that  a  crisis  is  fast  approaching,  if  not  already 
arrived,  when  his  escape  would  be  productive  of 
important  consequences.  That  his  partisans  are  active 
cannot  be  doubted ;  and  if  he  be  ever  willing  to 
hazard  the  attempt,  he  will  never  allow  such  an 
opportunity  to  escape.  You  will  therefore  exert  all 
your  attention  in  watching  his  proceedings,  and  call 
upon  the  Admiral  to  use  his  utmost  vigilance,  as  upon 
the  navy  so  much  must  ultimately  depend. 

^^  In  what  shape  and  in  what  manner  this  attempt 
will  be  made,  I  cannot  judge,  but  I  am  satisfied  this 
storm  will  not  pass  over  unnoticed  at  Longwood. 
General  Buonaparte  has  money  at  command ;  he  has 
partisans  in  abundance ;  he  has  means  of  conmiunica- 
tion  which  your  regulations  may  occasionally  intercept, 
but  cannot  entirely  prevent ;  the  times  are  most  favour- 
able for  the  attempt ;  and,  without  thinking  that  he 
habitually  courts  a  hazardous  enterprise,  I  cannot  per- 
suade myself  that  he  will  shrink  fix)m  one  which,  if 
successfiil,  must  now  promise  such  important  results." 

And  in  a  private  letter  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  written 
a  few  days  previously  Lord  Bathurst  said, — 

"  You  will  receive  a  despatch  fix)m  me  respecting 
the  probability  of  General  Buonaparte's  attempting  an 
escape.  You  are  at  liberty  to  show  it  in  extenso  to 
the  Admiral ;  indeed,  I  have  written  it  in  a  great 
measure  for  that  purpose,  as  it  will  enable  you  to  take 
a  review  with  him  of  all  the  different  ways  by  which 
Buonaparte  may  attempt  his  escape,  and  the  best 
means  therefore  of  preventing  it.    I  am  strongly  im- 


252  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.       Chap.  XXVIU, 

pressed  with  the  idea  that  very  much  depends  upon 
the  navy.  I  have  not  the  honour  of  being  acquainted 
with  the  Admiral,  but  it  is  possible  he  may  feel  a 
greater  security  than  the  present  crisis  may  admit, 
and  this  instruction  will  enaUe  you  to  excite  his 
attention  without  exposing  you  to  the  imputation  of 
being  unnecessarily  alarmed." 


Jas.  1821,  MORTAL  DISEASE.  253 


CHAPTER  XXTX. 

PROGRESS  OF  NAPOLEON's  FATAL  ILLNESS  —  LONO  CONVERSATION 
BETWEEN  THE  GOVERNOR  AND  COUNT  MONTHOLON  —  BONA- 
PARTE'S OPINION  OF  ANTOMMARCHI — NOTES  DICTATED  BY  HIM 
FOR  SIR  HUDSON  LOWE  —  THE  NEW  HOUSE  AND  IRON  RAIL- 
ING—  Bonaparte's  objechon  to  medicine — novel  mode 

OF  taking  exercise  —  SIR  HUDSON  LOWE  INSISTS  THAT  THE 
ORDERLY  OFFICER  SHALL  SEE  NAPOLEON  —  THE  LATTER 
CONSENTS  TO  BE  VISITED  BY  DR,  ARNOTT  —  DR.  ANTOMMARCHI 
APPLIES  FOR  LEAVE  TO  RETURN  TO  EUROPE  —  PRESENT  OF 
BOOKS  BY  NAPOLEON  TO  THE  20TH  REGIMENT—  INCREASE  OF 
HIS  MALADY. 

The  commencement  of  the  year  1821,  the  last  of 
Napoleon's  existence,  found  him  weakened  and  suffer- 
ing. His  attendants  became  anxious,  but  still  no 
immediate  danger  was  apprehended,  and  he  continued 
to  take  drives  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Longwood, 
but  was  observed  to  require  assistance  in  getting  in 
and  out  of  the  carriage.  The  mortal  disease  of  which 
he  died  had  already  taken  firm  hold  of  him,  and  few 
more  painful  maladies  can  be  conceived.  It  was  a 
scirrhous  cancer  of  the  stomach,  whioh  by  a  slow 
process  of  ulceration  corroded  the  coat  of  that  organ, 
and  rendered  it  unfit  to  perform  its  functions.  This 
explains  the  firequent  vomitings  and  the  loss  of  appe- 
tite, with  other  symptoms  which  accompanied  his 
illness. 

Dr.  Shortt,  Physician  to  the  Forces,  had  lately 
arrived  at  St.  Helena,  and  his  services  were  offered 
in  addition  to  those  of  Dr.  Amott,  but  no  answer 
appears  to  have  been  sent  to  the  proposal.  And  yet 
Bonaparte  had  no  confidence  in  Antommarchi,  who 


254  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXIX. 

was  in  truth  wholly  unequal  to  the  situation.  In  one 
of  the  orderly  officer's  reports  this  month  he  said  that 
Napoleon  had  been  very  angry  with  the  doctor, 
because  the  pills  which  he  had  been  taking  for  some 
time  past  had  lost  their  proper  effect.  This  might 
be  very  hard  upon  Antommarchi,  for  the  same  result 
would  very  probably  have  happened  if  he  had  pos- 
sessed first-rate  skill  in  his  profession ;  but  Napoleon 
was  getting  tired  of  him,  and  wished  to  have  another 
physician  sent  out  in  his  place.  And  he  was  equally 
dissatisfied  with  the  poor  old  Abbe  Buonavita,  who 
was  no  theologian,  and  quite  unfit  to  hold  converse 
on  religious  subjects  with  the  keenest  intellect  of  the 
age,  or  answer  the  questions  of  such  a  sceptic  as 
Napoleon  Bonaparte.*  The  wishes  of  the  exile  on 
these  points  were  made  known  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe 
by  Count  Montholon  in  the  course  of  a  long  and  in- 
teresting conversation  he  had  with  him  on  the  27th  of 
January.  The  Count  said  that  he  was  charged  to 
request  that  the  Abbe  Buonavita  might  be  replaced 
by  a  priest  firom  Europe,  and  that  a  physician  might 
also  be  sent  out,  as  well  as  successors  for  Count  Ber- 
trand  and  himself;  but  that  Bonaparte  particularly 
desired  thai  his  family  might  he  entirely  excluded  from 
all  interference  whatever  in  the  choice  of  any  of  them. 
He  had  great  reason  to  complain  of  the  choice  they 
had  made  in  the  persons  last  sent  to  St.  Helena.  The 
Count  said  that  it  perhaps  was  not  so  much  the  fault 
of  the  femily,  as  of  the  position  in  which  they  were 
placed,  in  an  ecclesiastical  state,  where  they  could  not 
act  with  sufficient  independence  in  making  a  selection* 
Besides,  they  had  no  relations  with  Paris,  to  enable 
them  to  make  a  good  choice.  Bonaparte  wished, 
therefore,  to  leave  it  entirely  to  the  decision  of  the 

'  The  Abb^  Buonavita  quitted  St.  Helena  for  Europe  before  Bonaparte's 


Jan.  1821.  THE  NEW  COMERS.  255 

King  of  France  and  his  Ministers,  as  he  thought  none 
could  choose  for  him  better  than  the  French  Govern- 
ment, the  present  Ministry  being  composed  of  persons 
nearly  all  of  whom  had  served  him  in  the  same  offices, 
and  who  so  well  knew  his  habits  and  disposition ;  for 
instance,  there  was  Pasquier,  who  had  been  ten  years 
his  minister,  with  whom  he  confidentially  conversed 
every  day  for  hours,  and  discussed  the  characters  of 
people ;  Monier  was  another  who  knew  him  perfectly, 
as  well  as  S^gur,  Simeon,  Daru;  and  Latour-Mau- 
bourg,  at  this  time  Minister  at  War,  who  served  with 
him  for  twenty-four  years  up  to  1814,  who  had  been 
his  aide-de-camp,  had  accompanied  him  to  Egypt,  and 
whose  fortune  he  had  made.  There  was  Be  Gazes 
himself,  once  his  private  secretary,  who  knew  him  in- 
timately for  several  years,  and  who  was  in  possession 
of  many  secrets  known  to  none  but  himself. 

At  a  previous  period  Count  Montholon  had  de- 
ecribed  the  new-comers  in  the  following  flattering 
terms :  "  The  Abb^  can  only  speak  of  Mexico ;  An- 
tonmiarchi  of  medicine;  and  Vignali  is  perfectly 
ignorant" 

With  regard  to  a  priest,  Montholon  said  that  Bo- 
naparte wanted  a  man  of  education  and  learning,  a 
theologian,  with  whom  he  could  maintain  arguments  in 
theology,  who  would  answer  all  his  questions  on  reli- 
gious matters  in  cases  which  required  to  be  examined 
and  sounded  to  their  depths^  one  who  was  perfectly 
versed  in  the  history  of  religi(m,  and  capable  of  acting 
as  a  guide  to  him  in  the  perusal  of  tiie  Scriptures ; 
able  to  convince  and  satisfy  his  mind  upon  points 
where  he  /elt  doubts.  He  wished  him  to  be  from 
forty  to  fifty  years  of  age,  a  man  of  erudition ;  for  as 
to  Buonavita,  he  was  incapable  of  discussing  any  reli- 
gious point,  and  had  never  studied ;  he  was^  in  fisu^t. 


256  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXIX. 

totally  ignorant  and  without  education.  Napoleon, 
the  Count  said,  was  not  satisfied  without  explanations 
on  every  point ;  he  wished  to  fathom  everything,  and 
had  lately  observed  to  him,  "  Although  I  feel  myself 
growing  weaker  and  weaker  every  day,  and  am  ex- 
tremely ill,  I  am  not  yet  brought  to  bay  in  a  state  to 
require  the  succour  of  religion ;  still,  if  I  found  myself 
reduced  to  that  plight,  is  it  to  a  person  like  that  I 
could  address  myself  to  become  enlightened  and  ob- 
tain spiritual  aid?  Who  knows?  Voltaire  himself 
asked  for  the  consolations  of  religion  before  his  death, 
and  perhaps  I  also  might  find  much  comfort  and  relief 
in  the  society  of  an  ecclesiastic  capable  of  inspiring  in 
me  a  taste  for  religious  conversation,  who  might 
render  me  devout" 

As  to  the  young  priest  VignaJi,  Montholon  said, 
when  he  came  out  to  St.  Helena  ke  could  neither  read 
nor  imfe,  though  he  was  now  studying  very  hard,  and 
making  great  eflforts.  With  respect  to  Dr.  Antom- 
marchi,  he  was  a  good  anatomist,  and  perhaps  a  good 
surgeon  also ;  but  he  was  very  ignorant.  He  had  not 
even  finished  his  studies  when  he  came  to  the  island, 
and  had  never  been  in  society.  As  Napoleon  must 
know  everything,  and  have  his  inquiries  satisfactorily 
answered,  which  Antommarchi  could  not  do,  he  had 
taken  a  dislike  to  him.  Besides,  added  the  Count,  his 
manners  were  too  frivolous  and  presuming;  he  had 
begun  by  giving  himself  a  good  deal  of  importance, 
and  on  his  arrival  believed  that  the  whole  island  was 
at  his  command.  There  could  be  no  difficulty  in  mak- 
ing a  selection  of  a  proper  person ;  Paris  abounded 
with  physicians  of  the  highest  reputation,  and  the  Min- 
isters of  the  King  of  France  might  easily  procure  one. 

With  respect  to  the  successors  of  Count  Bertrand 
and  himself,  proceeded  Montholon,  one  was  required 


Jan.  1821.  QUESTION  OF  ATTENDANTS.  257 

to  be  an  oflScer,  and  General  Drouot  was  the  person 
preferred.  He  was  a  man  of  great  means,  talent,  and 
information,  had  been  long  near  Bonaparte,  had  fol- 
lowed him  to  Elba,  and  was  the  person,  of  all  others, 
best  adapted  for  the  situation. 

The  Governor  here  remarked,  that  he  thought  the 
British  Grovemment  would  readily  consent  to  General 
Drouot's  coming  to  St.  Helena.  On  which  the  Count 
said  that,  if  Drouot  did  not  agree  to  it,  some  other 
general  officer  (but  one  of  the  two  must  be  an  officer) 
should  be  selected  who  had  served  with  Bonaparte, 
and  who  had  a  knowledge  of  his  disposition  and  cha- 
racter. 

As  to  the  second  person,  he  might  be  a  civilian, 
and  even  a  person  who  had  been  once  an  ecclesiastic, 
who  had  been  one  of  Napoleon's  Councillors  of  State 
or  Chamberlains,  or  an  old  confidential  friend,  who 
might  have  been  intimate  with  Bonaparte  when  he 
was  an  officer  of  artillery  at  the  commencement  of  his 
career ;  provided  he  was  accomplished,  a  man  of  litera- 
ture, of  talent,  and  of  gravity,  and  of  whom  he  could 
make  a  companion,  it  was  all  he  required. 

The  conversation  then  turned  upon  the  new  house, 
which  was  all  but  ready  for  Bonaparte's  reception, 
and  Montholon  said  they  were  much  in  want  of  a 
new  bookcase,  for  they  had  about  2700  volumes,  of 
which  nearly  half  were  lying  on  the  floor,  and  heaped 
up  on  the  top  of  the  existing  bookcases.  This  shows 
that  there  was  no  dearth  of  literature  at  Longwood. 

On  the  30th  of  January  Count  Montholon  wrote  to 
the  Gh)vemor,  and  said,  he  sent  him  some  notes  which 
he  "  was  charged ''  to  address  to  him  on  the  subject  of 
their  recent  conversation.    They  were  the  following : — 

**  1.  The  Emperor  Napoleon  is  ill,  and  can  never  ex- 
perience any  alleviation  in  this  island.    He  has  need 

VOL.  III.  s 


258  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXIX- 

of  the  air  of  Europe,  and  requires  this  year  mineral 
waters.  He  has  long  been  a  prey  to  the  most  cruel 
agony. 

"2.  Signor  Antommarchi,  his  surgeon,  is  insuffi- 
cient to  afford  him  succour  in  hva  actual  state  of  ill- 
ness; he  desires  to  have  one  of  the  physicians  of  his 
old  maison  de  sant^  at  Paris,  or  one  of  those  who  have 
served  in  the  army  as  physician  in  chief  to  the  forces 
(M^decin  en  Chef  de  Corps  d'Arm^e),  and  more  than 
forty-five  years  of  age.  Messrs.  Degenette,  Percy, 
and  especially  M.  Larrey,  would  be  able  to  designate 
the  medical  man  whom  they  judged  worthy  to  gain 
the  confidence  of  the  invalid. 

"  3.  He  will  receive  with  pleasure  any  one  who  may 
have  been  attached  to  his  person,  and  especially  the 
Dues  de  Vicence,  de  Rovigo,  the  Counts  de  Segor^ 
de  MontesquioD,  Dam,  Drouot,  de  Turenne,  and  the 
literary  men  Barons  Denon  and  Arnauld. 

"  The  part  taken  by  Lord  Bathurst  in  addressing 
himself  to  Cardinal  Fesdi  at  Borne,  which  appeared 
prudent,  has  proved  a  failure  by  reason  of  the  surveil- 
lance exercised  over  all  the  members  of  his  family 
and  the  impossibility  of  their  corresponding  with 
France.  Everything  that  is  necessary  to  do  can  be 
done  only  by  the  direct  intervention  of  the  English  or 
French  Government. 

"  Le  General  Comte  de  Montholon. 

«  Longwood,  Jantiary  30, 1821." 

These  notes  were  returned  the  next  day  to  Count 
Montholon,  with  the  following  reply : — 

**The  instructions  under  which  the  Governor  is 
acting  place  him  under  the  indispensable  necessity  of 
returning  the  enclosed  paper,  on  account  of  the  use  in 
it  of  the  imperial  title.  The  Governor  had  already 
the  honour  of  acquainting  Count  Montholon  that  he 


Jak.  1821,  THE  GOVERNOR'S  ATTENTION.  259 

ehould  not  fail  to  make  known  to  the  British  Govern- 
ment the  propositions  which  formed  the  subject  of  his 
communication  to  the  Governor  on  the  27th  instant, 
and  the  Governor  now  desires  to  add,  that  he  shall 
not  omit  to  avail  himself  of  the  more  specific  informal 
tion  which  the  enclosed  paper  has  conveyed  upon 
some  of  the  points  that  were  then  spoken  of,  to  render 
the  report  to  his  Government  regarding  them  as  fiiU 
and  as  exact  as  possible.  ^^  -g  t^we 

«  Plantation  House,  January  81, 1821.'* 

During  February  Bonaparte  was  attacked  with  con- 
stsmt  sickness,  and  he  had  great  difficulty  in  keeping 
any  food  up(m  his  stomach.  Meat  jelly  made  of  veal 
was  what  he  most  easily  retained,  and  when  this  wa^ 
discovered  some  was  immediately  sent  for  his  use  from 
Plantation  House,  and  a  cook  was  also  despatched  by 
the  Governor  to  Longwood  who  made  excellent  soup, 
of  which  Bonaparte  partook  aad  relished  it  very  much. 
Count  Montholon  told  Captain  Lutyens  ^*it  was  so 
good  the  d — d  doctor  would  not  let  the  Emperor  eat 
much  of  it." 

On  the  15th  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  wrote  to  Lord 
Bathurst  and  said, — "  Having  asked  further  some 
questions  of  the  orderly  officer,  I  have  been  infoiroed 
by  him  that  the  servants  of  the  house  say  General 
Bonaparte  eats  very  frequently,  but  little  at  a  tim^, 
and  at  very  irregular  intervals ;  sometimes  calling  for 
soup  when  he  wakes  in  the  night-time.  He  walks 
unassisted  when  in  his  garden.  One  of  his  servants, 
Noverraz,  is  frequently  employed  in  shooting  doves 
for  him,  of  which  he  is  said  to  be  fond." 

On  the  19th  the  orderly  officer  reported, — *^*  About 
half-past  four  yesterday  evening  I  was  cc^ning  from 
the  stables  on  horseback,  when  I  met  General  Bonar 

8  2 


260  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.         Chap.  XXIX, 

parte,  leaning  on  Count  Montholon's  arm,  walking 
towards  the  Btables.  I  took  off  my  hat,  which  the 
General  returned  by  raising  his  on  his  head.  He 
looked  very  pale  and  languid.  I  see  no  alteration  in 
his  appearance  for  the  better  since  I  last  had  a  good 
view  of  him.  They  then  drove  round  the  wood  in 
the  phaSton,  and  returned  in  about  three-quarters  of 
an  hour.  Count  Montholon  requested  I  would  return 
his  thanks  for  the  jelly.'* 

In  the  course  of  conversation  at  Longwood,  where 
Sir  Hudson  Lowe  had  gone  on  the  10th  of  February, 
to  call  upon  Count  Montholon,  the  Governor  said  he 
hoped  the  new  house  would  be  found  convenient  and 
comfortable,  if  they  were  disposed  to  occupy  it  (si  Ton 
est  dispose  k  Toccuper). 

The  Count  replied, — "The  house  appears  to  me 
very  comfortable  and  convenient,  and  I  confess  I  am 
astonished  that  you  have  succeeded  in  erecting  such  a 
building  in  so  short  a  time  and  in  so  perfect  a  manner 
with  the  few  materials  to  be  found  in  this  island." 
He  added  that  he  hoped  there  would  be  no  objection 
to  taking  possession  of  it,  and  that  indeed  he  believed 
there  would  be  no  real  obstacle ;  for  his  own  part, 
he  was  extremely  desirous  on  every  account  that  it 
should  be  occupied.  He  said  that  the  floors  of  that 
part  of  the  old  house  occupied  by  Bonaparte  were  in 
so  rotten  a  state,  that  in  some  parts  the  boards  broke 
under  the  feet  in  walking,  and  that  his  own  rooms^ 
when  compared  to  that  portion  of  the  house,  were 
superb.  He  then  spoke  of  the  plantations,  and  men- 
tioned the  success  of  their  attempts  in  transplanting 
trees  of  considerable  growth,  peach-trees  in  particular, 
and  even  several  oaks  of  some  size,  and  suggested 
that  similar  means  should  be  adopted  for  procuring 
shade  near  the  new  building. 


fm.  182L  THE  IRON  RAILING.  261 

In  another  conversation  on  the  16th  Count  Moii- 
iholon  said  that  Bonaparte's  great  objection  to  the 
iron  railing  was,  that  it  came  up  too  close  to  the  left 
of  the  new  house.  Had  it  been  ftu^ther  off  nothing 
would  ever  have  been  heard  about  the  matter ;  on  the 
contrary,  Bonaparte  would  have  been  glad  of  it,  as 
forming  a  secure  fence  against  the  cattle,  and  pre- 
venting the  curious  from  intruding  beyond  it  He  re- 
marked that,  on  its  arrival  at  St.  Helena  from  Eng- 
land, O'Meara  hurried  up  from  town  to  tell  Bonaparte 
that  a  ship  had  just  arrived  loaded  with  "400,000 
livres  "  of  iron  railings,  for  the  purpose  of  hemming 
him  in  and  enclosing  his  house  wiAin  fifteen  yards  dis- 
tance all  round ;  in  fact,  to  form  an  iron  cage  round 
him/  That,  in  consequence  of  this,  when  Napoleon 
saw  the  railing  being  put  up  along  the  lawn  in  front 
of  the  new  building,  he  became  exasperated,  exclaim- 
ing, **  There  is  the  cage.  O'Meara  was  right.  I  am 
going  to  be  imprisoned  within  an  iron  railing !"  The 
Count  said  that  he  had,  however,  reasoned  so  much 
with  him  on  the  subject,  that  it  was  no  longer  to  the 
railing  itself  he  objected,  but  to  its  being  so  near  the 
house ;  that,  provided  he  had  a  space  enclosed,  so  that 
the  new  house  would  stand  in  a  more  central  part  of 

*  "  Soon  after  the  iron  railings  arrived  here,  and  began  to  be  landed, 
Mr.  O'Meara  told  me  that  General  Bonaparte  had  heard  of  it,  and  imme- 
diately complained  that  they  were  going  to  make  an  iron  cage  for  him  ; 
but  he  (Mr.  O'Meara)  had  explained  to  General  Bonaparte,  without  my 
having  even  spoken  to  him  before  on  the  subject,  that  the  railing  was  pre- 
cisely of  the  same  description  as  that  put  up  in  the  front  of  gentlemen's 
houses  in  England  (which  it  really  is),  and  that  General  Bonaparte  had 
become  quite  satisfied  after  this  explanation  had  been  given  to  him.  I 
preserved  no  note  of  this  conversation  with  Mr.  O'Meara,  but  can  attest 
that  it  not  only  occurred  as  above  related,  but  that  Mr.  O'Meara  at  the 
time  spoke  in  such  way  as  to  impress  me  with  the  idea  he  had  entirely 
removed  all  objection  to  the  railing ;  and  in  fact  I  have  ascribed  the 
silence  observed  by  him  on  this  subject,  in  the  different  libels  against  me 
to  his  recollection  of  this  conversation,  "—^o^e  hy  Sir  Hudson  Lowe, 


362  CAPTIVITY  OP  KAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXIX. 

the  grounds,  he  would  have  no  objection  to  the  whole 
of  such  extent  being  surrounded  with  the  railing. 
There  would  be  some  little  additions  required  in  the 
interior  of  the  building,  all,  however,  connected  with 
the  personal  comfort  or  convenience  of  General  Bona- 
parte ;  he  could  not  exactly  tell  what  they  might  be ; 
but  the  Governor  said  he  would  be  happy  to  do  any- 
thing in  his  power  to  render  the  dwelling  as  conve- 
nient as  possible  for  General  Bonaparte,  and  that  he 
would  inspect  the  ground  and  see  what  could  be  don^ 
as  to  the  enclosure.  He  had  already  planned  an  en- 
closure such  as  Count  Montholon  spoke  of. 

The  Count  observed  that  Bonaparte  would  himself 
look  about  the  place  and  see  what  could  be  done,  or 
what  he  might  desire  to  have  done,  in  regard  to 
making  some  little  gardens  about  the  new  house,  in 
compensation,  as  it  were,  for  those  he  should  lose 
about  the  old  house. 

"  The  only  thing  now  which  annoys,"  added  Mon- 
tholon, **  is  the  six  o'clock  sentries"  (meaning  those  at 
sunset),  "  for  at  that  hour  when  he  feels  well  he  wishes 
to  walk  out.^  So  long  as  he  continues  unwell,  it  is 
of  little  consequence,  because  at  that  hour  he  will  be  in 
bed ;  but  not  so  when  he  finds  himself  able  to  walk 
out  in  the  evening."  He  said  that,  with  respect  to  the 
sentries  at  nine  o'clock  at  night,  Bonaparte  was  quite 
indifferent  on  that  subject;  they  had  formerly  con- 
ceived it  would  be  very  pleasant  to  walk  about  during 
the  fine  nights,  but  now  they  found  it  was  not  to  be 
done  Without  injury  to  health,  and  Bonaparte  had 

*  "  Count  MouUioloii*8  objection  appeared  here  to  be  made  on  the  sup- 
position that  the  sentries  were  to  be  posted  round  the  iron  railing  afler 
sunset ;  but  it  was  not  my  intention  to  place  them  round  it  imtil  nine 
o'clock  at  nighi»  having  already  designed  an  external  cordon  for  those  after 
stmset,  so  as  not  to  incommode  General  Bonaparte  by  their  observation 
during  the  very  shorf  time  that  any  twilight  prevails," — Note  by  Sir 
Hudson  Lotoe. 


Pbb.  182X.    SUGGBSTI0N8  AS  TO  HIS  NEW  HOUSE.  263 

entirely  surrendered  his  fonner  opinion  on  that  point ; 
the  iBentries  might  be  planted  close  to  the  very  wall 
of  the  house  at  nine  o'clock  and  he  would  be  per* 
fectly  satisfied. 

However  much  he  might  try  to  conceal  the  fact, 
there  is  no  doubt  that  Bonaparte  took  great  interest 
in  the  arrangement  of  the  bouse  and  grounds  at  his 
intended  new  abode,  and  through  Count  Montholon 
made  several  suggestions  in  the  way  of  improvement. 
In  one  of  these,  however,  he  was  rather  inconsiderate. 
After  allowing  the  work  to  be  so  far  completed  before 
he  hinted  at  any  desired  change,  Montholon  told  the 
Governor  that  Napoleon  wished,  as  the  quickest  way 
of  procuring  ghade,  that  a  trellis-work,  such  as  had 
been  made  in  the  small  garden  near  the  old  house, 
might  be  constructed  in  front  of  the  new  building,  to 
cross  over  the  terrace  down  to  the  trees,  and  that  the 
part  of  the  lawn  next  the  terrace  might  be  brought 
down  by  a  gentle  slope  to  the  trees,  and  also  that  the 
iron  railing  might  be  removed. 

The  Governor  remarked  that  this  plan  would  in- 
volve immensa  work,  and  was  what  he  had  not  con- 
templated ;  it  would  be  rendering  vain  the  long  and 
laborious  task  which  the  formation  of  the  terrace  in  its 
present  shape  had  involved.  He  would  have  attended 
with  pleasure  to  any  suggestion  on  this  point,  and 
readily  taken  into  consideration  the  proposals  now 
made  by  the  Count  had  they  been  communicated  to 
him  whilst  the  work  was  in  progress ;  but  it  was  now 
too  late  to  urge  these  objections.  He  said  he  had  sent 
plans  to  Longwood  to  Montholon  himself,  desiring  an 
opinion  on  them  before  the  building  was  begun,  as  he 
was  anxious  to  attend  as  Baucsh  as  possible  to  their 
wishes,  but  no  answer  had  been  returned. 

The  Count  replied  that  it  was  very  true  that  the 


264  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.         Chap.  XXIX. 

plans  had  been  sent  for  inspection  to  Longwood,  but 
unfortunately  they  had  not  understood  each  other; 
and  by  his  gesture  and  a  half-suppressed  lamentation 
he  appeared  to  wish  it  to  be  understood  that  it  had 
not  been  his  fietult,  although  he  was  not  at  liberty  to  dis- 
cuss the  subject  then.  He  said,  however,  that  nobody 
was  more  desirous  to  take  possession  of  the  new  build- 
^  ing  than  Bonaparte  himself,  who  often  asked,  "  Who 
can  have  a  greater  interest  in  seeing  that  I  occupy  it 
than  myself?  Is  it  not  plain  that  I  must  wish  to  be 
lodged  in  a  good  house  rather  than  remain  in  a  bad 
one  ?  Is  it  not  I  who  will  gain  the  most?  "  "He 
feels  obliged,"  continued  the  Count,  "  to  the  English 
(jovernment  for  having  caused  to  be  built  for  him  such 
a  house,  and  to  you  for  the  pains  you  have  taken  in 
its  construction.  Napoleon,  however,"  added  Mon- 
tholon,  "  considered  the  old  house  with  the  gardens 
adjoining  it  preferable  to  the  new  one,  if  it  remained 
without  the  adoption  of  his  suggestions ;  and  he  said» 
*  Why,  then,  should  I  leave  the  place  I  now  occupy 
to  go  into  another  less  pleasant  to  me  ? ' " 

Montholon  then  mentioned  another  objection, — the 
position  of  the  orderly  officer's  quarters,  which  he 
wished  to  be  removed  further  off.  After  a  long  and 
amicable  conversation,  the  Governor  on  leaving  said 
he  would  take  into  consideration  all  that  had  been 
mentioned  io  him. 

A  few  days  afterwards  the  Governor  informed 
Count  Montholon  that  he  had  decided  upon  including 
the  whole  space  in  front  of  the  new  house  containing 
trees  within  the  enclosure ;  and  ample  space  would  be 
afforded  for  laying  out  the  grounds  either  in  gardens 
or  any  other  desu^ble  mode.  The  Governor  then 
alluded  to  the  "  grille,"  or  iron  railing,  and  said  that, 
if  he  understood  the  Count  rightly,  he  had  stated  that 


Fkb.  1821.  HIS  POLICY.  266 

the  objection  was  not  against  the  railing  itself,  but 
against  its  too  great  proximity  to  the  house,  and  that, 
so  long  as  it  was  placed  at  a  sufficient  distance  fix)m 
the  building,  it  would  not  be  objected  to.  The  Count 
replied  that  the  Governor  had  perfectly  understood 
him — the  objection  was  that  it  was  too  near  the  house. 
He  said  that  Bonaparte  always  took  his  stand  on  the 
principle  that  he  had  hitherto  enjoyed  an  enclosure  of 
a  certain  extent  about  his  house,  and  when  he  found 
that  distance  reduced  to  15  or  20  toises^  he  opposed 
it.  "  Why,"  he  asked,  **  should  I  make  such  a  sacri- 
fice ?  "  Their  object  was  in  all  cases  to  gain  whatever 
they  could,  and  not  to  lose  any  advantage  they  already 
possessed — to  surrender  nothing  without  obtaining  an 
equivalent. 

As  a  further  illustration  of  this  line  of  policy,  Mon- 
tholon  mentioned  that  Bonaparte  had  also  acted  on 
the  same  principle  with  regard  to  the  orderly  officer^ 
He  had  remarked,  "This  officer  is  now  at  a  distance 
of  fifteen  toises  from  my  apartments,  and  his  rooms 
at  the  new  building  at  three  toises  only  :  why  should 
I  give  up  that  space,  and  let  him  thus  gain  twelve 
toises  upon  me  ?"  Had  the  new  house,  however,  been 
so  constructed  as  to  have  put  the  same  distance  be- 
tween the  orderly  officer's  rooms  and  those  of  Bona- 
parte as  at  present  existed,  he  would  not  have  spoken 
a  word  on  the  subject.  He  considered  him  in  fact  as 
the  officer  of  the  guard,  and  they  had  never  been 
inconvenienced  by  either — he  knew  that  where  there 
were  guards  there  must  be  officers. 

The  Gh)vemor  having  inquired  why  Bonaparte  did 
not  take  possession  of  the  new  house,  which  would  be 

>  "The  difference  arises  as  follows:— The  garden,  heing  ahout  100 
tdses  in  d^»th,  lay  in  front  of  the  old  house,  whereas  it  is  in  the  rear  of 
the  new  one.  The  space  in  the  rear  of  the  old  house  was  not  even  16 
toises.** — Note  hy  Sir  Hudson  Lowe, 


266  CAPTivrry  of  napoleon.       chap.  xxix* 

found  80  much  more  comfortable  during  the  bad  wea- 
ther that  then  prevailed,  the  Count  replied  that  for 
two  days  Napoleon  had  been  confined  to  hia  bed  by 
an  attack  of  fever.  He  said  that  he  would  not  take 
any  medicine,  notwithstanding  all  their  entreaties  and 
efforts  to  induce  him,  and  that  he  (Montholon)  had 
been  the  whole  day  trying  to  persuade  him  to  take  a 
dose  of  castor  oil,  but  he  could  not  prevail  upon  him 
to  do  so.  "You  have  no  idea,"  added  the  Count, 
^^  what  a  bad  patient  he  is ;  he  is  worse  than  an  iniiemt 
two  years  old — one  can  do^  nothing  with  him."  He 
also  stated  that  the  last  time  they  were  out  together 
in  the  carriage  his  mind  began  to  wander,  and  he 
spoke  incoherently.  Dr.  Antommarchi  had  told  him 
that  he  perceived  during  the  night  that  there  was  an 
incoherence  in  all  that  he  said,  and  that  he  was  much 
struck  with  it.  The  Count  then  said  that  Bonaparte 
was  extremely  ill ;  his  mental  and  bodily  powers  were 
equally  depressed ;  he  was  in  the  last  degree  of  weak- 
ness, and  in  a  state  of  perfect  prostration,  from  which 
he  could  not  be  roused. 

The  Governor  asked  why  some  other  medical  men 
were  not  called  in,  and  a  consultation  held  in  his  case. 
The  Count  said  he  ha4  frequently  and  earnestly  urged 
him  to  do  so.  That  very  day,  or  the  preceding,  he 
had  strongly  pressed  him  to  have  recourse  to  Airther 
medical  advice,  but  he  obstinately  refused — not,  how* 
ever,  because  he  felt  any  objection  to  see  English 
medical  men,  but  he  said  that^  as  he  could  not  keep 
anything  on  his  stomach  in  the  shape  of  food,  he  was 
much  less  likely  to  retain  medicine,  aud  their  assist- 
ance could  therefore  be  of  no  use.  He  had  taken  such 
a  dislike  to  Antommarchi,  in  consequence  of  the  me- 
dicine he  had  given  him,  that  he  could  not  now  bear 
the  sight  of  him,  and  it  was  only  by  stealth  that  he 


F«B.  1821.  STATE  OP  HEALTH,  267 

(Montholon)  could  get  him  into  his  room.  He  made 
Antommarchi  slip  in  now  and  then,  when  he  thought  it 
was  necessary  he  should  see  him,  for  he  would  not  allow 
him  to  be  called.  Bonaparte  said  that  it  was  owing 
to  the  medicine  he  had  taken  that  he  was  so  ill. 

Reverting  to  the  state  of  Napoleon's  mind,  the 
Count  said  it  was  not  to  be  wondered  at  after  his 
tremendous  &I1,  and  considering  the  height  from 
which  he  had  been  precipitated,  of  which  the  bare 
idea  was  enough  to  crush  and  overwhelm ;  and  then 
that  frightful  captivity — that  hopeless  exile — to  which 
no  limit  could  be  seen  I  He  remarked  that  Napoleon 
was  at  first  supported  by  the  hope  of  some  change — 
thinking  that  the  British  Gk)vemment  might  after  a 
certain  time  remove  him  from  St  Helena,  which  hope 
his  attendants  had  always  buoyed  up;  but  he  had 
seen  two,  three,  four,  five  years  expire  without  any 
appearance  of  a  change,  and  he  now  sank  under  it. 
He  had  himself  said,  a  short  time  ago,  "  There  is  no 
more  oil  in  the  lamp."  Dr.  Antommarchi's  opinion, 
added  the  Count,  was  that  Bonaparte's  principal 
malady  consisted  in  the  organs  of  digestion  and  the 
heart,  neither  of  which  performed  their  due  frinctions ; 
his  stomach  was  incapable  of  producing  digestion,  and 
his  heart  did  not  excite  a  suflBciently  quick  circulation 
of  the  blood.  This  last,  however,  was  not  a  recent 
complaint — the  circulation  of  the  blood  had  always 
been  defective  with  him.  About  twenty  years  ago 
Corvisart  had  predicted  to  him  it  would  in  tiie  course 
of  time  become  a  disease,  and,  when  Napoleon  was 
complaining  to  him  of  his  being  so  meagre,  he  had 
said,  "Do  not  desire  to  become  fet;  you  will  be  so 
too  soon,  and  will  have  cause  to  regret  it."  He  was 
th«i  a  General,  and  Corvisart  observed,  "  Whilst  you 
are  actively  employed,  and  you  continue  to  take  the 


268  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXIX. 

same  exercise  to  which  you  have  been  hitherto  habi- 
tuated, you  will  keep  away  the  disease ;  but  when  you 
become  engaged  *  dans  le  travail  de  cabinet ' — ^when 
you  must  devote  a  great  part  of  your  time  to  seden- 
tary employment — you  will  grow  too  fat,  and  this  will 
be  owing  to  the  want  of  a  free  circulation  of  blood." 
And  so,  said  Montholon,  it  proved; — from  the  time  of 
his  being  made  First  Consul,  but  particularly  after  he 
became  Emperor,  he  rapidly  increased  in  corpulency : 
his  blood  flowed  in  so  sluggish  a  manner  now,  that 
sometimes  his  pulse  could  scarcely  be  felt  even  in  the 
arteries,  and  it  produced  an  icy  coldness  in  the  ex- 
tremities. Dr.  Antommarchi  had  found  out  for  some 
time  a  remedy  for  the  coldness  in  his  lower  limbs, 
but  it  had  returned  within  the  last  two  or  three  days, 
and  reached  half-way  tip  above  the  knees.  In  order 
to  restore  the  circulation  he  was  obliged  to  use  hot 
towels  and  flannels,  heated  to  such  a  degree  that  his 
attendants  could  scarcely  even  touch  them,  and  yet 
he  himself  scarcely  felt  them,  and  it  was  not  until  the 
application  of  six  or  seven  of  these  that  the  usual 
degree  of  circulation  was  re-established.  It  was  this 
slow  circulation  of  blood,  said  Montholon,  which  made 
him  so  calm.  His  indifilerence  and  apathy  to  every- 
thing had  now  become  so  great  that  the  newspapers, 
the  late  publications,  and  books  recently  arrived, 
which  would  some  time  ago  have  proved  so  interest- 
ing to  him,  scarcely  attracted  a  moment's  attention. 
He  had  also  been  losing  his  memory  for  the  last 
twelve  months. 

As  the  Governor  was  taking  leave  he  renewed  an 
offer  he  had  previously  made  of  sending  anything 
from  Plantation  House  which  he  thought  Bonaparte 
might  feel  inclined  to  take.  For  this  the  Count  grate- 
fully returned  his  thanks,  saying,   "I  am  perfectly 


Mabch,  1821.  NOVEL  RIDING  EXERCISE.  269 

sensible  of  your  obliging  oflfer,  and  fully  persuaded 
of  the  attention  you  are  disposed  to  manifest  on  this 
occasion.** 

On  the  18th  of  March  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  wrote  to 
Lord  Bathurst  and  said, — 

"I  yesterday  heard  of  an  extraordinary  way  in 
which  General  Bonaparte  has  of  late  contrived  to  take 
riding  exercise  within  doors,  mounted  on  a  species  of 
hobby.  It  appears  that  in  his  billiard-room,  which 
has  remained  closed  for  some  time  to  all  English  per- 
sons, there  is  a  beam  fixed  in  such  way  as  to  admit 
of  another  being  suspended  in  balance  across  it,  at 
one  extremity  of  which  a  weight  is  placed  equal  to 
that  of  General  Bonaparte's  person,  and  at  the  other 
end  a  saddle.  This  saddle  Greneral  Bonaparte  mounts, 
and  raises  himself  up  and  do^n  by  the  movement  of 
his  feet  in  touching  the  ground  at  his  pleasure.  The 
person  who  gave  this  information  is  Mr.  Darling,  the 
upholsterer  in  attendance  at  Longwood,  and  to  whose 
admission  to  any  part  of  the  house  there  has  been 
rarely  any  objection  made.  He  had  heard  of  this  con- 
trivance from  a  Chinese  mechanic  employed  about  the 
house,  and  made  an  effort  to  get  into  the  billiard- 
room,  but  could  not  succeed.  There  is  still  room 
therefore  for  some  doubt  regarding  the  description, 
but  I  give  it  as  it  has  been  related  to  me  in  the  first 
instance.** 

In  another  despatch  of  the  24th  Sir  Hudson  wrote, — 

**  The  Marquis  de  Montchenu  showed  to  me  a  few 
days  since  part  of  a  letter  he  was  writing,  giving  an 
account  of  Count  Montholon's  last  conversation  with 
him,  wherein,  speaking  of  the  conspiracy  which  had 
been  detected  last  year,  he  observed  it  was  (Jeneral 
Bonaparte's  opinion,  the  object  of  the  conspirators,  if 


270  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXEX. 

they  had  succeeded  in  their  attempt  against  the  Booiv 
bons,  would  have  been  to  call  either  Eugene  Beau- 
hamois  or  his  (Bonaparte's)  son  to  the  throne  of 
France.  He  thought  Eugene  however  the  least  likely, 
as  it  was  known  he  possessed  a  certain  firmness  of 
character,  and  would  endeavour  to  maintain  the  posi- 
tion in  which  he  might  be  placed.  His  son,  therefore, 
he  believed,  would  have  been  fixed  upon,  because 
this  would  have  afforded  the  opportunity  for  the  forma- 
tion of  a  regency,  and  he  could  almost  name  those 
persons  who  were  likely  to  have  composed  it.  They 
would  unite  their  efforts  together  to  bring  about  the 
regime  of  1793.  It  would  then  be  found  there  was  no 
occasion  for  a  king,  ^etpuis  on  assassinera  monJUsJ'  *' 

In  addition  to  his  mortal  malady,  Bonaparte  had 
for  several  days  this  inonth  a  sharp  attack  of  fever, 
and  on  the  24th  Captain  Lutyens  reported  that  Count 
Montholon  had  told  him  that  he  had  done  everytiiing 
in  his  power  to  persuade  the  invalid  to  see  Dr.  Arnott. 
He  had  even  gone  on  his  knees  to  him  on  the  subject, 
but  Napoleon  replied,  "  No  1  No  1" 

Dr.  Arnott,  however,  went  the  next  day  to  Long- 
wood,  but  could  not  see  either  Bonaparte  or  Dr.  An- 
tommarchi.  He  had  only  an  interview  wiUi  Count 
Montholon,  who  told  him  that  Antommarchi  called 
the  disease  a  gastric  intermittent  fever. 

On  the  28th  the  orderly  oflBcer  reported  that  Madame 
Bertrand  informed  him  that  since  the  fever  came  on 
again  that  morning  Bonaparte  had  refused  to  take 
any  medicine  from  the  doctor,  and  said  he  would  not 
take  any  more ;  he  would  leave  his  illness  to  nature, 
and  he  made  the  priest  Vignali  feel  his  pulse,  "which 
she  thought  perfect  madness." 

As  several  days  had  elapsed  since  the  orderly 
oflBcer  had  seen  Bonaparte,  it  became  necessary  to 


Mabot,  1821.       NECESSllT  FOR  SEEING  HIM.  271 

take  steps  for  accomplishing  this  object,  as  to  which 
the  GK)vemor's  positive  instractions  from  the  English 
Government  left  him  no  discretion.  And  it  was 
obviously  right  tiiat  he  should  not  content  himself 
merely  with  the  assertions  of  the  foreign  attendants  at 
Longwood,  after  having  been  so  often  deceived  by 
them  in  many  ways.  Sir  Thomas  Reade  therefore 
wrote  on  the  29th  to  Captain  Lutyens  a  letter  by 
order  of  the  Governor,  in  which  he  said, — 

"  If  General  Bonaparte  is  really  so  ill  as  Dr.  An- 
tommarchi  and  Count  Montiiolon  have  represented 
him  to  be,  it  is  an  act  of  humanity  on  their  part  to 
insist  upon  calling  in  other  medical  advice ;  and  it 
will  be  regarded  as  a  criminal  neglect  at  the  same 
time  on  the  part  of  his  medical  adviser,  whilst  he  is 
represented  to  be  in  such  danger,  to  delay  calling  in 
other  medical  assistance  to  him  until  to-morrow. 

**  It  is  your  duty  to  insist,  after  what  has  been  said 
to  you  of  General  Bonaparte's  illness,  upon  having 
an  opportunity  afforded  to  you  of  seeing  him,  if  an 
English  medical  person  is  not  admitted  to  him." 

Sir  Hudson  Lowe  himself  called  on  Count  Montho- 
lon  the  next  day,  and  had  a  long  conversation  with 
him  on  the  subject.  He  told  him  that  it  had  now 
become  necessary  there  should  be  no  fhrther  delay 
on  his  part  in  performing  his  duty ;  and  therefore,  if 
either  the  orderly  officer,  or  a  British  medical  officer, 
was  not  allowed  an  early  opportunity  of  seeing  Bona- 
parte, he  was  determined  to  adopt  such  measures  as 
would  enable  him  to  obtain  tiiie  requisite  information 
with  regard  to  his  presence.  He  said  he  should 
regret  exceedingly  being  compelled  to  have  recourse 
to  any  measure  of  coercion,  but  he  was  resolved  no 
longer  to  postpone  obtaining  proof  of  his  presence. 


272  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXIX. 

He  had  abstained  from  pressing  the  point  until  he  had 
fully  made  up  his  mind  on  the  subject,  but,  having  done 
so,  he  had  called  upon  the  Count  for  the  purpose  of 
making  known  to  him  in  the  most  fonnal  and  official 
manner  his  final  decision,  but  it  would  give  him 
infinite  pleasure  if  he  could  attain  his  object  without 
having  recourse  to  disagreeable  means. 

Sir  Hudson  then  left,  but  again  returned  in  the 
afternoon,  and  stated  that  the  India  ships  were  waiting 
for  a  signal  from  him  before  they  sailed,  and  it  was  there- 
fore necessary  that  Bonaparte  should  be  seen,  in  order 
that  the  signal  might  be  made  for  their  departure, 
and  Dr.  Amott  was  then  waiting  in  attendance  at 
Longwood.  Count  Montholon  said  this  was  a  thing 
which  could  not  be  done  in  an  hour ;  it  was  necessary 
to  combine  some  plan  to  endeavour  if  possible  to  per- 
suade Bonaparte  to  see  Dr.  Arnott ;  it  was  impossible 
he  could  at  once  go  into  his  room  and  abruptly 
deliver  to  him  the  communication  made  by  the  Go- 
vernor. In  order  to  devise  some  means  of  effecting  it, 
he  had,  immediately  after  the  Grovernor  quitted  him  in 
the  morning,  gone  down  to  Count  Bertrand  to  confer 
with  him  on  the  subject,  and  they  had  agreed  to  unite 
their  efforts,  and  use  all  the  arguments  they  could 
possibly  urge,  to  induce  Bonaparte  to  admit  a  British 
medical  officer  to  see  him.  He  therefore  trusted  the 
Governor  would  not  press  the  matter  at  present,  but 
would  give  them  the  whole  day ;  and  it  was  only  four- 
and-twenty  hours  longer  he  asked  for.  The  Grovemor 
replied  that,  although  he  had  already  detained  the 
ships  one  day,  he  would  take  upon  himself  to  detain 
them  till  the  next  morning,  and  would  not  therefore 
insist  upon  carrying  his  intention  into  effect  that  day, 
but  he  would  not  postpone  it  fiirther ;  the  ships  must 
sail  to-morrow. 


March,  1821.  PLAN  FOR  SEEING  HIM.  273 

After  some  further  conversation  Sir  Hudson  asked 
why  the  orderly  oflBcer  could  not  have  a  view  of 
Napoleon  through  his  windows,  or  why  he  could  not 
be  taken  to  the  door  of  his  room  ?  The  Count  replied 
that  it  would  be  of  no  use,  as  the  bed  was  so  low, 
and  in  such  a  situation,  that  it  could  not  be  seen  from 
the  windows ;  and  as  for  going  to  the  door,  it  would 
be  of  no  avail,  for  the  room  was  constantly  kept  so 
dark  during  the  day  as  well  as  night,  that  Napoleon 
could  not  be  seen  without  a  light,  and  he  would  only 
allow  a  lantern  cased  in  paper  to  be  brought  into  his 
room,  giving  just  suflBcient  light  to  distinguish  him  at 
the  side  of  the  bed ;  the  light  being  so  painful  to  his 
eyes  that  he  could  not  bear  it. 

The  firmness  of  the  Governor  had  the  desired  effect, 
and  in  his  report  next  day  the  orderly  oflBcer  stated, — 

"  I  was  waiting  for  Count  Montholon  to  get  up  this 
morning,  when  he  sent  for  me  before  he  was  dressed. 
He  told  me  he  had  been  endeavouring  to  fix  upon 
some  plan  to  enable  me  to  have  a  view  of  General 
Bonaparte,  and  that  he  had  last  night  consulted  with 
Marchand,  and  they  had  agreed  that,  if  I  appeared  in 
the  garden  in  front  of  the  bedchambers,  they  would, 
if  possible,  cause  me  to  see  him,  by  means  of  leaving 
the  blinds  a  little  open.  I  accordingly  repaired  to 
the  garden,  when  Count  Montholon,  who  was  in  the 
act  of  shutting  the  bed-room  Venetians,  came  out  to 
me,  and  told  me  to  look  through  a  window,  the  Vene- 
tian and  curtain  of  which  he  had  purposely  left  a  little 
open;  he  observed  to  me  that  General  Bonaparte 
was  then  actually  being  assisted  from  one  bed  to  the 
other.  I  looked  as  he  desired,  and  perceived  General 
Bonaparte,  leaning  on  Dr.  Antommarchi,  come  fix)m 
the  inside  room,  and  heard  him  get  into  the  bed  of  the 
room  in  which  I  looked." 

VOL.  III.  T 


274  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Cfliip.  XXIX. 

A  further  and  still  more  important  point  was  now 
gained  in  the  consent  of  Napoleon  to  see  Dr.  Arnott. 
Count  Montholon  told  the  latter  that  Bonaparte 
wished  him  to  attend  professionally,  on  condition  that 
he  would  treat  him  in  every  respect  as  he  would  any 
other  patient.  Dr.  Arnott  replied  that  he  would  not 
treat  him  in  any  other  manner,  such  being  the  known 
wish  of  the  Governor.  When  this  was  communicated 
to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  he  immediately  expressed  his 
approval,  and  informed  Dr.  Arnott  that,  with  respect 
to  giving  bulletins,  none  would  be  required  by  him, 
unless  under  circumstances  which  could  not  then  be 
well  foreseen.  If,  however,  they  were  called  for,  in- 
formation would  be  given  of  it. 

Dr.  Arnott  was  admitted  to  Napoleon's  bedside  for 
the  first  time  on  the  night  of  the  1st  of  April.  He 
had  been  dining  with  the  orderly  oflBcer,  and  at  half- 
past  ten  Dr.  Antommarchi  came  in  and  asked  him  to 
visit  Bonaparte.  Dr.  Arnott  says,  **  I  went  with 
him,  and  I  was  walked  into  a  dark  room  where  Gene- 
ral Bonaparte  was  in  bed.  The  room  was  dark,  so 
that  I  could  not  see  him,  but  I  felt  him  or  some  one 
else.  I  examined  his  pulse  and  state  of  skin.  I 
perceived  there  was  considerable  debility,  but  nothing 
that  indicated  immediate  danger." 

Knowing  as  we  do  now  the  dreadful  malady  which 
was  wasting  the  illustrious  exile  away,  and  the  immi- 
nent danger  in  which  he  at  this  time  was,  it  is  cer- 
tainly strange  that  Dr.  Arnott  did  not  for  some  time 
entertain  apprehensions  of  a  fatal  result.  On  the  6th 
of  April  we  find  Sir  Thomas  Reade  saying  in  a  letter 
to  the  Governor,— **  Dr.  Arnott  informed  me  that 
he  had  never  found  him,  during  any  of  his  visits,  in 
the  state  in  which  he  had  been  described  by  Dr.  An- 
tommarchi.   From  what  I  could  learn  generally,  out 


April,  1821.    ANTOMMARCHI'S  WISH  TO  LEAVE.  275 

of  Dr.  Amott's  conversation,  he  appears  to  think  that 
General  Bonaparte  is  not  aflfected  with  any  serious 
complaint,  probably  more  mental  than  any  other. 
Count  Bertrand  had  asked  him  his  opinion  of  Gkneral 
Bonaparte:  he  told  him  that  he  saw  no  danger  whatever. 
During  his  visit  this  morning  he  recommended  GTene- 
ral  Bonaparte  to  rise  and  get  shaved.  He  replied 
he  was  too  weak  at  present,  that  he  would  shave  when 
he  was  a  little  stronger.  He  always  preferred  shaving 
himself.  His  beard  is  very  long,  and  Dr.  Arnott 
describes  his  looks  in  consequence  to  be  horrible.  I 
inquired  if  he  appeared  much  emaciated  ?  His  reply 
was  in  these  words :  *  No ;  I  feel  his  pulse  frequently, 
and  he  has  as  stout  a  wrist,  with  as  much  flesh  upon 
his  arm,  as  I  have,  neither  does  his  face  appear  to  have 
&llen  away  much.  I  see  nothing  very  particular  in 
his  appearance  except  his  colour,  which  is  very  pallid — 
cadaverous.  I  saw  him  vomit  this  morning,  which  is 
the  only  extraordinary  thing  I  have  observed ;  he  did 
not,  however,  vomit  much.'  " 

But  still  more  strange  was  the  conduct  of  Dr.  An- 
tommarchi.  He  did  not  disguise  his  opinion  that 
Napoleon  was  in  a  precafious  state,  and  yet  at  this 
very  time  he  applied  for  leave  to  return  to  Europe. 
On  the  9  th  of  April  he  called  at  Plantation  House, 
and,  finding  that  the  Governor  was  not  at  home,  he 
told  Major  Gorrequer  that  he  had  come  for  the  pur- 
pose of  speaking  to  him  upon  a  subject  personal  to 
himself.  As  he  found  it  impossible  to  afiford  the  aids 
of  his  profession  at  Longwood,  he  had  determined  to 
apply  for  permission  to  return  to  Europe.  Major 
Gorrequer  offered  to  accompany  him  to  James  Town, 
where  he  could  see  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  and  they  went 
together.  On  the  road  the  doctor  observed,  that  on 
engaging  to  come  out  to  St.  Helena  he  had  hoped  to 

T  2 


276  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON,  Chap.  XXIX. 

render  some  service.  If,  therefore,  he  had  been  able 
to  afiford  his  professional  assistance,  he  would  most 
willingly  have  stayed  so  long  as  he  was  useful ;  but 
as  he  found  that  he  was  of  no  use  he  felt  most  anxious 
to  return  to  Europe ;  he  would  there  resume  his  lite- 
rary and  professional  studies,  and  complete  the  work 
he  was  then  occupied  in  publishing,  which  could  not 
be  so  well  done  during  his  absence  as  if  he  himself 
were  superintending  its  publication,  particularly  the 
execution  of  the  engravings.  The  book,  he  said,  was 
a  valuable  one,  and  w:ould  form  his  whole  patrimony, 
for  whatever  the  sale  of  it  produced  was  all  he  had 
to  depend  upon. 

On  arriving  at  the  Castle  in  James  Town,  Dr.  An- 
tommarchi  told  the  Governor  that,  finding  his  assist- 
ance was  of  no  use  at  Longwood,  he  had  waited  upon 
him  to  request  permission  to  return  to  Europe.  The 
Governor  replied,  that  it  was  a  request  that  required 
deliberation  on  his  part ;  he  regretted  to  find  that  at 
this  particular  moment,  when  so  much  benefit  was  to 
be  expected  fix)m  the  joint  advice  of  himself  and  Dr. 
Arnott,  he  should  have  decided  on  making  such  a 
demand.  Antommarchi  declared  that  no  feeling 
whatever  towards  Dr.  Arnott  had  influenced  him  in 
making  this  request:  they  acted  in  the  completest 
accord,  and  concurred  Mly  on  every  point.  Dr. 
Arnott  was  an  upright  man,  and  he  hoped  he  himself 
was  so  likewise,  but,  as  he  found  himself  of  no  use,  his 
continuance  at  Longwood  could  be  of  no  advantage. 
He  then  adverted  to  the  unpleasantness  of  his  situa- 
tion, on  account  of  the  temper  of  Bonaparte,  and  the 
services  required  of  him,  more  like  the  attendance  of 
a  menial,  assigning  this  also  as  a  motive  for  wishing 
to  return  to  Europe,  "  e  di  sciogliere  il  nodo  de'  le- 
gami."    The  Governor  replied,   "But,  Signer  Pro- 


Apbil,  1821.   PRESENT  TO  THE  TWENTIETH  REGIMENT.   277 

fessor,  it  is  necessary  always  to  consider  the  tem- 
perament of  the  patient  (il  genio  della  persona)  and 
circumstances  of  tiie  case." 

Dr,  Antommarchi  said  that,  placed  under  the 
circumstances  in  which  he  felt  himself  there,  it  was 
best  for  him  to  return  home,  to  attend  to  his  own  per- 
sonal affairs,  to  pursue  his  literary  occupations,  and 
complete  the  work  he  had  undertaken,  which  he  was 
very  desirous  of  doing.  He  iherefore  begged  that 
the  Grovemor  would  permit  him,  as  soon  as  conve- 
nient, to  leave  the  island.  The  only  answer  given 
by  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  was,  that  it  was  a  demand  of  a 
nature  that  required  deliberation,  and  that  he  must 
refer  it  to  England. 

An  incident  occurred  on  the  14th  which  might,  we 
think,  have  been  treated  differently  by  the  Governor, 
and  with  respect  to  which  he  seems  to  have  acted 
under  an  overstrained  sense  of  duty.  Dr.  Amott  had 
pressed  his  refractory  patient  very  strongly  to  take 
some  medicine,  on  which  Napoleon  good-humouredly 
said  that  he  must  not  urge  him  to  do  a  thing  in  the 
same  manner  as  he  would  one  of  the  soldiers  of  the 
20th  (Dr.  Arnott's)  regiment,  and  immediately  after- 
wards he  began  to  praise  the  British  soldiers,  and  said 
he  would  send  the  oflScers  of  the  20th  Coxe's  *  Life  of 
Marlborough,*  which  had  been  presented  to  him  by  the 
Hon.  Robert  Spencer.  The  volumes  were  accordingly 
sent  to  the  orderly  oflScer's  room,  and  Dr.  Amott  ex- 
plained the  object  of  the  donor.  Captain  Lutyens 
forwarded  to  Major  Jackson,  the  commanding  officer, 
the  books,  in  which  it  unfortunately  happened  that 
the  imperial  title  was  written.  Napoleon  asked  Dr. 
Amott  how  the  officers  liked  the  books,  but  some- 
thing diverted  his  attention  and  no  anwer  was  given. 

When  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  heard  of  the  circumstance 


278  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.         Chap.  XXIX. 

the  next  day  he  wrote  to  Dr.  Amott  and  said, — 
*'  Captain  Lutyens  has  mentioned  you  have  been  again 
spoken  to  regarding  the  books,  but  that,  something 
occurring  in  the  room  at  the  time,  you  were  enabled 
to  avoid  making  any  reply.  This  is  so  fetr  well,  as 
the  attempt  to  make  you  the  channel  of  communica- 
tion in  such  matters,  they  well  hnowy  is  foreign  to  your 
professional  duties,  and  it  will  probably,  therefore, 
not  have  been  made  without  some  ulterior  design  in 
view." 

Sir  Hudson  Lowe  having  left  the  option  of  accept- 
ing or  rejecting  the  books  to  the  commanding  officer. 
Major  Jackson  wrote  to  Captain  Lutyens,  with  the 
knowledge  and  fiiU  approval  of  the  Governor,  the 
following  note : — 

"Sir, 

"Having  seen  the  book  which  was  left  in  your 
room,  and  heard  what  had  been  said  to  Dr.  Arnott 
regarding  it,  I  really  do  not  see  how  you  can  with 
propriety,  as  a  captain  of  the  20th  regiment,  undertake 
to  forward,  as  a  present  from  General  Bonaparte  to 
the  officers  of  the  regiment,  whether  through  me  as 
the  commanding  officer  of  it  or  through  any  other 
channel,  a  book  which  bears  the  imperial  name  on 
the  title-page.  It  does  not  appear,  besides,  that  the 
Governor  has  been  either  written  to  or  spoken  to 
regarding  it.  You  ought,  therefore,  to  take  an  oppor- 
tunity of  explaining  to  Count  Montholon  the  delicacy 
of  your  situation  in  this  particular,  and  ask  him  to  be 
permitted  to  leave  the  book  with  him  (as  it  does  not 
appear  you  are  acquainted  by  whom  it  was  left  in 
your  room)  for  the  above  reasons.    I  am,  &c. 

"E.  Jackson,  Major  20th  Regiment." 

At  this  letter  Captain  Lutyens  unwisely  and  un- 


April,  1821.  CAPTAIN  LUTYENS.  279 

necessarily  took  ofifence,  and  he  infonned  Msgor  Jack- 
son that  **  he  conceived  he  had  no  authority  to  act  in 
regard  to  his  conduct  at  Longwood  from  his  orders." 
The  result  was  that  he  was  superseded  in  his  duties  as 
orderly  officer  at  Longwood,  and  Captain  Crokat  was 
appointed  in  his  stead. 

I  cannot  help  thinking  that  Napoleon's  kindly- 
meant  present  might,  under  all  the  circumstances,  have 
been  accepted,  notwithstanding  the  style  of  Emperor 
was  inscribed  in  the  volumes*  He  did  not  send  them 
as  coming  from  "the  Emperor,"  nor  write  the  objec- 
tionable title  in  them ;  nor  was  there  much  likelihood 
of  a  British  regiment  being  seduced  from  its  allegiance 
by  adding  to  its  library  a  few  books,  the  gift  of  Napo 
leon.  It  does  not  appear  that  he  ever  heard  of  the 
fate  of  his  present  \  but  if  he  had  there  is  no  doubt 
that  he  would  have  felt  what  had  happened  as  a  de- 
liberate insult. 

On  quitting  Longwood  Captain  Lutyens  was  ad- 
dressed by  Count  Montholon,  who  said,  "I  have  been 
desired  by  Napoleon  to  express  to  you  his  satisfaction 
at  the  attention  which  has  been  paid  by  you  during 
your  residence  at  Longwood;  and  am  further  re- 
quested to  say  that  he  hopes,  if  he  recovers  his 
health,  he  shall  have  the  pleamre  of  seeing  you."  ^ 

On  the  16th  Dr.  Amott  reported  to  the  Governor 
that  Bonaparte  was  not  so  well ;  there  appeared  much 
prostration  of  strength,  and  his  mind  was  much  agitated. 
He  told  the  doctor  that  he  had  lost  all  hopes  of  re- 
covery, and  anything  he  could  do  would  be  only  pal- 
liative. Count  Montholon  also  said  to  the  orderly 
officer  that  he  did  not  think  Bonaparte  would  survive 

'  Captain  Lutyens  gave  bo  much  satisfaction  to  the  French  at  Longwood, 
that  after  Bonaparte's  death  the  Countess  Bertrand  sent  him  a  pieoe  of 
coral,  with  some  of  Napoleon's  hair. 


2S0  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXIX. 

more  than  three  or  four  weeks.  He  added  that  his 
strength  appeared  to  have  gone  from  his  body  to  his 
head ;  he  now  recollected  everything  of  former  days ; 
the  stupor  and  forgetfulness  had  left  him,  and  he  was 
continuially  talking  of  what  would  take  place  at  his 
death. 

On  the  28th  the  (Governor  wrote  to  Admiral  Lam- 
bert and  told  him  that  Dr.  Arnott  had  that  morning 
informed  him  that  Bonaparte  had  become  considerably 
worse  than  he  had  ever  seen  him  before,  in  conse- 
quence of  repeated  attacks  of  vomiting,  and  that  his 
disorder  bore  a  very  serious  aspect.  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe  enclosed  a  copy  of  a  note  he  had  addressed  to 
Count  Montholon,  in  which  he  offered  the  instant 
attendance  of  any  medical  person  on  the  island,  and 
told  him  that  he  had  before  offered  the  services  of 
Dr.  Shortt,  Physician  to  the  Forces,  and  was  sure  that 
Admiral  Lambert  was  equally  ready  to  order  the 
attendance  of  the  principal  medical  officer  of  the 
navy ;  but  should  the  services  of  any  other  medical 
men  be  required,  their  attendance  would  be  immedi- 
ately directed. 

Next  day  Captain  Crokat  reported  that,  according 
to  the  statement  of  Count  Montholon,  Bonaparte  had 
passed  a  very  bad  night  and  could  not  rest ;  he  was 
constantly  talking  and  quite  delirious,  and  remained 
in  that  state  imtil  about  7  o*clock  in  the  morning, 
when  he  fell  into  a  sound  sleep. 


May,  1821.  HIS  DEATHBED.  281 


CHAPTER  XXX. 

DEATH  OP  NAPOLEON  —  HIS  FUNERAL  —  HIS  CHARACTER  AND 
CONDUCT  AT  ST.  HELENA. 

At  midnight  of  the  30th  of  April  Bonaparte  was  sud- 
denly seized  with  chilliness,  and  became  as  cold  as  ice. 
His  pulse  was  not  perceptible,  and  he  appeared  as  if 
he  was  being  suffocated.  In  fact  Dr.  Antommarchi 
was  sent  for  and  thought  he  was  dying.  Dr.  Arnott 
was  sent  for,  and  proceeded  immediately  to  his  bed- 
side, but  found  him  recovered  from  the  attack,  and  in 
the  same  state  as  he  had  left  him  in  the  evening.  His 
pulse  was  rather  high,  but  it  had  been  the  same  at 
half-past  six,  when  Dr.  Arnott  had  last  seen  him. 
The  fits  of  vomiting  were,  however,  less  frequent. 
Count  Montholon  told  Dr.  Arnott  that  he  had  com- 
municated the  Govemor*s  letter  offering  other  medical 
advice  to  Bonaparte,  who  replied,  "No I  I  know  I 
am  dying — ^I  have  confidence  in  the  people  already 
about  me,  and  I  do  not  wish  others  to  be  called  in." 
Dr.  Arnott  now  thought  the  case  very  alarming,  espe- 
cially owing  to  Bonaparte*s  refiisal  to  take  either  food 
or  medicine.  He  had  pulled  off  the  blister  which  had 
been  applied  to  his  stomach,  before  it  could  produce 
any  material  effect;  and  he  had  a  fit  of  hiccuping 
during  the  night,  which  lasted  about  ten  minutes. 

On  the.  evening  of  the  1st  of  May  Dr.  Arnott  re- 
port^ **  I  can  perceive  no  change  in  General  Bona- 
parte since  morning.  He  continues  very  low,  and  his 
strength  is  much  sunk.  I  think  he  rather  raves  more 
than  he  did  in  the  morning.    He  has  called  me  Stokoe 


282  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXX. 

sometimes.  I  have  been  here  all  day."  As  Drs. 
Arnott  and  Antommarchi  differed  in  opinion  as  to  a 
particular  mode  of  treatment,  to  which,  however,  the 
objection  of  the  latter  was  founded  solely  upon  the 
disinclination  of  the  patient  to  being  disturbed,  Sir 
Hudson  Lowe  made  a  last  effort  to  induce  the  dying 
Exile  to  have  additional  medical  advice,  and  on 
Thursday  the  3rd  of  May  he  called  on  Count  Mon- 
tholon,  accompanied  by  Dr.  Arnott  and  M^jor  Gor- 
requer,  and  said  that,  when  there  was  a  difference  of 
opinion,  it  must  be  satisfiu^tory  to  Dr.  Antommarchi, 
and  relieve  him  from  a  great  deal  of  responsibility,  to 
have  the  advice  of  other  medical  men ;  and  in  this 
case,  where  life  or  death  was  in  question,  he  hoped 
the  Count  would  do  all  in  his  power  to  have  recourse 
to  it. 

Count  Montholon  replied  he  had  that  instant  been 
consulting  on  that  very  point  with  Count  Bertrand, 
and  they  had  agreed  that,  ^a  soon  aa  ever  Bonaparte 
fell  into  a  state  of  unconsciousness,  they  would  imme- 
diately apply  for  further  assistance,  but  at  that  mo- 
ment they  dared  not  venture  to  introduce  any  other 
medical  man  into  his  room.  ^^  He  had  not,"  said 
Montholon,  "  lost  his  senses  sufficiently  for  that,  and 
they  feared  to  propose  it  to  him,  lest  it  should  produce 
a  shock  which  might  be  dangerous  in  his  present 
state."  He  added  that  he  believed  even  Dr.  Arnott 
would  not  think  it  prudent  to  have  recourse  at  that 
moment  to  any  measure  of  such  a  nature,  considering 
the  weakness  of  the  patient  Dr.  Arnott  appearing 
to  assent  to  this  opinion,  the  Count  proceeded  to  say 
that  the  instant  it  was  perceived  that  Napoleon  had 
lost  his  reason  they  would  immediately  apply  fw  the 
aid  of  the  medical  men  who  the  Governor  had  told 
them  would  be  in  readiness.     Sir  Hudson  Lowe  then 


May,  1821.  HIS  DEATHBED.  283 

said  that  Drs.  Shortt  and  Mitchell  were  ready  to  come 
at  any  time,  but,  in  order  that  there  might  be  no 
delay,  he  would  cause  them  to  be  in  attendance  on 
the  spot  He  also  mentioned  that  the  Admiral  had 
expressed  an  opinion  that  the  moment  Bonaparte  lost 
his  recollection  would  be  a  good  opportuni^  for  the 
other  medical  men  to  see  him,  and  that  he  was  de- 
sirous to  assist  by  sending  the  chief  medical  officer  of 
the  navy. 

The  Count  afterwards  spoke  of  Bonaparte's  col- 
lectedness  of  mind  at  one  time,  and  his  total  loss  of 
sense  and  recollection  at  another,  and  said  that  he 
persevered  in  rejecting  everything  that  was  oflFered  to 
him,  whether  medicine  or  nourishment.  He  always 
shook  his  head,  saying,  "Non,  non,"  in  a  grunting 
tone.  He  added  that  he  had  repeatedly  endeavoured 
to  make  him  consent  to  his  calling  in  other  medical 
advice,  which  the  Governor  offered,  and  on  these 
occasions  Napoleon  asked,  **  Mais  est-ce  que  je  suia 
movrantV*  to  which  he  had  replied  that,  although  he 
was  not  absolutely  in  a  dangerous  state,  it  was  a 
necessary  precaution,  and  he  therefore  ought  to  have 
further  medical  aid;  but  he  could  not  obtain  Bona- 
parte's assent.  His  mind,  said  Montholon,  was  some- 
times so  deranged  that  he  was  lost  to  everything ;  for 
instance,  on  mentioning  Dr.  Shortt's  name,  and  telling 
him  that  he  was  Dr.  Baxter's  successes,  Napoleon 
asked,  with  much  surprise,  **What,  is  Dr.  Baxter 
gone  ?  that  is  very  odd  I  I  never  knew  anything  of 
it  I  Why  was  it  not  mentioned  to  me  before  ?  What 
was  the  reason  of  his  going  away?"  To  this  the 
Count  said  he  answered  that  Dr.  Baxter  had  been 
recalled,*  and  Dr.  Shortt  had  come  out  in  his  place. 

'  Dr.  Baxter  had  kft  the  island  a  short  time  previtmsly. 


284  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXX. 

After  this  Napoleon  continued  for  a  long  time  talking 
about  Dr.  Baxter.  At  another  time  he  inquired  who 
was  the  medical  person  in  attendance  upon  him,  and, 
on  Count  Montholon's  answering  "  Dr.  Antommarchi," 
he  repeated  the  name  as  if  surprised,  saying  he  did 
not  know  such  a  person,  and  asked,  **Who  is  this 
Antommarchi?  Is  it  not  O'Meara  who  continues 
always  to  attend  me  ?"  He  frequently  did  not  know 
Dr.  Amott,  and  called  him  Stokoe. 

Sometimes,  however,  continued  the  Count,  he  would 
suddenly  be  roused  from  this  state — ^he  became  per- 
fectly composed,,  and  his  recollection  returned :  "  for 
example,"  added  Montholon,  *Hhe  day  before  yester- 
day, in  the  evening,  he  became  all  at  once  calm,  and 
desired  me  to  send  everybody  out  of  the  room,  and  to 
take  pen  and  paper ;  he  then  dictated  to  me  a  letter 
addressed  to  the  (Governor,  which  he  directed  me  to 
forward  the  moment  he  expired."  He  also  desired  that 
after  his  decease  the  Count  should  show  his  will  to 
the  Governor  if  he  wished  to  see  it,  and  let  him  take 
a  copy  of  it  if  he  liked. 

Speaking  of  the  shock  which  anything  unusual  or 
unexpected  now  produced  on  Bonaparte,  Montholon 
observed  that  even  his  seeing  the  Countess  Bertrand 
had  considerably  affected  his  nerves ;  and  the  appear- 
ance of  Bertrand  himself,  at  hours  when  he  was  not 
formerly  in  the  habit  of  attending  upon  him,  made  an 
impression  on  him.  When  he  saw  him  he  called  out, 
"Comment I  vous  voilk  ici,  Bertrand?  que  voulez 
vous  ?  qu'est-ce  qui  vous  amene  k  cette  heure  ?" 

Count  Montholon  also  mentioned  that,  about  three 
or  four  nights  before,  Bonaparte  had  moved  himself 
down  towards  the  foot  of  the  bed,  and  on  his  coming 
into  the  room  he  found  him  as  if  endeavouring  to 
raise  himself  up.    On  his  trying  to  assist  him,  he  com- 


May,  1821.  HIS  DEATHBED,  285 

plained  of  a  pain  in  the  stomach,  and  fell  down.  His 
eyes  turned  about  in  his  head  in  a  way  which  alarmed 
the  Count  very  much,  as  he  then  lost  his  recollection. 
The  same  thing,  he  said,  happened  two  or  three  even- 
ings before,  when  he  was  assisting  him  to  sit  upon  his 
bed,  and  placing  pillows  against  his  back  to  support 
him.  He  was  no  sooner  seated  than  he  extended  his 
arms,  and  fell  back  with  his  eyes  turning  in  his  head. 

The  (lovemor  expressed  himself  as  very  desirous 
that  a  trial  of  English  medical  science  should  be  made, 
and  said  it  would  not  be  doing  the  medical  officers 
there  justice  if  they  had  not  an  opportunity  afforded 
them  of  seeing  what  their  skill  and  experience  could 
effect  in  the  case.  He  mentioned  the  extraordinary 
recovery  of  Captain  Meynell  of  the  navy,  who  was  so 
dangerously  ill  at  Plantation  House  that  he  was  con- 
sidered at  the  last  extremity,  and  O'Meara,  who  had 
been  called  in,  had  pronounced  him  beyond  the  chance 
of  recovery,  but  notwithstanding,  through  the  skill  of 
Drs.  Baxter  and  Thompson,  he  was  restored.  Sir 
Hudson  Lowe  then  said,  "In  short,  M.  le  Comte,  I 
am  strongly  desirous  that  English  medical  science 
^ould  at  all  events  have  the  chance  of  saving  his 
life." 

Between  three  and  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon 
Dr.  Antommarchi  came  to  Major  Grorrequer,  who  re- 
mained at  Longwood,  and  expressed  his  desire  to  have 
a  consultation  in  his  own  room  with  the  medical  per- 
sons proposed.  He  said  that  Bonaparte  was  dying, 
and  he  thought  he  would  expire  in  the  course  of  the 
day,  though  he  nught  yet  survive  a  little  longer. 
Major  Gorrequer  immediately  caused  a  signal  to  be 
made  for  Drs.  Shortt  and  Mitchell  to  come  to  Long- 
wood  instantly,  and  soon  afterwards  they  arrived 
there. 


286  '  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXX. 

A  constdtation  took  place  between  them  and  the 
two  doctors  Amott  and  Antommarchi,  but  they  did 
not  see  Napoleon.  They,  however,  prescribed  some 
medicine,  which  had  the  desired  eflFect  and  aflForded 
temporary  relief  but  it  was  all  in  vain.  Napoleon's 
mortal  hour  had  come,  and  no  efifort  of  human  skill 
could  stay  the  hand  of  death. 

While  anxious  to  give  all  the  details  respecting  the 
last  moments  of  this  extraordinary  man,  I  feel  that 
there  are  some  of  a  medical  nature  which  ought  not 
to  be  made  public.  A  knowledge  of  the  minutiae  of 
illness  is  best  confined  to  the  nurse  and  the  physician. 
We  must  respect  the  sanctity  of  the  sick  room,  and 
throw  a  veil  over  the  infirmities  of  poor  suflFering 
humanity.  Before  he  strikes  his  last  blow  the  King 
of  Terrors  tramples  upon  our  pride,  and  the  weakness 
of  our  mortal  nature  is  shown  at  the  deathbed  of  the 
greatest  as  well  as  of  the  meanest  of  the  children  of  men. 

A  faint  gleam  of  hope  appears  in  the  following 
report  of  Dr.  Arnott,  dated  "  Longwood,  4th  May, 
9  o'clock  P.M. :" — "  I  have  just  left  our  patient  fest 
asleep.  He  appears  better  than  he  was  two  hours 
ago.  He  has  no  hiccup,  his  respiration  is  easy,  and 
in  the  course  of  the  day  he  has  taken  a  considerable 
quantity  of  nourishment  for  a  person  in  his  state." 

But  it  was  only  the  last  flicker  of  the  lamp  of  life. 
During  the  night  of  the  4th  a  fatal  change  took  place ; 
and  when  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  arrived  at  Longwood 
early  in  the  morning  of  Saturday,  the  5th  of  May,  he 
found  the  following  note  written  in  pencil  by  Dr. 
Amott,  and  addressed  to  the  orderly  officer : — 

"  He  is  dying.  Montholon  prays  I  will  not  leave 
the  bedside.  He  wishes  I  should  see  him  breathe 
his  last." 

This  was  followed  by  other  communications  from 


Mat,  1821.  HIS  DEATH.  287 

Dr.  Arnott  in  rapid  succession,  which  will  be  read 
with  painful  interest. 

"  The  pulse  cannot  be  felt  at  the  wrist  now,  and 
the  heat  is  departing  from  the  surfetce.  But  he  may 
hold  out  some  honrs  yet.*' 

"He  is  worse.  The  respiration  is  become  more 
hurried  and  diflScult." 

"He  has  this  moment  expired." 

This  last  note  was  received  by  Sir  Hudson  Lowe 
at  six  o'clock  in  the  evening.  Napoleon  had  ceased 
to  breathe  eleven  minutes  before  that  hour.^ 

While  he  was  dying  a  violent  hurricane  swept  over 
the  island,  which  shook  many  of  the  houses  to  their 
foundations,  and  tore  up  some  of  the  largest  trees. 
As  the  tempest  raged  and  howled,  it  seemed  as  if  the 
spirit  of  the  storm  rode  upon  the  blast  to  tell  the 
world  that — 

"  A  mighty  power  had  passed  away 
To  breathless  Nature's  dark  abyss.** 

And  the  warring  elements  without  were  an  emblem 
of  the  thoughts  that  occupied  the  mind  of  the  expiring 
Chief.  They  still  turned  to  the  strife  of  the  battle- 
field, and  with  the  words  TSte  d^Armee  on  his  lips  his 
spirit  passed  away  for  ever  from  dreams  of  earthly 
conquest  to  meet  its  Creator  and  its  Judge. 

Dr.  Arnott  remained  in  the  room  with  the  body 
during  the  night  of  the  5th,  and  early  next  morning 
Sir  Hudson  Lowe,   accompanied  by   Eear-Admiral 

'  Daring  the  last  awful  moments  it  is  said  that  a  crucifix  was  placed 

upon  Napoleon's  pillow,  but  I  find  no  mention  of  the  fact  in  the  Lowe 

papers.    It  is  to  this  supposed  circumstance  that  Manzoni  alludes  in  the 

following  lines  of  his  magnificent  ode,  '  n  Cinque  Maggio :' — 

*'  n  Dio  cho  atterra  e  suscita, 

Che  affanna  e  che  consola, 

Sulla  deserta  coltrice 

Accanto  a  lui  posd.*' 


288  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXX. 

Lambert,  the  Marquis  de  Montchenu,  and  several 
British  officers,  together  with  Mr.  Brooke  and  Mr. 
Greentree,  two  of  the  Members  of  Council  at  St 
Helena,  proceeded  to  Longwood,  and  viewed  the 
corpse  of  Napoleon,  which  lay  with  its  face  un- 
covered.^ Afterwards  an  opportunity  was  aflForded 
to  various  other  persons — officers  of  the  army  and 
navy,  and  inhabitants  of  the  island — to  see  the  body 
as  it  lay  dressed  in  uniform  upon  the  bed. 

"Well,  gentlemen,"  said  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  to 
Major  Gk)rrequer  and  Mr.  Henry  as  they  walked  to- 
gether before  the  door  of  Plantation  House  conversing 
on  the  character  of  the  deceased,  "he  was  England's 
greatest  enemy,  and  mine  too;  but  I  forgive  him 
everything.  On  the  death  of  a  great  man  like  him, 
we  should  only  feel  deep  concern  and  regret.'*^ 
>  In  the  afternoon  the  dissection  took  place  accord- 
ing to  Napoleon's  own  wish,  who  was  anxious  that 
his  son  might,  if  possible,  be  saved  from  an  attack  of 
the  same  malady.  The.  body  was  opened  by  Antom- 
marchi,  in  the  presence  of  Counts  Montholon  and 
Bertrand,  Sir  Thomas  Reade,  Major  Harrison,  Cap- 
tain Crokat^  (the  orderly  officer),  Dra,  Shortt, 
Amott,  Burton,  Mitchell,  Livingstone,  Rutledge,  and 
Henry,  the  Abb6  Vignali,  and  the  three  servants, 
Marchand,  St.  Denis,  and  Pierron:  and  the  report 
was  signed  by  Drs.  Shortt,  Amott  Mitchell,_^ur- 
ton,  and  Livingstone. 


^  On  the  same  day  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  wrote  to  Lady  Holland,  and  in- 
formed her  of  the  death  of  Napoleon.  He  said  in  his  letter,  "  The  com- 
passionate interest  which  yonr  Ladyship  has  so  constantly  and  in  so 
generous  a  manner  shown  towards  the  remarkable  person  who  has  been 
so  long  under  my  care,  imposes  it  as  a  duty  on  me  to  take  the  earliest 
opportunity  of  informing  you  that  he  breathed  his  last  yesterday  evening, 
at  about  ten  minutes  before  six  o'clock." 

•  See  Henry's  *  ETcnts  of  a  Military  Life,'  vol.  ii.  p.  80. 


Mat,  1821.  POST-MORTEM  EXAMINATION.  289 

The  following  are  the  most  remarkable  appearances 
that  presented  themselves  at  the  autopsy : — 

On  a  superficial  view  the  body  appeared  to  be  very 
&t>  which  was  confirmed  on  the  first  incision.  The 
fet  was  upwards  of  an  inch  thick  over  the  breast,  and 
an  inch  and  a  half  over  the  abdomen.  The  lungs 
were  quite  sound.  The  heart  was  of  the  natural  size, 
but  thickly  covered  with  fat.  Upon  opening  the  abdo- 
men the  omentum  was  found  remarkably  fat,  and  on 
exposing  the  stomach  it  was  found  the  seat  of  extensive 
disease.  Strong  adhesions  connected  the  whole  upper 
surface,  particularly  about  the  pylorus  (or  pit  of  the 
stomach),  with  the  concave  surface  of  the  left  lobes  of 
the  liver ;  and  on  separating  these  an  ulcer  was  disco- 
vered, which  penetrated  the  coats  of  the  stomach,  one 
inch  from  the  pylorus,  su^iciently  large  to  admit  the 
passage  of  the  little  finger.  The  internal  surface  of  the 
stomach,  to  nearly  its  wnole  extent,  was  a  mass  of 
eancermis  disease,  or  schirrous  portions  advancing  to 
cancer. /This  was  particularly  noticed  near  the  pylorus. 
The  cardiac  extremity  for  a  small  space  near  the  ter- 
mination of  the  oesophagus  wm  the  only  part  which 
appeared  in  a  healthy  state,  aifi  the  stomadi  was  filled 
with  a^large  quantity  of  fluids  resembling  coflfee- 
grounds/J 

The  convex  surfexje  of  the  left  lobe  of  the  liver 
adhered  to  the  diaphragm,  and  the  liver  was  perhaps 
a  little  larger  than  natural.  With  the  exception  of 
the  adhesions  occasioned  by  the  disease  in  the  sto- 
mach, no  unhealthy  appearance  was  observed  in  the 
liver.  This  organ  was,  as  might  be  expected,  parti- 
cularly examined,  and  the  moment  the  operator  took 
it  out  Dr.  Shortt  said  it  was  enlarged ;  all  the  medical 
men  present,  however,  diflcred  from  him,  and  Dr. 
Amott  said  there  was  nothing  extraordinary  in  the 

VOL.  III.  u 


290  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXX. 

appearance  of  the  liver ;  it  might  probably  be  a  large 
one,  but  certainly  not  larger  than  the  liver  of  any 
man  of  the  same  age  and  size  as  Bonaparte.  But  Dr. 
Shortt  still  persisted  in  his  opinion  that  it  was  en- 
larged. Sir  Thomas  Reade  then  observed,  that  they 
ought  all  to  be  prepared  to  give  a  decided  opinion  as 
to  the  real  state  of  the  liver,  and  all  the  doctors 
re-examined  it  and  reiterated  their  former  opinions. 
Dr.  Antommarchi  had  the  liver  in  his  hand,  and, 
having  taken  his  knife  and  cut  it  open,  he  remarked, 
/ "  It  is  good,  and  there  is  nothing  extraordinary  in  its 
/  appearance,  except  that  it  is  a  large  liver."  After  this 
(  Sir  Thomas  Reade  desired  Dr.  Shortt  to  give  direc- 
^tions  for  having  the  body  closed,  when  Count  Mon- 
tholon  came  and  took  Sir  Thomas  aside,  saying  that 
it  was  the  particular  wish  of  Bonaparte  that  his  heart 
should  be  preserved  and  sent  to  his  wife,  the  Ardi- 
duchess  Maria  Louisa.  He  was  so  earnest  in  his 
request,  that  Sir  Thomas  Reade  consented  to  leave 
the  heart  separate  from  the  body  until  a  reference 
could  be  made  to  the  Governor.  It  was  accordingly 
put  into  a  small  silver  cup,  and  given  to  the  care  of 
Assistant-Surgeon  Rutledge  of  the  20th  regiment, 
who  was  ordered  to  remain  in  charge  of  the  body. 

Sir  Thomas  Reade  says  in  his  report,  —  "  The 
medical  gentlemen  immediately  and  unanimously 
expressed  their  conviction  that  the  diseased  state  of 
the  stomach  was  the  sole  cause  of  his  death.  The 
stomach  was  taken  out  and  exhibited.  Two-thirds 
of  it  appeared  in  a  shocking  state,  covered  with  a 
cancerous  substance." 

Sir  Hudson  Lowe  did  not  feel  authorised  to  give  up 
the  heart  to  Count  Montholon,  but  he  directed  that  it 
should  be  placed  in  the  coffin  separate  from  the  body, 
which  was  embalmed  and  dressed  for  interment  in  the 


ILiT,  1821.        DR.  RUTLEDGE'S  MEMORANDUM.  291 

uniform  of  a  colonel  otchassmrs  of  the  old  guard.  Dr. 
Rutledge  has  left  an  interesting  memorandum  of  what 
occurred  during  his  melancholy  watch.    He  says, — 

"  The  heart  and  stomach,  which  had  been  taken  out 
of  the  body,  were  put  in  a  silver  vase  by  me,'  and  I 
was  directed  by  Sir  Thomas  Reade,  according  to  the 
orders  of  the  Governor,  not  to  lose  sight  of  either  the 
body  or  the  vase,  to  take  care  and  not  to  admit  of 
the  cavities  being  opened  a  second  time  for  the  pur- 
pose of  the  removal  of  any  part  of  the  body,  and  not 
to  allow  the  contents  of  the  vase  to  be  disturbed 
without  an  order  from  him  to  that  effect.  This  was  in 
consequence  of  the  pressing  solicitations  of  Madame 
Bertrand  to  be  allowed  to  keep  the  heart,  and  to  take 
it  away  with  her  when  leaving  the  island. 

**  In  the  course  of  the  evening  Madame  Bertrand 
informed  me  that,  for  the  space  of  four  years  previous 
to  Bonaparte's  death,  he  had  coiflplained  much  of  lan- 
cinating pain  in  the  part  affected,  although  his  general 
health  did  not  appear  to  be  much  impaired.  Diges- 
tion was  carried  on  tolerably  well  until  within  the 
last  fiftyjdays,  from  which  time  ^had  entertained 
serious  apprehensions  of  his  situation ;  that  she  had 
frequently  heard  him  say,  since  their  arrival  on  the 
island,  that  whenever  he  was  either  in  very  bad 
spirits  or  appeared  to  feel  himself  particularly  indis- 
posed he  feared  a  disease  in  his  stomach,  and  that, 
if  this  should  so  happen,  he  Inew  and  felt  convinced 
that  he  could  not  recover ;  said  that  it  was  a  disease  of 
this  sort  that  his  father  as  well  as  some  other  members 
of  his  family  had  died  of,  and  that  it  was  a  stomach 
disease  (scirrhosis)  with  which  he  was  attacked ;  he 
knew  that  he  was  out  of  the  reach  of  human  aid.  For 
the  last  few  weeks  he  was  in  the  habit  of  lounging  a  good 
deal  on  a  sofa  in  the  dining-room,  aiui  when  the  family 

u  2 


2^2  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXX. 

were  at  dinner  would  usually  take  a  bit  of  meat  under- 
done, and  having  chewed  it  would  swallow  the  juice 
and  put  the  masticated  meat  out  of  his  mouth.  Broths 
and  jellies  were  his  favourite  nutriments 

*^7th.  Madame  Bertrand  and  Antommarchi  have 
been  unceasing  in  their  importunities  with  me  from 
almost  the  moment  when  the  body,  &c.,  were  given 
into  my  charge  yesterday;  Madame  B,  trying  her 
most  persuasive  powers  to  obtain  the  hewt;  and 
Antommarchi  absolutely  begging  of  me  to  give  him 
up  the  stomach,  in  order,  as  he  said,  that  he  might  be 
enabled  to  show  to  the  relatives  and  friends  of  Bona- 
parte that  his  death  was  caused  by  an  incurable  com- 
plaintj  and  that  no  blame  could  be  attached  to  him 
for  the  unsuccessful  result  of  his  treatment. 

"  Half-past  seven  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  I  placed 
the  heart  in  a  silver  vessel  which  I  had  prepared  for 
the  purpose,  and,  having  filled  it  up  with  spirit  of 
wine,  closed  the  opening  by  placing  a  silver  shilling 
(bearing  the  head  of  George  III.  on  it)  over  the 
open  part,  and,  having  soldered  it  down,  placed  the 
s'tomach  in  a  silver  pepper-box,  without  any  means  of 
preventing  the  putrefactive  process.  These,  together 
with  a  silver  dinner-plate,  knife,  fork,  and  spoon,  an 
ewer,  twelve  pieces  of  gold  and  three  pieces  of  silver 
coins,  and  a  plate  bearing  my  address,  as  being  the 
last  British  officer  who  had  ever  seen  him,  I  put 
into  the  tin  case  wherein  the  body  had  been  just  laid, 
[and]  saw  the  lid  of  this  case  soldered  on,  and  the 
covering  of  a  wooden  case,  which  was  outside  the  tin 
one,. screwed  down,  and  all  placed  in  a  leaden  coffin^ 
the  cover  of  which  I  saw  soldered  on ;  sent  my  report 
of  it  to  Sir  Thomas  Reade,  as  he  had  directed,  and 
thus  terminated  my  part  of  that  duty.  I  afterwards 
accepted  the  invij^tion  of  Count  Montholon  and  re- 


Mat,  1821.  THE  CAUSE  OF  HIS  DEATH.  293 

tired  with  the  fiimily,  or,  I  should  rather  have  said, 
the  Longwood  party,  to  dinner,  the  whole  period  of 
which  there  was  scarcely  anything  else  spoken  of  ex- 
cepting the  diseased  appearances  of  the  stomach,  each 
person  making  a  particular  observation  on  it,  and  all 
agreeing  that  Bonaparte  had  been  for  a  long  time  pre- 
ring  (sic)  to  expect  his  death  from  this  cause." 

So  far  from  the  liver  having  been  the  seat  of 
disease  and  the  cause  of  Napoleon*s  death,  as  all 
would  have  expected  who  gave  credence  to  the  state- 
ments of  O'Meara,  it  is  a  very  remarkable  fiict  that 
it  toas  owing  to  that  organ  that  life  was  preserved  so 
long.  The  liver  acted  as  a  kind  of  cork  or  stopper  to 
the  opening  in  the  coat  of  the  stomach  formed  by  the 
ulcer,  and  prevented  the  escape  of  the  contents  of  the 
stomach,  which  must  have  caused  immediate  death. 
This  curious  circumstance  is  mentioned  by  Dr.  Shortt 
in  a  note  addressed  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  on  the  8th  of 
May.  He  said, — **  Had  the  edges  of  the  ulcer  which 
penetrated  the  coats  of  the  stomach  near  the  pylorus 
not  firmly  adhered  to  the  liver,  death  would  have 
taken  place  much  sooner,  as  part  of  the  contents  of  the 
stomach  would  have  escaped  into  the  abdomen." 

Dr.  Antommarchi,  however,  did  not  sign  the  report 
on  the  autopsy,  and  this  became  afterwards  the  sub- 
ject of  invidious  remark.  But  the  explanation  is 
simply  this :  Dr.  Shortt  asked  him  to  add  his  signa- 
ture, as  they  were  all  unanimous  in  opinion;  to 
which  Antommarchi  replied  that  he  agreed  perfectly 
with  the  British  medical  officers,  but,  as  the  report 
was  written  in  a  language  which  he  did  not  under- 
stand, it  might  appear  strange  if  he  annexed  his  name 
to  it.  Dr.  Shortt  then  offered  to  translate  it  for  him 
into  Italian,  and  Dr.  Burton  made  the  same  offer 
of  translating  it  into  French;  and  he  was  told  that,  as 


294  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXX. 

Count  Bertrand  understood  English,  he  might  satisfy 
him  as  to  the  fidelity  of  the  translation.  Dr.  Antom- 
marchi  then  had  the  report  translated,  with  the  cor- 
rectness of  which  he  was  satisfied ;  but  on  asking 
Bertrand's  advice  as  to  what  he  diould  do,  the 
C!ount  objected  to  Antommarchi  signing  it,  on  the 
sole  ground  that  in  the  report  the  deceased  was  not 
styled  the  Emperor  Napoleon,  and  he  would  never 
consent  that  any  attendant  of  Napoleon  should  sign 
a  document  in  which  he  was  not  recognized  by  the 
imperial  title.* 

The  real  reason  of  Bertrand's  objection  no  doubt 
was,  the  complete  contradiction  given  by  the  report 
to  the  theory  that  the  seat  of  disease  was  the  liver. 
This  had  been  the  hypothesis  of  O'Meara  and  Antom- 
marchi himself,  and  it  was  one  which  conveniently 
enabled  the  unscrupulous  partisans  of  Napoleon  to 
attribute  his  illness  and  death  to  the  influence  of  the 
climate  of  St.  Helena.  Antommarchi  in  his  book  took 
care  to  countenance  this  untruth.  He  says,  "The 
liver,  which  zoos  affected  by  chronic  hepatitis^  closely 
adhered  by  its  convex  surface  to  the  diaphragm ;  the 
adhesion  occupied  the  whole  extent  of  that  organ,  and 
was  strong,  cellular,  and  of  long  existence." 

It  is  however  satisfactory  to  be  able  to  prove  that 
the  French  oflScers  who  were  the  companions  of  Napo- 
leon in  his  exile  were  entirely  convinced  that  cancer 
of  the  stomach  was  the  sole  cause  of  his  death.  So 
anxious  was  Madame  Bertrand  to  ascei*tain  the  nature 
of  the  disease,  that  she  placed  her  finger  in  the  cavity 
eaten  out  by  the  ulcer,  and  Count  Bertrand,  in  two 
letters  written  by  him  on  the  6th  of  May,  the  one 
to  his  brother,  and  the  other  to  Cardinal  Fesch,  ex- 

'  The  above  account  ia  taken  from  a  letter  from  Dr.  Buito&  to  Mr. 
GoulburD»  dated  August  13, 1821. 


Mat,  1821.  APPEARANCE  OF  THE  BODY.  295 

plicitly  stated  this  without  the  slightest  reserve  or 
qualification.^  And  Count  Montholon  also  expressed 
the  same  opinion.  Indeed,  the  case  does  not  admit 
of  a  shadow  of  doubt ;  nor  would  it  have  been  neces- 
sary to  confirm  what  is  as  clear  as  noonday  were  it 
not  for  the  inveterate  misrepresentation  which  has 
distorted  almost  everything  connected  with  Napo- 
leon's captivity. 

Mr.  Henry,  who  assisted  at  the  dissection  of  the 
corpse,  says  that  the  fetce  had  a  remarkably  placid  ex- 
pression, and  indicated  mildness  and  sweetness  of  dis- 
position. Those  who  gazed  on  the  features,  as  they 
lay  in  the  still  repose  of  death,  could  not  help  exclaim- 
ing, "  How  beautiful  1"  The  head  was  so  large  as  to  be 
disproportioned  to  the  rest  of  the  body,  and  the  fore- 
head was  very  broad  and  fiiU.*  The  skin  was  par- 
ticularly white  and  delicate,  and,  notwithstanding  the 
accumidation  of  external  fat,  the  whole  frame  was 
slender  and  effeminate.  There  was  scarcely  any  hair 
on  the  body,  and  that  of  the  head  was  thin,  fine, 
and  silky.  On  the  left  1^,  near  the  ankle,  was  a  scar, 
which  i4)peared  to  have  been  occasioned  by  a  wound. 

When  the  coffin  was  finally  closed  it  was  placed 
upon  the  bed,  and  mass  was  performed  in  the  room.^ 

•  ''  n  parait  qu'il  est  mort  de  la  mdrne  maladie  que  son  p^re,  d'un 
sqnirre  au  pilor  ;  dans  les  demien  terns  de  sa  longue  maladie  il  en  avait 
soup^onn^  la  cause.** — Extract  of  letter  from  Count  Bertrand  to  CcW' 
dinal  Fesch, 

•  It  may  interest  phrenologists  to  know  that  the  organs  of  combative- 
ness,  causativeness,  and  philoprogenitiveness,  were  strongly  developed 
in  the  cranium. 

•  At  the  end  of  the  second  volume  of  Olleara's  *  Voice  *  (fifth  edition) 
there  is  a  statement  signed  by  Count  Montholon  to  the  efifect  that  he  wished 
the  foUowing  inscription  to  be  placed  on  Napoleon's  oofi&n : — 

"  Napoleon. 

N^  ^  Ajaccio  le  15  Aoiit,  1769. 

Mort  ^  Ste.  H^^ne  le  5  Mai,  1821** 

—but 


296  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXX. 

On  the  9  th  of  May  the  funeral  took  place.  After  a 
funeral  service  had  been  read  over  the  corpse  accord- 
ing to  the  rites  of  the  Roman  Catholic  religion,  in  a 
small  chapel  fitted  up  for  the  occasion  at  Longwood^ 
it  was  carried  by  a  party  of  grenadiers  of  the  regi- 
ment which  had  last  done  duty  in  guarding  Napoleon 
to  a  funeral  car  drawn  by  four  of  his  own  carriage 
horses.  The  horse  he  usually  rode  followed  in  the 
rear  fiilly  caparisoned.  His  sword,  and  a  mantle 
which  he  had  worn  at  the  battle  of  Marengo,  were 
placed  on  the  coflBn.  The  funeral  car  was  followed  by 
the  persons  who  composed  his  family  at  St.  Helena 
as  chief  mourners,  and  by  the  principal  ofiScers,  civil, 
naval,  and  military,  on  the  island,  including  the  Go- 
vernor, and  the  Commissioner  of  the  King  of  France, 
and  the  procession  passed  slowly  along  the  line  <rf 
troops  which  extended  from  the  entrance  to  Long- 
wood  nearly  half  way  to  the  place  of  interment 
The  troops  remained  with  their  arms  reversed,  the 
several  bands  playing  a  funeral  dirge  until  the  mourn- 
ful cortege  had  passed ;  and  when  it  had  reached  the 
extremity  of  the  line  they  filed  oflF  fi^m  their  position, 
and  followed  in  the  r§ar.  On  arriving  at  that  part  of 
the  road  where  the  path  descended  towards  the  place 
of  burial,  the  body  was  removed  from  the  funeral  car, 
and  borne  alternately  by  the  grenadiers  of  the  several 

— but  that  the  Governor  objected  on  the  ground  that  his  inBtructions  would 
not  allow  him  to  sanction  any  other  name  being  placed  on  the  coffin  than 
that  of  "  General  Bonaparte."  When  this  statement  appeared^  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe  wrote  to  Montholon  himself,  and  said,  "  Having  a  perfect  recol- 
lection of  the  only  objection  I  had,  I  beg  leave  to  refer  to  it.  When  in- 
formed it  was  your  desire  to  have  the  words  *  Napol^n,  n^  ^  Ajaocio,'  &c. 
inscribed,  I  signified  that  I  should  have  no  objection,  provided  the  word 
*  Bonaparte '  was  added  to  that  of  *  Napoleon,*  and  that  the  inscription 
stood  *  Napoleon  Bonaparte.'  To  the  addition  of  the  word  *  Bonaparte  • 
to  that  of  *  Napol^n '  you  saw  motives  of  objection  which  I  did  not 
to  discuss^  and  thus  no  inscription  whatever  was  placed.*' 


May,  182U  THE  FQNERAL.  297 

corps  doing  duty  on  the  island,  including  a  party  of 
the  royal  marines,  to  the  spot  where  the  last  service 
was  to  be  performed.  The  procession  had  moved  on 
horseback  until  it  reached  this  place,  where  the  whole 
of  the  persons  attending  dismounted,  and  the  pall  was 
then  borne  to  the  grave  by  the  principal  attendants  of 
Napoleon. 

In  a  letter  to  Lord  Bathurst  Sir  Hudson  Lowe 
said, — "I  shall  cause  railing  to  be  put  round  the 
whole  of  the  ground,  it  being  necessary  even  for  the 
preservation  of  the  willows,  many  sprigs  of  which  have 
already  begun  to  be  taken  by  diflFerent  individuals 
who  went  down  to  visit  the  place  after  the  corpse  was 
interred."  This  is  the  incident  which  Antommarchi 
has  so  ridiculously  distorted.  He  says,  in  his  *  Last 
Moments  of  Napoleon,*  **  Hudson  and  the  Admiral, 
displeased  at  this  spontaneous  manifestation  of  feeling, 
endeavoured  \)  check  it  by  anger  and  threats ;  but 
this  had  no  other  effect  than  that  of  increasing  the 
activity  of  the  assailants,  and  the  willows  were  en- 
tirely stripped  as  high  as  the  hand  could  reach. 
Hudson  was  pale  with  rage;  but  the  guilty  were 
numerous  and  of  all  classes  of  people,  and  he  could 
not  therefore  punish.  He,  however,  took  his  revenge 
by  prohibiting  all  approach  to  the  grave,  which  he 
surrounded  by  a  barrier.*'  The  stupid  malignity  of 
this  passage  carries  with  it  its  own  refutation,  and  it 
is  by  no  means  an  unfair  specimen  of  the  spirit  and 
tone  of  the  whole  work. 

The  ground  selected  for  the  place  of  burial  had  been 
previously  consecrated,  and  the  spot  was  one  which  had 
been  pointed  out  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  as  that  in  which 
Bonaparte  himself  had  expressed  a  desire  to  be  buried 
if  his  remains  were  left  in  the  island  of  St.  Helena. 
It  was  situated  in  a  garden  in  the  middle  of  a  deep 


298  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXX. 

ravine,  under  the  shade  of  two  willow-trees,  close  to  a 
small  fonntain,  from  which  water  had  been  brought 
daily  for  his  use  in  two  silver  bottles  of  his  own. 
The  Abbe  Yignali  performed  the  last  funeral  rite, 
and  whea  tiie  corpse  was  lowered  into  the  earth  three 
volleys  of  musketry  and  discharges  of  cannon  fired 
over  the  grave  thundered  the  requiem  of  Napoleon. 

All  that  now  remained  to  be  done  was  to  peruse 
the  will,  and  make  an  inventory  of  the  effects  of  the 
deceased.  The  Governor  went  to  Longwood  on  the 
12  th  for  that  purpose,  accompanied  by  Sir  Thomas 
Reade  and  Major  Gorrequer.  He  there  met  Counts 
Montholon  and  Bertrand,  and  in  their  presence  he 
examined  the  papers  and  other  property. 

On  the  table  were  two  gold  snuflF-boxes,  one  of 
which  had  a  large  cameo,  on  which  was  engraved  a 
goat  nibbling  at  a  vine-stalk,  with  a  Faun  upon  its 
back.  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  was  struck  with  the  beauty 
of  the  workmanship,  and  opening  the  lid  he  observed 
at  the  bottom  a  small  card  with  the  following  words 
upon  it  written  in  Bonaparte's  own  hand : — "  L*Em- 
pereur  Napole'on  k  Lady  Holland;  temoignage  de 
satisfection  et  d'estime."^ 

A  great  portion  of  the  papers  consisted  of  notes 
dictated  by  Bonaparte  on  the  subject  of  his  own 
campaigns;  there  were  also  several  memoranda  in  his 
handwriting,  and  slips  of  paper  containing  directions 
in  pencil  to  Count  Montholon  to  make  researches  in 
various  publications,   and  collect  materials  for  the 

'  On  the  back  of  the  card  was  vritten,  in  another  hand,  '*  Donne'  par  le 
Pape  Pie  VII.,  ^  Tolentino,  1797."  To  mark  his  acknowledgment  of  Dr. 
Amott*8  services,  Bonaparte  directed  that  the  other  gold  snuff-box,  upon 
which  he  had  himself  carved  the  letter  N.,  and  also  a  sum  of  600  nai)oleons 
(500/.),  should  be  presented  to  him.  Dr.  Amott  afterwards  received  an 
additional  sum  of  6001,  from  the  English  Qovemment 


Mat,  1821.  EULOGIUM  ON  WELLINGTON.  299 

work  on  which  Napoleon  was  then  engaged.  Amongst 
the  papers  was  an  account  of  the  battle  of  Water- 
loo, written  out  fair,  the  rough  draft  of  which  had 
been  taken  away  by  General  Gk>urgaud.  After  the 
Governor  had  left  the  house,  Count  Montholon  called 
back  Major  Gorrequer  to  ask  him  a  question,  mid  ho 
then  mentioned  that  he  had  been  seardiing  for  a  note 
dictated  to  him  by  Napoleon  a  long  time  previously, 
and  which  he  was  sorry  he  could  not  find,  as  it  was  an 
eubgivm  on  the  Duke  of  Wellington^  in  which  Napoleon 
had  spoken  in  the  highest  terms  of  praise  of  the  mili- 
tary conduct  of  the  Duke. 

But  in  unhappy  contrast  to  this  generous  appreciar 
tion  of  his  great  antagonist  must  be  mentioned  the 
deplorable  feet  that  Napoleon  bequeathed  in  his  will 
a  sum  of  money  to  Cantillon,  the  miscreant  who  at- 
tempted to  assassinate  the  Duke  of  Wellington  in 
Paris,  and  who,  although  acquitted  by  the  jury  who 
tried  him,  was  undoubtedly  guilty.^ 

It  is  far  more  pleasing  to  be  able  to  mention  that 
Napoleon  on  his  deathbed  earnestly  begged  Count 
Bertrand  to  use  every  means  in  his  power,  consistent 
with  his  honour,  to  efifect  a  reconciliation  with  Sir 
Hudson  Lowe,  saying  that  he  hoped  he  would  succeed, 
as  he  himself  alone  had  been  the  cause  of  the  dif- 


'  By  the  fourth  codicil  to  his  will  Napoleon  left  the  fdlowing  legacy : — 
"  5*  Item,  (10,000)  dix  mille  francs  an  sous-officier  Cantillon,  qui  a 
«0suy^  on  proc^  oonune  pr^venu  d'ayoir'vouler  assassiner  Lord  Wellington^ 
oe  dont  il  a  M  d^lar6  innocent.  Cantillon  av^t  autant  de  droit  d'aseaa- 
siner  cet  oligarque,  que  celui-ci  de  ni'envoyer  pour  p^rir  sur  k  rocher  de 
Sainte  H^^e.  Wellington,  qui  %  pi^pos^  cet  attentat,  cherchait  ^  le 
justifier  sur  I'int^t  de  la  Grande  Br^agne.  Cantillon,  ai  yraiment  il  eftt 
assassin^  le  Lord,  se  serait  convert  et  aurait  M  jasdfitf  par  les  mdmoB 
motifs,  Tint^r^t  de  France,  de  se  d^faire  d*un  g^n^ral  qui  d^ailleurs  amt 
vioM  la  Capitulation  de  Paris,  et  par  la  sVtait  rendu  responsable  du  sang 
des  martyrs  Ney,  Lab^doy^,  etc.  etc^  et  du  crume  d'avoir  d^pouilM  ka 
mus^  contie  le  texte  des  traits" 


300  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXX. 

ferences  between  them.  This  was  at  all  events  stated 
by  Madame  Bertrand  to  Admiral  Lambert,  and  she 
added  that  her  husband  was  very  desirous  to  fulfil 
Napoleon's  dying  wish.  When  this  was  made  known 
to  the  Governor,  he  instantly  determined  to  bury  the 
past  conduct  of  Bertrand  in  oblivion,  and  gladly  ac- 
cepted the  proffered  reconciliation.  Both  the  French 
Counts  called  at  Plantation  House  together  on  the  12th, 
and  were  there  courteously  received  by  the  Gk>vernor. 

Let  us  now  pause  for  a  moment  and  endeavour  to 
analyse  our  conception  of  the  character  of  Napoleon. 
It  is  with  diffidence  that  a  writer  should  attempt  to 
describe  the  moral  lineaments  of  one  who  was  so  little 
like  ordinary  men.  If  we  apply  to  him  the  terse  and 
nervous  language  of  the  Koman  historian  when  he 
speaks  of  Agricola,  I  fear  we  must  invert  the  order  of 
the  passage  and  say,  magnum  virum  facile  crederesy 
bonum  libenter.  What  eidogy  can  be  thought  exag- 
gerated when  we  speak  of  the  powers  of  his  intel- 
lect, which  flashed  like  lightning  upon  every  subject 
that  it  touched,  and  illuminated  it  with  the  ray  of 
transcendant  genius?  Abler  pens  than  mine  have 
recorded,  and  others  in  future  ages  will  continue  to 
record,  the  actions  that  emanated  from  the  solitary 
workings  of  that  capacious  mind.  They  have  told  and 
will  tell  how  he  bowed  Europe  beneath  the  yoke  of 
his  single  will,  and  accepted  homage  from  the  proudest 
monarchs  of  the  Continent.  And  if  he  was  great  as  a 
conqueror,  he  was  also  great  as  a  legislator.  Marengo, 
Austerlitz,  and  Jena  may  in  the  course  of  years  be 
forgotten,  or  remembered  only,  like  Marathon  and 
Arbela,  as  the  subjects  of  a  schoolboy  theme.  To 
use  the  beautiful  illustration  of  Canning,  the  spires 
and  turrets  of  institutions  which  he  swept  away  in  the 
deluge  of  war  may,  by  re-appearing  above  the  surface, 


Mat,  1821,  HIS  CHARACTER.  301 

efface  the  memory  of  the  changes  which  for  a  time  he 
wrought  in  the  polity  of  nations ;  but  he  will  still,  as 
he  himself  in  the  spirit  of  prophecy  asserted,  go  down 
to  posterity  with  his  Code  in  his  hand.  The  numerous 
memoirs  written  of  him  give  abundant  proof  of  the 
intuitive  sagacity  with  which  he  saw  the  bearings  of 
questions  the  most  complicated,  and  solved  problems 
in  government  the  most  abstruse.  At  times,  no  doubt, 
he  was  mistaken,  as,  for  instance,  in  his  views  of  the 
economy  of  national  wealth ;  but  his  mistakes  were 
rather  tiiose  of  the  age  in  which  he  lived  than  of  the 
man.  In  captivity  as  well  as  on  the  throne  his  will 
still  exercised  its  regal  sway  over  the  minds  of  others, 
and  those  to  whom  he  thought  fit  to  be  gracious  re- 
tired from  his  presence  fascinated  by  his  manner  and 
dazailed  by  his  discourse. 

But,  alasl  these  volumes  present  a  different  and 
darker  side  of  the  picture. 

"  Fu  vera  gloria?  al  poster! 
L*ardua  sentenza." 

The  soul  that  could  grasp  and  almost  realize  the  idea 
of  universal  empire  was  unequal  to  the  task  of  bearing 
adversity  with  dignity  or  even  resignation.  I  speak 
not  here  of  the  want  of  the  sublime  consolations  of 
religion,  which  can  alone  give  true  support  in  the 
hour  of  trial,  for  to  these  Napoleon  was  unhappily 
insensible;  but  a  heathen  philosopher  would  have 
mourned  or  smiled,  as  his  mood  might  be,  to  see  how 
the  lion  fretted  in  his  toils.  The  captivity  of  Napo- 
leon at  St.  Helena  illustrates  the  greatness  and  the 
littleness  of  man.  He  might  have  exhibited  on  that 
island  rock  a  moral  grandeur  which  would  have 
eclipsed  the  splendour  of  his  imperial  crown.  But 
he  knew  not  how  to  submit  to  his  inevitable  fate, 
and,  in  the  words  of  Lamartine,  he  contended  with 


302  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Ch^.  XXX. 

adversity  aa  if  it  had  been  a  homan  offence,  instead  of 
recognising  and  being  resigned  to  it  as  the  merciM 
sovereignty  of  Ood.  In  that  unequal  and  miserable 
stru^e  he  condescended  to  resort  to  the  most  paltry 
tricks  in  order  to  try  and  make  men  believe  ihsi  he 
was  the  victim  of  nuJice  and  the  martyr  of  persecution. 
He  seems  to  have  been  unfortunate  in  the  choice  of 
his  compani(His  in  exile,  who  had  not  the  firmness  to 
resist  the  commands  which  he  laid  upon  them^  even 
when  they  felt  that  those  commands  were  wrong. 
They  were  the  slaves  and  puppets  of  his  imperious 
will,  and  appear  to  have  imagined  that  the  servility  of 
their  obedience  to  him  absolved  them  from  the  obliga- 
tion of  every  other  duty.  It  is  impossible  not  to 
admire  the  chivalrous  devotion  with  which  they  volun- 
teered to  share  the  captivity  of  their  master;  ai^ 
every  allowance  ought  to  be  made  for  the  affection 
which  blinded  them  to  his  faults.  Love  thinketh  no 
evil ;  and  they  regarded  him  with  an  attachment  which 
almost  amounted  to  idolatry.  They  therefore  not  un- 
naturally considered  the  restrictions  which  curtailed 
his  libeily — ^and  against  which  he  chafed  with  so  much 
impatience — as  harsh  and  severe.  It  was  with  feelings 
of  wounded  pride  and  humiliation  that  they  saw  him 
whom  they  had  known  as  the  Emperor  of  France  and 
lord  of  millions  watched  by  sentries,  and  compelled  to 
submit  to  the  inspection  of  an  English  general  officer 
every  note  whidi  he  might  write  or  dictate.  But  they 
ctooped  to  acts  unworthy  of  their  reputation,  and  be- 
came willing  accomplices  in  a  system  of  trickery  and 
deceit.  An  honourable  exception  must  however  be 
made  in  the  case  of  General  Gourgaud,  whose  conduct 
throughout  the  whole  period  of  his  stay  at  St.  Helena 
was  honest  and  straightforward.  The  least  complaining 
of  all  the  party  at  Longwood,  he  found  for  that  very 


Mat,  1821.  fflS  COMPANIONS  IN  EXILE.  303 

reajaon  little  sympathy  from  his  companions ;  and  at 
last,  unable  to  bear  the  state  of  isolation  in  which  he 
was  placed,  he  was  driven  to  ask  permission  to  return 
to  Europe. 

But  respecting  the  others  we  may  quote  as  strictly 
applicable  to  them  what  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  has  said  in 
a  manuscript  found  amongst  his  papers : — **  Two  points 
must  be  attended  to  in  their  condition:  first,  they 
were  the  instruments  which  Bonaparte  used  to  exas- 
perate the  character  of  his  captivity  by  extorting  some 
act  of  harshness  from  those  who  were  concerned  in  his 
security;  and  secondly,  they  had  miscalculated  the 
enduring  power  of  affection  and  the  strength  of  mind 
necessary  to  support  long  years  of  monotonous  ex- 
istence, of  which  their  own  death  was  as  likely  to  be 
the  termination  as  that  of  their  master/' 

Las  GBses  was  a  man  who  possessed  a  quick  and 
versatile  intellect  and  considerable  literary  attain- 
ments, but  his  mind  was  tortuous  and  he  had  little 
regard  for  truth.  He  had,  as  an  eloquent  French 
writer  has  said  of  him,  the  servility  of  a  domestic  and 
the  blindness  of  a  devotee.  Montholon  was  empha- 
tically weak,  and  the  mere  creature  of  Napoleon,  who 
perfectly  understood,  and,  as  we  have  seen,  more  than 
once  expressed,  how  little  reliance  could  be  placed 
upon  his  veracity.  And  yet  he  was  undoubtedly  an 
amiable  and  plausible  man,  and,  under  different  cir- 
cumstances and  less  strong  temptation,  might  have 
won  from  us  a  gentle  and  favourable  judgment.  Glad 
should  I  be,  if  truth  allowed  it,  to  echo  the  praise 
which  has  more  especially  been  bestowed  by  writers 
upon  Bertrand,  whom  Sir  Archibald  Alison  calls  **  the 
noble-hearted  Bertrand."  Mr.  Henry,  who  knew  him 
well  at  St.  Helena,  says,^  **  I  believe  that  Marshal 

*  Events  of  a  Military  Life,  vol.  ii.  p.  92. 


304  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXX. 

Bertrand  was  the  most  honest  and  honourable  man  of 
the  Longwood  establishment,  perhaps  of  the  whole 
Court  of  Napoleon ;  and,  on  all  other  subjects  than  those 
immediately  relating  to  the  Emperor* s  interests,  of  unim- 
peachable veracity."  But  this  is  something  like  a 
contradiction  in  terms.  How  can  a  man  be  called 
honest  and  honourable,  or  be  said  to  have  any  re- 
verence for  truth,  who  is  prepared  to  sacrifice  it  at  the 
bidding  of  another  ?  The  large  exception  here  made 
destroys  Bertrand's  claim  to  be  regarded  as  a  person 
of  veracity.  The  habit  of  falsehood  with  reference  to 
one  subject  or  class  of  subjects  is  incompatible  with 
the  idea  of  straightforward  honesty  of  character.  No 
sane  man  tells  untruths  without  a  motive,  and,  if  the 
motive  be  admitted  as  an  excuse,  who  deserves  punish- 
ment for  falsehood  ?  "  Thou  shalt  not  bear  false  wit- 
ness against  thy  neighbour"  is  a  command  without 
qualification  or  exception,  and  Count  Bertrand  never 
hesitated  to  bear  false  witness  against  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe  whenever  he  thought  the  interests  of  Napoleon 
required  it.  Besides  this,  he  was,  if  we  may  believe 
the  testimony  of  Count  Montholon,  the  chief  obstacle 
in  the  way  of  more  amicable  relations  between  Napo- 
leon and  the  Governor — as  though  the  former  were  * 
not  sufficiently  inclined  to  find  fault  unless  instigated 
by  his  followers.  He  did  nothing  but  mischief  when 
he  sought  to  urge  on  his  master  to  continued  and  un- 
dignified resistance  by  appealing  to  his  pride,  as  we 
know  he  did  appeal,  exclaiming,  "Mais,  Sire,  votre 
nom,  votre  gloirel"  Neither  the  Emperor  nor  the 
Marshal  had  a  true  conception  of  the  dignity  of  mis- 
fortune, and  the  name  and  glory  of  Napoleon  were 
only  tarnished  by  giving  heed  to  such  advice.  But 
it  may  well  be  doubted  whether  he  would  have  tole- 
rated as  his  attendants  men  more  truthful  and  inde- 


May,  1821.  HIS  CONDUCT  AT  ST.  HELENA.  305 

pendent.  Such  would  not  have  aided  him  in  his 
ignoble  contest  with  the  Governor,  when  like  a  peevish 
child  he  shut  himself  up  in  gloomy  seclusion,  and  in- 
jured his  own  health  in  order  if  possible  to  bring  odium 
upon  Sir  Hudson  Lowe.  Charitably,  indeed,  we  ought 
to  judge  of  the  conduct  of  a  man  who  had  fallen  from 
such  a  dizzy  height  of  power.  Often  and  often  must 
he  have  stood  with  his  arms  folded  on  his  breast  and 
allowed  his  thoughts  to  wander  back  to  the  palace 
where  his  word  was  law,  or  the  battle-field  where  the 
thimder  does  not  more  swiftly  follow  the  lightning 
than  execution  waited  on  his  command, — until  the 
present  must  have  seemed  a  dream,  and  the  past  the 
only  reality. 

"  Oh  !  quante  volte  al  tacito 
Morir  d'  un  giomo  inerte, 
Chinati  i  rai  fulminei, 
lie  bracda  al  seno  conserte 
Stette,  e  dei  di  che  furono 
L'assalse.il  sovvenir  1 " 

And  then,  when  suddenly  awakened  from  that  dream — 
"  afflicted  and  drunken,  but  not  with  wine" — his  mind 
may  well  have  reeled  under  the  contrast,  and  for  the 
time  have  lost  all  control  over  itself. 

But  while  this  may  be  urged  in  excuse  for  the 
ebullitions  of  caprice,  facts  must  not  be  distorted  in 
his  favour.  To  conceal  or  disguise  the  truth  in  order 
to  soften  features  that  are  disagreeable  is  no  part  of 
the  duty  of  a  biographer  or  historian.  A  painter  may 
if  he  pleases  flatter  the  vanity  of  a  one-eyed  sitter  by 
drawing  him  in  profile,  but  a  writer  who  is  in  any 
degree  responsible  for  forming  the  opinions  of  others 
as  to  a  man*s  character  must  exhibit  it  in  its  weakness 
as  well  as  in  its  strength.  He  must  tell  the  whole 
truth,  or  he  misleads  his  readers.  And,  if  this  is  right 
under  any  circumstances,   especially  is  it  so  where 

VOL.  HI.  X 


306  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXX. 

the  reputation  of  another  is  at  stake.  If  Napoleon 
behaved  in  exile  with  the  dignity  and  fortitude  which 
his  worshippers  pretend,  and  Sir  Hudson  Lowe's  con- 
duct was  such  as  they  ascribe  to  him,  then  indeed  the 
Gh)vemor  was  the  tyrant,  and  the  prisoner  the  victim. 
But  the  very  reverse  of  this  was  the  case.  Napoleon 
outraged  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  with  every  species  of 
insult.  His  constant  habit  was  to  speak  of  him  in  epi- 
thets which  no  gentleman  can  hear  applied  to  himself 
without  his  blood  tingling  in  his  veins.  His  object 
throughout  seems  to  have  been  to  provoke  and  foster 
a  quarrel,  in  hopes  of  having  some  tangible  cause  of 
oflTence  to  complain  of.  We  have  seen  that  he  ex- 
pressed disappointment  and  vexation  that  he  could  not 
make  the  Governor  angry.  The  imperturbable  tem- 
per of  the  latter,  imperturbable  at  least  towards  his 
prisoner,  was  a  rock  against  which  the  wave  of  his 
passion  expended  itself  in  vain.  That  brain,  on  whose 
tissues  at  one  time  himg  the  diplomacy  of  Europe, 
busied  itself  at  St.  Helena  in  schemes  of  which  the 
immediate  purpose  was  to  mortify  and  annoy  Sir 
Hudson  Lowe.  On  one  occasion,  when  by  a  strata- 
gem of  Montholon  he  obtained  a  copy  of  a  note 
addressed  by  the  Governor  to  the  Marquis  de  Mont- 
chenu,  he  was,  we  are  told,  joyfnl  as  on  a  day  of 
victory.  Alasl  how  was  the  mighty  fallen  I  His 
complaints  of  ill-treatment  were  loud  but  insincere, 
and  were  dictated,  not  by  suflFering,  but  by  policy. 
I  do  not  believe  that  Napoleon  seriously  contem- 
plated as  a  possibility  clandestine  escape,  for  no 
man  had  a  clearer  or  more  just  discernment  when 
decision  was  necessary,  and  he  knew  that  his 
island  prison  was  too  well  guarded  to  render  any 
plan  of  evasion  practicable.  But  he  never  ceased  to 
cherish  the  hope  that  he  would  be  allowed  to  return 


May,  1821.  HIS  SELFISHNESS.  307 

to  Europe.  He  thought  a  change  of  ministry  in 
England  might  effect  this,  for,  ignorant  of  the  latitude 
of  attack  in  which  political  parties  amongst  ourselves 
indulge,  he  naturally  built  much  upon  the  language 
of  the  opposition.  If  Lord  Holland  became  Prime 
Minister,  it  seemed  an  inevitable  consequence  that 
Napoleon  must  be  free.  But  interest  in  his  fate 
might  die  away  if  it  were  not  kept  alive  by  sympathy 
and  compassion.  If  he  ideclared  himself  satisfied  with 
his  treatment,  there  would  be  little  to  expect  from 
the  zeal  of  partisans  in  his  behalf.  "At  one  time," 
says  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  "  I  had  hoped  that  I  might 
help  him  to  support  his  great  reverse  of  fortune,  but  I 
soon  discovered  that  his  first  and  strongest  wish  was 
to  aggravate  and  heighten  the  grievances  of  his  situa- 
tion, and  that  the  greatest  unkindness  I  could  be 
guilty  of  was  to  leave  him  no  cause  of  complaint." 
Therefore  it  was  that  the  cry  of  suffering  arose  at 
St.  Helena,  and  was  carried  across  the  Atlantic,  to  be 
echoed  by  rumour  with  her  thousand  tongues,  until  men 
began  really  to  believe  that  the  illustrious  prisoner 
was  treated  with  causeless  and  disgraceful  severity. 

No  one  can  study  the  character  of  Napoleon  with- 
out being  struck  by  one  prevailing  feature, — his 
intense  selfishness.  This  was  caused  partly  no  doubt 
by  the  unparalleled  success  which  had  for  twenty 
years  attended  his  career,  and  which  made  him  look 
upon  himself  as  a  being  bom  under  a  star,  and  as  one 
whose  destiny  it  was  to  rule,  while  it  was  the  destiny 
of  others  to  obey.  Under  the  chariot-wheels  of  his  am- 
bition he  was  ready  to  crush  everything  that  opposed 
his  path,  without  compunction  or  remorse.  He  re- 
garded others  merely  as  instruments  to  be  used  by 
him,  and  to  be  flung  aside  when  he  had  no  longer 
occasion  for  them.   A  memorable  example  of  this  occurs 

X  2 


308  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXX. 

in  his  treatment  of  the  noble-minded  Josephine.  Be- 
cause she  gave  no  promise  of  an  heir  to  the  throne  he 
snapped  the  cord  of  aflfection  in  a  moment.  The  ties 
of  duty  and  of  love  were  nothing  in  his  eyes  when  he 
found  that  his  wish  for  a  son  was  not  likely  to  be 
gratified.  How  little  feeling  did  he  show  when  he 
heard  of  the  death  on  the  battle-field  of  any  of  the 
Generals  and  Marshals  to  whom  he  seemed  to  be 
most  attached ! .  Indeed,  as  has  been  already  men- 
tioned, he  said  of  himself  that  his  soul  was  of  marble, 
and  it  was  thus  insensible  to  some  of  the  finest  feelings 
of  our  nature.  Not  that  Napoleon  was  without  gentle- 
ness and  even  playfulness  in  his  disposition.  When 
pleased  and  unopposed  there  was  a  charming  vivacity 
in  his  manner  which  irresistibly  won  all  hearts.  He 
was  fond  of  espieglerie  even  with  grown-up  people, 
and  in  the  case  of  children,  who  were  always  fii- 
vourites  with  him,  there  was  no  limit  to  his  good 
humour.  But  he  could  not  brook  contradiction  or 
opposition,  and  had  not  the  slightest  consideration  for 
others  when  they  stood  in  the  way  of  his  caprice. 
He  was  the  sun  round  which  others  were  to  revolve, 
but  though  attracted  by  his  influence  they  were  kept 
at  too  great  a  distance  to  feel  the  warmth  of  his 
friendship  or  aflfection.  Each  of  them  might  say  with 
Helena — 

"  In  his  bright  radiance  and  collateral  light 
Must  I  be  comforted,  not  in  his  sphere." 

Another  feature  in  the  character  of  Bonaparte  which 
must  not  be  lost  sight  of,  and  which  has  an  important 
bearing  upon  the  question  of  his  treatment  at  St. 
Helena,  was  his  habitual  disregard  of  truth.  His 
moral  sense  was  so  blunted  that  he  had  no  scruple  in 
resorting  to  deceit,  and  if  necessary  to  falsehood,  if 
he  could  thereby  accomplish  an  object  in  view.     It 


Mat,  1821.  HIS  DISREGARD  OF  TRUTH.  309 

has  been  said  of  him  by  a  French  writer,  with  sar- 
castic severity/  that  he  was  in  the  Moniteur  the  first 
journalist  of  the  Empire,  and  that  he  kept  what  he 
won  with  his  pen  much  longer  than  what  he  won  with 
his  sword.  He  there  gave  himself  an  unbounded 
licence  of  invention,  and  made  events  assume  what- 
ever complexion  he  pleased,  taking  care  that  it  was 
such  as  harmonized  with  his  projects,  and  flattered 
the  vanity  of  the  French  nation.  It  was  thus  that 
the  victories  of  Wellington  in  the  Peninsula  were 
ignored,  and  after  terrible  reverses  France  was  told 
that  the  English  would  have  been  crushed  by  Na- 
poleon, if  he  had  thought  that  the  proper  moment  for 
the  catastrophe  had  arrived. 

At  St.  Helena  he  gave  full  scope  to  this  propensity. 
The  letters  which  he  there  dictated  to  his  obsequious 
followers,  and  which  have  made  such  an  impression 
on  the  public  mind,  are  filled  with  glaring  misstate- 
ments of  facts.  They  may  be  called  the  bulletins  of 
his  exile,  which  were  intended  to  deceive  the  people 
of  Europe,  as  the  bulletins  of  his  battles  were  intended 
to  deceive  the  French.  Even  Bertraud  was  ashamed 
of  them,  and  more  than  once  disowned  the  respon- 
sibility of  their  authorship,  although  he  submitted  to 
the  humiliation  of  writing  them,  and  subscribed  them 
with  his  name.  "  That  monologue  of  six  years,'*  says 
Lamartine,*  "which  he  addressed  to  the  world  from 
the  summit  of  his  rock,  and  the  most  trivial  words  of 
which  vere  registered  by  his  courtiers  to  be  trans- 
mitted to  his  myrmidons  as  the  gospel  of  party,  was 
nothing  more  than  a  long  diplomatic  note,  void  of 

»  See  Jules  Maurel's  *  Wellington/  a  remarkable  sketch,  written  in  a 
spirit  of  generous  appreciation  of  the  qualities  of  our  great  hero  which  is 
deserving  of  all  praise. 

'  Histoire  de  la  Restauration. 


310  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXX. 

good  faith,  addressed  to  his  partisans,  and  speaking  in 
turns  the  language  of  all  the  factions  that  he  wished 
to  nourish  with  his  memory,  instead  of  being  the  disin- 
terested, sincere,  and  religious  effusion  of  a  soul  which 
bequeaths  with  its  greatness,  its  filings,  its  truth, 
audits  repentance  to  the  world/* 

Can  we  then  be  so  infatuated  with  hero-worship, 
so  dazzled  by  the  splendour  of  intellectual  gifts,  as  to 
allow  ourselves  to  treat  gently  and  speak  lightly  of 
this  contempt  of  veracity,  this  disdain  of  the  first  and 
simplest  requirement  of  the  moral  law?  No  more 
pernicious  lesson  can  be  taught  than  the  doctrine 
that  success,  which  elevates  a  man  to  the  pinnacle  of 
power,  absolves  him  from  the  obligation  to  observe 
the  imperishable  distinction  between  right  and  wrong* 
And  we  do  in  effect  teach  that  doctrine  when  we 
forbear  to  censure  in  Napoleon  Bonaparte  a  want  of 
truth,  which  we  should  condemn  in  another  as  a 
meanness  and  a  disgrace. 

When  we  turn  from  his  character  to  his  actions, 
and  ask  in  what  respect  he  benefited  mankind,  the 
answer  is  most  unsatisfactory.  Perhaps  no  man  ever 
for  the  sake  of  his  own  restless  ambition  inflicted 
so  much  positive  misery  upon  his  species.  His 
path  was  that  of  the  destroyer.  Kingdoms  were 
trodden  down  under  the  iron  heel  of  conquest,  and 
wherever  he  appeared  with  his  armies  blood  was 
poured  upon  the  ground  like  water.  A  fierce  soldiery 
was  let  loose  upon  the  countries  of  Europe,  which 
spoiled  the  inhabitants,  ravaged  the  fields,  and  swept 
away  as  with  a  whirlwind  the  accumulations  of  years 
of  industry  and  peace.  A  military  despotism  on  a 
scale  of  unparalleled  magnitude  was  established, 
which  abrogated  all  political  rights  and  strove  to 
trample  out  all  national  distinctions.     If  the  sorrows 


May,  1821.  HIS  ACTIONS.  311 

of  a  single  hero  or  heroine  in  a  tale  of  fiction  can 
move  our  hearts  and  powerfully  awake  our  sympa- 
thieSy  let  us  think  for  a  moment  on  the  amount  of 
human  suffering  caused  by  the  career  of  Napoleon, 
It  is  hardly  an  exaggeration  to  say  that  the  land 
was  as  the  Garden  of  Eden  before  him,  and  behind 
him  a  desolate  wilderness.  Tears  did  not  feil  to  flow 
for  each  homestead  burned,  each  family  outraged, 
each  peasant  and  each  soldier  slain,  in  that  long 
series  of  years  during  which  he  ruled  the  destinies  of 
France.  And  what  did  France  gain  under  his  sway  ? 
A  code  of  laws  which  is  his  best  title  to  her  gratitude, 
and  that  which  she  values  more — military  glory. 
But  at  what  a  price  was  that  glory  purchased !  The 
bravest  and  the  best  of  her  sons  died  in  distant  fields 
of  battle,  amidst  the  sands  of  Egypt  or  the  snows  of 
Russia.  A  ruthless  conscription  depopulated  the 
villages,  and  at  last  reached,  in  its  downward  course, 
youths  who  were  just  emerging  into  manhood,  but 
who  were  still  rather  boys  than  men.  Her  treasure 
was  exhausted,  her  liberties  were  gone.  A  system  of 
espionnage  betrayed  family  secrets  to  the  minister  of 
police,  whose  agents  were  everywhere,  and  whose 
onmipresence  no  one  could  escape.  And  at  last  came 
bitter  retribution  for  the  long-continued  and  daring 
attempt  against  the  rights  of  nations.  Her  soil  was 
invaded,  her  capital  was  taken;  and  Pandours  and 
Cossacks  bivouacked  in  the  Champ-de-Mars,  while 
English  soldiers  kept  guard  at  the  Louvre,  and  foreign 
bayonets  brought  back  the  King  whom  she  had  driven 
into  exile  and  proclaimed  an  outlaw. 

Of  his  merits  as  a  great  Captain  we  need  not  speak. 
Such  a  World-Conqueror  will  perhaps  never  be  seen 
again.  But  we  may  hope  the  time  is  coming,  if, 
indeed,  it  has  not  already  come,  when  men  will  sit  in 


312  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXX, 

stern  judgment  upon  those  who  without  adequate  and 
just  cause,  and  for  the  sake  of  their  own  aggrandize- 
ment, involve  nations  in  strife.  War  is  in  itself  an 
unmitigated  curse.  It  is  indeed  the  abomination  of 
desolation.  It  may  impose  upon  the  imagination  with 
all  its  proud  pomp  and  circumstance,  and  few  sights 
can  be  conceived  of  more  thrilling  interest  than  the 
march  of  a  great  army  in  compact  array.  But  follow 
that  army  to  the  battle-field.  See  it  after  the  shock 
of  conflict,  when  the  clash  of  swords  is  over  and  the 
artillery  has  ceased  to  thunder.  Listen  to  the  cries 
of  the  wounded  and  the  groans  of  the  dying :  follow 
the  surgeon,  and  observe  what  his  mission  is  when  the 
battle  is  won,  and  acres  of  God's  fair  earth  are  strewed 
with  corpses  and  converted  into  a  vast  charnel-house. 
And  what  sorrow  accompanies  the  tidings  of  every 
victory!  The  child  is  fetherless,  and  the  wife  a 
widow,  and  the  wail  of  mourning  for  those  who  have 
fallen  mingles  with  the  shout  with  which  the  nation 
exults  in  its  success.  War  may  be  a  necessity  in 
defence  of  outraged  rights,  and  to  repel  aggression, 
but  it  ought  ever  to  be  looked  upon  as  a  miserable 
calamity,  and  he  who  wantonly  provokes  it  is  one  of 
the  worst  enemies  of  his  race.  No  man  ever  felt  this 
more  strongly  than  Wellington.  No  great  commander 
was  more  anxious  to  avert  the  horrors  of  war.  He 
said  that  the  most  dreadful  thing  next  to  a  battle  lost 
was  a  battle  won ;  and  it  is  one  of  his  best  titles  to 
the  gratitude  of  Europe  that  he  always  fought  for  peace. 
But  who  can  say  this  of  Napoleon?  His  whole 
public  life  was  one  series  of  acts  of  hostile  aggression, 
and  we  do  not  find  it  recorded  that  he  ever  betrayed 
compunction  or  expressed  remorse  for  the  loss  of  the 
countless  thousands  whom  his  ambition  caused  to 
perish  by  the  cannon  and  the  sword. 


Chap.  XXXI.         ADDRESS  TO  THE  GOVERNOR.  313 


CHAPTER  XXXI. 

CONCLUSION  OF  THE  MEMOIR  OF  SIR  HUDSON  LOWE. 

On  the  27th  of  May,  1821,  the  Camel  storenship 
sailed  from  St.  Helena,  having  on  board  Count  and 
Countess  Bertrand  and  their  children.  Count  Mon- 
tholon,  Dr.  Antommarchi,  the  Abbe  Vignali,  and  the 
servants  of  the  Longwood  establishment.  Mr.  Henry, 
who  accompanied  the  party,  says  that  during  the 
voyage  no  complaint  whatever  was  made  by  any  of 
them  of  the  deportment  of  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  towards 
them  during  their  exile.^ 

Sir*  Hudson  Lowe  sailed  from  St.  Helena  with  his 
family  and  suite  on  the  25th  of  July,  but  before  he 
quitted  the  island  he  had  the  gratification  of  receiving 
the  following  address  from  the  inhabitants : — 

"  Sir, 

"  As  your  Excellency  is  upon  the  eve  of  resign- 
ing your  authority  on  this  island,  we  the  undersigned 
inhabitants  cannot  be  suspected  of  views  of  an  in- 
terested nature  in  respectftilly  oflFering  our  most  sin- 
cere and  grateful  acknowledgments  for  the  consider- 
ation, justice,  impartiality,  and  moderation  which 
have  distinguished  your  government. 

"  A  prominent  measure  of  your  Excellency *s  was  a 
proposal  which  might  have  been  expected  to  have 
been  unpopular  in  a  colony  where  slavery  had  long 
been  recognised:  yet.  Sir,  it  met  with  the  instanta- 

'  E?enU  of  a  Military  Life,  vol.  ii.  p.  60. 


314  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXXI. 

neous  and  unanimous  approbation  of  the  inhabitants ; 
a  result  which  aflFords  no  slight  proof  of  our  entire 
confidence  in  your  concern  for  our  welfare, 

"  Under  the  existence  of  such  ties  between  the 
governor  and  governed,  and  your  marked  discounte- 
nance of  any  rising  indication  of  party  spirit,  it  is 
easy  to  account  for  the  tranquillity  and  comfort  we 
have  enjoyed  during  your  Excellency's  residence 
amongst  us. 

"  Finding  we  cannot  have  the  happiness  of  the 
continuation  of  your  Excellency's  government,  we 
beg  you  will  accept  the  assurances  of  our  sincere, 
respectful,  and  affectionate  wishes  for  the  health  and 
prosperity  of  your  Excellency,  and  of  every  member 
of  your  family/* 

Before  Sir  Hudson  Lowe's  arrival  in  England,  Lord 
Bathurst  had  written  a  despatch  in  which  he  con- 
veyed to  him  the  King's  marked  approbation  of  his 
conduct  during  the  whole  period  of  his  government  at 
St.  Helena.  After  mentioning  that  he  had  received 
his  letters  announcing  Bonaparte's  death.  Lord  Bath- 
urst said, — 

**  I  am  happy  to  assure  you  that  your  conduct,  as 
detailed  in  those  despatches,  has  received  His  Ma- 
jesty's approbation.  It  is  most  satisfactory  to  His 
Majesty  to  observe  that  no  measures  were  omitted  by 
you  for  the  purpose  of  placing  at  Greneral  Buonaparte's 
disposal  the  best  medical  advice,  and  of  aflFordlng 
every  relief  and  alleviation  of  his  suflFerings  during 
the  latter  period  of  his  life  of  which  his  state  admitted. 
After  the  discussions  which  have  taken  place  between 
yourself  and  Greneral  Buonaparte's  attendants,  it  is  no 
inconsiderable  gratification  to  observe  that,  if  your 
offers  of  service  and  assistance  were  latterly  declined, 


Chap.  XXXI.     SIR  HUDSON'S  RECEPTION  AT  COURT.       315 

the  refusal  to  accept  them  seems  to  have  arisen,  not 
from  any  unwillingness  on  the  part  of  General  Buona- 
parte to  do  justice  to  your  motives,  but  from  the 
satisfaction  which  he  expressed  himself  to  feel  in  the 
talents  and  conduct  of  the  medical  officer  who  had 
been  already  selected  to  attend  upon  him. 

"  His  Majesty  has  further  commanded  me  to  avail 
myself  of  this  opportunity  to  repeat  that  general 
approbation  of  your  conduct  during  the  time  that  you 
have  administered  the  government  of  St.  Helena, 
which  I  have  on  particular  occasions  had  so  often  the 
pleasure  of  conveying.  Placed  as  you  have  been  in  a 
situation  which  must,  under  any  circumstances,  have 
been  one  of  heavy  responsibility,  but  which  particular 
events  contributed  to  render  yet  more  difficult  and 
invidious,  you  discharged  your  arduous  trust  with 
strict  fidelity,  discretion,  and  humanity,  and  have 
effectually  reconciled  the  two  main  duties  of  your 
command,  combining  the  secure  detention  of  General 
Buonaparte*s  person,  which  was  of  necessity  the  para- 
mount object  of  your  attention,  with  every  practicable 
consideration  and  indulgence  which  your  own  dispo- 
sition prompted  and  your  instructions  authorized  you 
to  show  to  his  peculiar  situation." 

Sir  Hudson  Lowe  was  presented  to  the  King  on  the 
14th  of  November,  and,  being  about  to  kiss  His  Ma- 
jesty's hand,  the  K!ing  took  hold  of  his  and  shook  it 
heartily,  saying,  "  I  congratulate  you  most  sincerely 
upon  your  return,  after  a  trial  the  most  arduous  and 
exemplary  that  perhaps  any  man  ever  had.  I  have 
felt  for  your  situation,  and  may  appeal  to  Lord  Bath- 
urst  how  frequently  I  have  talked  to  him  about  you.** 
Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  describing  the  interview  in  a  letter 
to  a  friend,  says,  "  He  took  my  hand  a  second  time, 
and  again  repeated  his  congratulations  on  the  exem- 


316  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Ciup.  XXXI. 

plary  maimer  in  which  I  had  fulfilled  my  duties,  turn- 
ing at  the  time  to  all  the  Ministers  who  were  present, 
as  if  to  impress  his  own  sentiments  upon  them."  And 
soon  after  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  had  the  gratification  of 
receiving  a  convincing  proof  of  the  approval  of  Go- 
vernment of  his  conduct,  by  being  appointed  to  the 
first  vacant  colonelcy  of  a  regiment  (the  93rd)  that 
occurred  after  his  return  to  England.  This  was  an 
honourable  distinction,  to  which  his  long  and  arduous 
services  well  entitled  him. 

But  evil  days  were  now  before  him.  The  partisans 
of  Bonaparte  could  not  forgive  the  man  who  had  had 
the  guardianship  of  his  person,  and  for  six  long  years 
discharged  the  duties  of  his  trust  with  such  firmness 
and  fidelity/  The  floodgates  of  abuse  were  opened 
against  him,  and  he  had  to  endure  insinuations  and 
attacks  the  most  painful  to  an  honourable  mind.  Nor 
was  it  only  these  that  annoyed  him.  As  he  said 
himself,  in  a  private  letter  written  in  July,  1823, 
to  Mr.  Wilmot  Horton,  **It  is  not,  however,  of 
those  who  were  Bonaparte*s  professed  admirers  that  I 
have  alone  had  reason  to  complain.  They  have,  it  is 
true,  given  ear  to  every  calumny  against  me ;  they 
have  acted  as  if  they  had  been  all  true ;  they  have 
given  every  support  to  the  inventors ;  they  have  cast 
forth  their  own  insinuations  to  rankle  in  the  public 
mind ;  and  they  have  not  dared,  *as  I  said  from  the 
first  they  would  not,  to  commit  their  own  reputation 
by  publicly  bringing  forward  any  one  thing  against 
me/'  But  what  pained  him  more  was  the  coldness 
and  apathy  of  those  to  whom  he  felt  he  was  entitled 


»  One  day  in  November,  1822,  young  Laa  Cases,  who  was  then  in 
London,  assaulted  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  in  the  street,  and  afterwards  sent 
him  a  challenge,  which  Sir  Hudson  had  the  good  sense  and  moral  courage 
to  treat  with  the  contempt  it  deserved. 


Chap.  XXXI.  PROSECUTION  OP  O'MEARA.  317 

to  look  for  encouragement  and  support.  Let  no  man, 
however,  rely  too  confidently  upon  this,  whose  only 
claim  to  it  is  the  consciousness  that  he  has  done  his 
duty.  This  does  not  inspire  enthusiasm  in  others,  nor 
cause  friends  to  cluster  round  the  object  of  calumny 
and  reproach.  But  it  cannot,  I  think,  be  denied  that 
the  English  Government  ought  to  have  aided  Sir 
Hudson  Lowe  more  heartily  and  efifectually  than 
they  did. 

In  July,  1822,  O'Meara  published  his  work  called 
*  Napoleon  in  Exile,  or  a  Yoice  from  St.  Helena;' 
and  the  sensation  it  excited  is  well  described  in  the 
following  passage  of  a  memorial  addressed  to  Lord 
Liverpool  by  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  : — "  Public  curiosity 
flew  with  eagerness  to  the  repast :  nothing  was  want- 
ing to  satisfy  the  cravings  of  the  most  credulous,  the 
most  inquisitive,  or  the  most  malignant  mind.  The 
highest  authorities  were  not  spared ;  but  /  was  des- 
tined to  be  the  real  victim,  upon  whom  the  public 
indignation  was  to  fall." 

He  lost  no  time  in  placing  himself  in  communica- 
tion with  Lord  Bathurst,  and  the  result  was  a  deter- 
mination to  appeal  to  the  law  for  redress. 

He  retained  the  Solicitor-General  Sir  John  Copley 
(now  Lord  Lyndhurst),  and  Mr.  Tindal  (the  late 
Chief  Justice  of  the  Court  of  Common  Pleas,  than 
whom  England  cannot  boast  of  a  more  profound  or 
accomplished  lawyer),  and  he  laid  his  case  before  the 
former  in  the  montli  of  August.  In  November  he 
received  the  joint  opinion  of  these  eminent  counsel,  in 
which  he  was  advised  to  make  a  selection  of  the  most 
obnoxious  and  libellous  passages  in  O'Meara's  volumes, 
with  the  view  of  applying  to  the  court  for  a  criminal 
information.  This  was  a  task  "the  difficulty  of 
which,"  says   Sir  Hudson  Lowe,    "was  afterwards! 


318  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXXI. 

most  fiilly  acknowledged  to  me  by  Mr.  Tindal  him- 
self fipom  the  peculiar  art  with  which  the  work  was 
composed,  and  from  the  studied  care  taken  to  avoid 
any  direct  accusation  in  points  where  any  living  testi- 
mony could  be  referred  to." 
And  he  adds, — 

"  Truth  and  falsehood  were  so  artfully  blended  to- 
gether in  the  work,  and  the  latter  so  cunningly  inter- 
woven with  the  former,  in  order  to  secure  the  eflfect 
of  giving  a  complete  false  colour  to  every  act  of  mine, 
and  to  impress  upon  the  mind  of  the  unsuspecting  or 
careless  reader  almost  the  direct  reverse  in  every  case 
of  what  had  been  the  real  fact,  that  a  great  length  of 
explanation  became  necessary,  in  order  to  disentangle 
all  the  meshes  of  the  plot,  which  had  thus  been  so 
artificially  woven  to  accomplish  the  ruin  of  my  public 
and  private  character." 

Time,  however,  was  of  the  last  importance  in  this 
case,  although  Sir  Hudson  was  not  aware  of  it.  He 
says, — **  During  the  nearly  four  months  that  my 
papers  had  been  with  the  Solicitor-General,  I  never 
became  informed  by  him,  —  I  never  received  the 
slightest  hint  Or  caution  from  him,  or  from  any  other 
human  being, — I  had  never  understood,  I  never  sus- 
pected, that  I  should  be  limited  to  any  particular 
week,  or  day,  for  commencing  the  prosecution  against 
the  author  of  a  work  who  had  been  preparing  his  ca- 
lumnious attacks  against  me  for  six  years  before.'' 

In  order  to  entitle  himself  to  a  rule  for  a  criminal 
information,  it  was  necessary  for  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  to 
prepare  a  voluminous  affidavit,  denying  the  truth  of 
the  allegations  of  which  he  complained,  and  the  diffi- 
culty of  doing  this  arose  from  the  artful  malignity 
with  which  the  book  was  composed.    To  use  his  own 


Chap.  XXXI.  PROSECUTION  OF  O'MEARA.  319 

words, — **  After  a  most  attentive  perusal  and  examin- 
ation of  the  thousand  pages  of  the  work,  and  having 
selected  those  passages  which  did  appear  to  me-  to 
admit  of  the  least  dubious  construction,  and  having 
attempted  to  qualify  others  by  the  introduction  of 
such  explanations  as  I  thought  it  proper  to  employ,  in 
order  not  to  trifle  with  the  sanctity  of  an  oath,  I  was 
told  I  must  deny  the  whole  of  such  passages  in  an  un- 
qualified manner,  or  omit  them  altogether;  and  I  was 
thus  compelled  to  abandon  many  of  those  which  were 
the  most  artfully  wrought,  and  contained  the  most 
calumnious  falsehoods  against  me,  or  to  content  myself 
with  denying  in  a  general^  but  not  less  formal  manner, 
the  imputaiions  they  were  intended  to  convey.'' 

It  was  not  until  the  latter  end  of  Hilary  Term, 
1823,  that  the  rule  was  applied  for,  and  in  the  mean 
time  such  had  been  the  avidity  with  which  the  public 
perused  the  *  Voice  fi:om  St.  Helena,'  that  a  fifth 
edition  had  already  then  appeared.  When  the  Soli- 
citor-General rose  to  move  for  a  rule  to  show  cause 
why  a  criminal  information  should  not  be  granted 
against  Barry  Edward  O'Meara  for  the  libels  he  had 
published  against  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  in  his  book,  &c., 
he  was  interrupted  by  the  Court,  who  asked  when 
that  work  was  first  published,  and  whether  the  alleged 
libels  were  inserted  only  in  a  subsequent  edition  ? 
After  going  through  the  facts  as  deposed  to  in  Sir 
Hudson  Lowe's  affidavit,  Lord  Chief  Justice  Abbott 
(afterwards  Lord  Tenterden)  said,  **  The  only  difficulty 
the  Court  has  felt  is  the  lateness  of  the  application. 
I  take  it  to  be  a  settled  rule,  when  you  move  for  a 
criminal  information  against  a  magistrate  or  justice  of 
the  peace,  you  must  come  in  the  first  term,  or  so 
early  in  the  second  term  that  hje  may  show  cause 
against  the  rule  in  that  second  term.    You  should 


320  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXXI. 

not  come  so  late  in  the  second  term  as  to  postponer 
the  showing  canse  till  the  third  term.  That  is  the 
case  where  the  application  is  against  a  magistrate  or 
justice  of  the  peace.  I  am  not  aware  at  this  moment 
that  the  same  rule  has  been  laid  down  with  regard  to 
other  persons,  though  in  general  the  tardiness  of  the 
application  operates  strongly  on  the  Court  against  the 
parties  making  it.  Yet,  in  this  particular  case.  Sir 
Hudson  Lowe  is  an  officer  of  the  public ;  he  is  one  of 
his  Majesty's  officers ;  so  that  the  parties  are  changed." 

The  Court,  however,  granted  the  rule  nisi  as  it  is 
called,  that  is,  a  rule  which  was  to  be  made  absolute, 
unless  O'Meara  should  show  sufficient  cause  to  the 
contrary ;  for  the  application  for  such  a  rule  is  in  the 
first  instance  always  ex  parte. 

In  support  of  this  rule  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  obtained 
and  fileii  in  Court  twenty-one  affidavits,  including 
those  of  Sir  Thomas  Eeade,  Major  Gorrequer,  Sir 
Greorge  Bingham,  many  officers  of  the  53rd  and  66th 
regiments,  which  were  stationed  at  St.  Helena  during 
his  government,  Dr.  Verling,  Mr.  Balcombe,  and 
others.  On  the  other  side  Mr.  0*Meara  filed  seven- 
teen affidavits,  namely,  his  own,  and  those  of  Major 
Poppleton  (who  had  been  the  first  appointed  orderly 
officer  at  Longwood),*  two  captains  of  the  53rd,  and 

^  It  is  right  to  mention  that,  notwithstandiDg  the  good  opinion  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe  had  entertained  of  Captain  Poppleton  while  he  dilcharged  the  duties 
of  orderly  ofl&cer,  he  afterwards  discovered  that  he  had  accepted  a  present 
of  a  snuflf-box  from  Napoleon,  without  acquainting  him  with  the  circum- 
stance ;  but  it  is  also  fair  to  Captain  Poppleton  to  state  that  on  his  arrival 
in  England  he  informed  Lord  Bathurst  that  he  had  accepted  the  present. 
When  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  became  aware  of  the  fact,  he  wrote  to  Lord 
Bathurst  in  terms  of  strong  censure  of  Captain  Poppleton's  conduct  in  this 
particular,  saying  that  in  accepting  a  present  without  his  knowledge  he 
considered  him  to  have  betrayed  the  confidential  trust  reposed  in  him.  He 
had  also  refused  Captain  Poppleton*s  application  to  be  allowed  to  remain 
at  Longwood  when  the  regiment  to  which  he  belouged  was  relieved. 


Chap.  XXXI.         PROSECUTION  OF  O'MEARA.  321 

a  captain  and  lieutenant  of  the  66th  regiment ;  Mr. 
Camming,  a  purser  of  an  East-Indiaman  ;  Mr.  Cook, 
formerly  commander  of  a  store-ship ;  Counts  de  Mon- 
tholon  and  Las  Cases,  Emmanuel  Las  Cases,  Dr. 
Antommarchi,  and  five  of  Bonaparte's  domestic  ser- 
vants. 

On  the  11th  of  June  O'Meara's  counsel,  Mr.  Charles 
Phillips  and  Mr.  (afterwards  Mr.  Justice)  Patteson, 
showed  cause  against  the  rule,  and,  without  attempting 
to  enter  into  the  facts  or  merits  of  the  case,  they 
urged  the  fatal  objection,  which  had  been  already  in- 
timated by  the  Court  when  they  granted  the  rule, 
that  the  application  was  made  too  late.  The  Solicitor- 
General  admitted  that  he  could  find  no  precedent  to 
justify  the  delay,  and  the  late  Lord  Abinger,  then 
Mr.  Scarlett,  who  was  retained  with  him  in  the  case, 
confessed  himself  equally  at  fault.  It  now  became 
merely  a  question  whether  the  rule  should  be  dis* 
charged  with  costs.  Mr.  Justice  Best  (afterwards 
Lord  Wynford)  said,  "  This  objection  does  not  go  to 
the  merits.  It  appears  to  me  to  be  a  fatal  objection. 
If  we  choose  to  stand  on  that,  and  shut  our  eyes  to 
the  merits,  I  don't  think  we  could  give  costs."  And 
so  the  Court  ultimately  decided  in  Michaelmas  term ; 
and  the  only  satisfaction  which  Sir  Hudson  Lowe 
derived  from  the  result  of  the  proceedings  was,  that 
he  was  not  compelled  to  pay  the  costs  of  his  adver- 
sary as  well  as  his  own !  We  cannot  help  sympa- 
thising with  his  feelings  expressed  in  a  note  to  his 
solicitor  on  the  7th  of  November,  where  he  says, — ^ 
**  Your  clerk  has  informed  me  that  it  is  probable  the 
question  will  be  got  rid  of  as  lost  in  point  of  time. 
Eeally  I  hope  the  Solicitor-General  will  set  me  right 
with  the  public  on  this  head.  I  never  was  informed, 
and  could  not  know,  tiiat  any  particular  time  was 

VOL.  III.  Y 


322  CAPTIVITT  OP  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXXI. 

fixed  for  my  bringing  on  the  cause ;  and  it  was  not 
until  after  my  papers  and  memoranda  had  been  in  the 
Solicitor-Gknerars  possession  the  whole  of  last  sum- 
mer, and  until  his  opinion  and  that  of  Mr.  Tindal 
had  been  given  to  me  upon  them  in  November,  that  I 
knew  the  urgency  of  my  bringing  forward  the  case. 
I  do  not  like  it  to  be  imputed  to  me  that  such  delay 
proceeded  from  ignorance  of  the  laws.  It  was  not 
to  be  presumed  I  should  be  informed  of  such  a  rule, 
unless  made  acquainted  with  it  by  my  legal  advisers, 
and,  as  such  a  rule  was  known  to  exist  by  them,  why 
was  no  opinion  given  to  me  upon  the  papers  I  left 
with  the  Solicitor-G-eneral  until  after  a  delay  of  three 
or  four  months  ?  It  would  be  really  hard  upon  me  to 
bear  the  whole  reproach  of  the  delay." 

Sir  Hudson  next  consulted  Mr.  Tindal  as  to  the 
expediency  of  indicting  O'Meara,  or  of  bringing  an 
action  for  damages  against  him.  But  the  cautious 
lawyer  dissuaded  him  from  the  attempt.  He  said 
with  perfect  truth  that  the  proper  legal  remedy  had 
been  already  resorted  to  for  the  vindication  of  his 
client's  character.  He  had  cleared  himself  from  every 
charge  upon  his  oath,  and  if  O'Meara  challenged  the 
truth  of  his  denials  he  might  test  them  by  prosecuting 
Sir  Hudson  Lowe  for  perjury.  An  indictment,  how- 
ever, would  not  try  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  the 
accusations  contained  in  the  libel,  for  Lord  Camp- 
bell's excellent  Act  was  not  then  in  existence,  which 
enables  a  defendant  to  justify,  even  in  an  indictment, 
an  alleged  libel  if  he  can  show  that  its  publication  is 
for  the  public  benefit.  As  to  a  civil  action,  Mr. 
Tindal  said  that  it  was  perfectly  certain  that 
O'Meara  would  not  justify,  for  a  great  portion  of 
his  work  consisted  of  private  communications,  as  he 
himself  stated,  from  Bonaparte,  which,  of  course,  he 


chap.xxxl        earl  bathurst'S  advice.  323 

could  not  prove.  And  it  would  be  useless  to  incur 
the  risk  of  obtaining  a  verdict  for  only  small  damages, 
which  would,  in  fact,  be  a  triumph  to  the  defendant. 

This  opinion  was  submitted  by  Sir  Hudson  Lowe 
to  Earl  Bathurst,  that  he  might  be  guided  by  that 
Minister's  advice.  And  it  is  deeply  to  be  lamented 
that  he  did  not  at  once  energetically  follow  Lord 
Bathurst's  counsel,  who  wrote  to  him  the  following 
letter : — 

"  My  dear  General,  "  November  28, 1823. 

**I  have  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your 
letters,  and  the  enclosures,  which  I  return.  After 
so  decided  an  opinion  given  by  so  respectable  an  ad- 
vocate as  Mr.  Tindal  against  any  further  prosecutions, 
I  certainly  could  not  think  of  advising  you  to  under- 
take them.  I  have  always  thought  that,  whatever 
might  have  been  the  result  of  your  late  proceedings, 
you  owed  it  to  yourself,  after  all  that  had  been  said 
against  you,  to  draw  up  a  fiill  and  complete  vindica- 
tion of  the  administration  of  your  government  at  St. 
Helena,  coupled  with  all  the  documents  in  your  state- 
ment. It  will  be  for  consideration  when  it  will  be 
prudent  to  publish  it. 

"  With  respect  to  the  advice  given  you  by  your 
friends  that  you  should  press  for  some  mark  of  his 
Majesty's  favour  as  a  testimony  of  the  sense  his  Go- 
vernment entertain  of  your  conduct,  and  the  com- 
plaint which  you  seem  to  make  that  nothing  has  been 
done  of  that  description,  you  will  allow  me  to  remind 
you  that,  though  a  regiment  was  not  in  a  pecuniary 
light  any  great  advantage,  yet  your  having  been 
given  one  soon  after  your  return  was  an  unequivocal 
proof  of  his  Majesty's  approbation  of  your  services ; 
and  I  am  sure  you  will  be  ready  to  acknowledge  that 

Y  2 


324  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXXT\ 

the  attention  which  has  been  shown  to  those  who 
served  under  you  is  much  more  than  Governors  on 
their  return  usually  experience.  You  are  also,  I 
believe,  aware  that  it  is  my  intention  to  take  an 
early  opportunity  of  recommending  you  to  a  West- 
India  Gk)vemment.  I  shall  do  so,  because  I  think 
that  your  services  entitle  you  to  such  an  appointment, 
but  do  not  let  your  friends  persuade  you  that  this  is 
to  silence  any  clamour  which  may  be  raised  against 
you.  Believe  me  it  will  only  give  to  your  opponents 
the  occasion  of  renewing  their  attack. 

"  I  have,  &c. 

"  Bathurst." 

It  was  no  doubt  a  fatal  mistake  of  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe  not  to  publish  a  refutation  of  the  charges 
against  him  by  printing  the  documents  in  his  posses^ 
sion.  He  wearied  the  Government  with  applications 
for  redress,  when  he  had,  in  fact,  in  his  own  hands 
the  amplest  means  of  vindicating  his  character.  It  is 
needless  to  repeat  what  has  been  already  said  on  this 
subject  in  an  early  part  of  the  present  work.  He  does 
not  seem  to  have  been  aware  how  seldom  there  is 
found  in  Governments  the  moral  courage  to  support, 
much  less  patronize,  an  injured  but  unpopular  man. 
The  soi'disant  liberal  press,  which  with  strange  incon^ 
sistency  had  always  espoused  the  cause  of  Bonaparte, 
the  very  iucamation  of  military  despotism,  rejoiced  at 
having  so  tangible  an  object  of  attack  through  whom 
the  Ministry  might  be  assailed,  and  a  tide  of  calumny 
was  thus  set  afloat  which  was  enough  to  overwhelm 
any  one,  however  innocent.  And  the  miserable  effect 
of  this  kind  of  position  is,  that  at  last  even  friends 
begin  to  grow  lukewarm  if  not  suspicious,  and  care 
not  to  come  forward  and  incur  the  odium  of  defending 


Chap.  XXXI.         SIR  HUDSON  LOWE'S  ERROR.  825 

him  whom  the  vox  populi  condemns.  Besides,  in  an- 
other important  respect  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  suffered. 
There  can  be  little  doubt  that  Lord  Liverpool  was  in 
some  degree  prejudiced  against  him.  Lord  Bathurst 
recommended  him  for  a  pension,  which  was  surely  due 
to  him  as  much  as  to  Colonel  Wilkes,  the  Grovernor 
of  St.  Helena  whom  he  succeeded,  and  who  received 
a  retiring  allowance  of  1500t  a-year;  but  no  pen- 
sion was  ever  granted  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe.  Why 
was  this  ?  Nothing  could  be  more  full,  explicit,  and 
unreserved  than  the  terms  in  which  Lord  Bathurst 
conveyed  to  him  the  approval  of  the  British  Govern- 
ment at  the  close  of  his  arduous  duties  at  St.  Helena. 
Why,  then,  was  a  pecuniary  recompence  withheld 
which  he  had  fairly,  earned  ? 

The  fact  seems  to  be  that  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  suf- 
fered \hQ  peine  forte  et  dure  for  standing  mute.  Lord 
Liverpool,  perhaps,  construed  the  late  Governor's 
persevering  silence  unfavourably,  as  though  it  arose 
from  mistrust  of  the  goodness  of  his  case.  Aide  toi,  et 
le  Ciel  faidera^  is  a  golden  maxim,  which  in  a  world 
like  this  ought  never  to  be  lost  sight  of.  Instead  of 
wasting  his  time  in  addressing  memorials  to  the  Mi- 
nistry, and  insisting  in  private  to  them  upon  his  inno- 
cence of  the  charges  heaped  upon  his  head,  he  ought 
to  have  appealed  boldly  to  the  public  by  laying  before 
them  the  real  facts  of  the  case,  before  the  poison  of 
calumny  had  infected  the  whole  literature  of  the 
country  on  the  subject  of  his  government  at  St. 
Helena.  He  professed,  indeed,  to  despise  his  enemies, 
and,  conscious  of  his  own  rectitude,  believed  that  jus- 
tice would  be  done  to  him  at  last.  But  he  died  before 
that  time  came,  and,  beyond  collecting  materials  for 
his  defence,  he  took  no  steps  for  the  public  vindication 
of  his  character.  When  O'Meara's  book  first  appeared 


326  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXXI. 

he  proposed  to  the  Qovemment  that  he  should  publish 
a  letter  in  his  own  name,  declaring  the  whole  work 
throughout,  in  all  that  related  to  him,  to  be  a  tissue 
of  the  grossest  falsehoods,  or  of  the  most  artftd  misre- 
presentations, and  one  of  the  most  infamous  attempts 
that  had  been  ever  made  to  impose  upon  the  credulity 
and  generous  feelings  of  the  British  nation.  To  such 
a  declaration  it  was  suggested  that  he  should  add  a 
pledge  that  he  would  write  a  refutation  of  the  calum- 
nies contained  in  it  This  pledge,  however,  he  says 
that  he  saw  no  sufficiently  strong  motive  to  give.  It 
was  attaching  an  importance,  both  to  the  work  itself 
and  to  the  writer,  which  he  did  not  conceive  they 
merited.  He  could  besides  never  brook  the  idea  that 
his  conduct  in  the  discharge  of  the  duty  with  which 
he  had  been  charged,  honoured  as  it  had  been  by  the 
fullest  approbation  of  his  Majesty's  Qovemment,  was 
such  as  to  render  it  necessary  for  him  to  enter  into  a 
vindication  of  it  against  the  aspersion  of  such  a  slan- 
derer. 

The  feeling  which  actuated  him  is  strongly  expressed 
in  a  letter  he  wrote  on  the  23rd  of  May,  1823,  in 
which  he  said  that  he  had  so  conducted  himself  in  all 
his  difficult  relations  towards  Napoleon,  during  the 
whole  course  of  his  duties  at  St.  Helena,  as  to  set  at 
utt^r  defiance  and  to  hold  in  the  most  downright  con- 
tempt any  species  of  accusation  that  could  be  brought 
against  him,  being  convinced  that  the  more  publicity 
was  given  to  any  investigation  relating  to  his  conduct, 
whether  towards  Bonaparte  or  his  followers,  the 
greater  would  his  difficulties  appear,  and  the  more 
would  such  investigation  redound  to  his  honour. 

This  feeling  is  creditable  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe's 
spirit,  and  such  expressions  are  the  language  of  con- 
scious innocence ;  but  it  was  a  grievous  errOT  not  to 


Chap.  XXXI.    AFTER  CAREER  OF  SIR  HUDSON.  327 

attempt  to  do  away  with  the  impression  produced  by 
0*Meara's  book  by  giving  to  the  world  a  true  version 
of  the  occurrences  which  that  writer  so  malignantly 
and  so  skilfully  distorted. 

Lord  Bathurst  did  not  forget  his  promise  of  a  West 
Indian  appointment,  and  on  the  14th  of  December, 
1823,  he  wrote  to  Sir  Hudson  and  informed  him  that 
he  was  to  go  out  as  Governor  of  Antigua.  He  did 
not,  however,  for  family  reasons,  accept  the  appoint- 
ment, but  subsequently,  in  1825,  he  was  made  Com- 
mander of  the  Forces  at  Ceylon,  and  quitted  England 
in  the  month  of  October  in  that  year.  He  travelled 
by  way  of  Paris,  Frankfort,  Yienna,  and  Constanti- 
nople. At  Vienna  he  had  an  interview  with  Prince 
Mettemich,  who  told  him  that,  in  a  conversation  he  had 
with  Count  Bertrand  in  Paris,  the  latter  said  that  they 
had  no  complaint  to  make  against  the  Gk)vernor  of  St. 
Helena  personally  for  his  conduct  there,  that  he  did 
everything  in  his  power  to  render  their  situation  com- 
fortable, but  that  it  was  the  island  they  were  dissatisfied 
with.^  Bertrand  at  the  same  time  mentioned  that 
they  had  given  up  all  hope  of  being  removed  from  St. 
Helena  through  the  effect  of  their  complaints,  and 
that  their  sole  hope  for  some  time  before  Bonaparte's 
death  was  in  the  success  of  a  project  which  had  been 
formed  in  America  for  getting  him  off  the  island. 

In  1828,  while  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  was  at  Ceylon, 
Sir  Walter  Scott's  '  Life  of  Napoleon '  appeared.  The 
archives  of  the  Colonial  Office  had  been  thrown  open 
to  his  research,  and  he  had  had  the  opportunity  of 
reading  the  despatches  of  Earl  Bathurst  and  Sir  Hud- 
son Lowe.    And  no  one  can  doubt  the  willingness  of 

*  Ute  reader  will  remember  the  suppressed  passage  of  Las  Cases'  Journal, 
qaoted  previously,  toI.  i.  p.  25 : — **  Les  ditails  de  St.  H^lhie  sont  peu  de 
€ho9e ;  c*€it  d'y  Stre  qui  est  la  grande  affaire,'' 


328  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXXL 

Sir  Walter  Scott  to  do  justice  to  the  reputation  of 
another,  or  for  a  moment  suspect  him  of  unfeimess  in 
the  use  of  materials  placed  at  his  command.  A  more 
thoroughly  honest  and  high-minded  writer  never  ex- 
isted, and,  while  we  admire  the  genius  of  the  poet,  the 
novelist,  and  the  historian,  we  love  the  generous  and 
kindly  nature  of  the  man.  But  it  seems  impossible 
that  he  could  have  attentively  perused  the  correspondr 
ence  between  Lord  Bathurt  and  the  Governor  of  St. 
Helena,  and  the  other  official  documents,  weighing 
carefully  the  evidence  they  contain  against  the  asser* 
tions  of  such  authors  as  O'Meara,  Las  Cases,  and  An- 
tommarchi.  For,  to  quote  only  one  instance  of  inac- 
curacy, he  speaks  of  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  as  forgetting 
that  his  prisoner  was  in  a  situation  where  he  ought 
not  to  have  been  considered  as  an  object  of  resentment, 
or  as  subject  like  other  men  to  retort  and  retaliation. 
"  The  new  Grovernor,"  he  says,  "was  vulnerable;  he 
could  be  rendered  angry,  and  might  therefore  be  taken 
at  advantage."  The  public  naturally  imagined  that 
this  view  was  formed  upon,  or  at  all  events  corroborated 
by,  a  perusal  of  the  official  documents  to  which  Sir 
Walter  had  had  access,  and  it  of  course  gave  additional 
probability  to  the  statements  of  O'Meara  in  his  book, 
where  he  represents  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  as  giving  way 
to  unseemly  bursts  of  passion,  and  abusing  his  power 
for  the  purpose  of  causing  annoyance  to  Napoleon. 
But  the  documents  themselves  are  directly  opposed  to 
any  such  conclusion.  Whatever  may  have  been  Sir 
Hudson  Lowers  faults  of  character,  assuredly  the  want 
of  self-command  in  his  relations  towards  his  ca(^ive 
was  not  one  of  them.  We  have  seen  that  Napoleon 
was  irritated  not  by  his  anger,  but  his  impassive  cool- 
pess,  and  that  Sir  Pulteney  Malcolm  bore  testimony 
to  his  perfect  control  over,  his  temper  during  the  pain- 


Chap.  XXXI.       SCOTT'S  'LIFE  OF  NAPOLEON.'  329 

fill  interviews  at  Longwood,  And  we  may  safely 
assert,  without  the  least  fear  of  contradiction,  that 
there  does  not  exist  in  all  the  numerous  despatches, 
whether  public  or  private,  which  he  wrote  while  Go- 
vernor of  St,  Helena,  or  in  the  voluminous  papers 
which  he  left  behind  him  at  his  death,  a  single  line  to 
warrant  the  idea  that  he  ever  considered  Napoleon 
as  ^^an  object  of  resentment,  and  open  to  retort  and 
retaliation/* 

Sir  Hudson  Lowe  turned  with  eagerness  to  Sir 
Walter  Scott's  work  in  hopes  of  finding  in  it  a  full 
vindication  of  his  conduct  as  Governor  of  St.  Helena. 
He  had  been  grievously  injured  in  public  estimation 
by  the  calunmies  which  had  been  industriously  spread 
by  his  enemies,  and  he  thought  that  the  time  was  now 
come  when  the  whole  truth  would  be  made  known, 
and  the  cloud  which  rested  on  his  name  would  be 
rolled  away.  He  expected,  however,  more  than  it 
was  possible  for  the  historian  to  accomplish.  For  Sir 
Walter  had  access  only  to  the  correspondence  and 
documents  in  the  Colonial  Office,  and  these  did  not 
and  could  not  supply  the  materials  for  a  complete  de- 
fence. This  required  an  inspection  of  the  minutes 
made  fix)m  time  to  time  by  Major  G^rrequer,  which 
have  been  so  often  quoted  in  the  present  work — a  com- 
parison of  O'Meara's  printed  narrative  with  his  private 
letters — and  the  consideration  of  a  great  variety  of 
documents  in  Sir  Hudson  Lowe's  possession,  which 
Sir  Walter  Scott  had  no  opportunity  of  perusing. 

Li  proportion  as  Sir  Hudson's  hopes  had  been  raised, 
the  pong  of  disappointment  was  keenly  felt; — "  for  it 
was  not  an  enemy  that  reproached  him,  then  he  could 
have  borne  it."  He  applied  for  and  obtained  fix)m 
the  Governor  of  Ceylon  temporary  leave  of  absence, 
in  order  that  he  might  return  to  England  and  consider 


330  CAPTivrrr  of  napoleon.      chap.  xxxi. 

what  steps  lie  ought  to  take  in  his  own  yindication. 
On  his  way  home  he  touched  at  St.  Helena,  and  wifli 
what  feelings  must  he  have  visited  a  place  with  which 
his  own  fate  had  been  so  strangely  interwoven !  He 
had  first  landed  there  as  its  Governor,  to  assume  one  of 
the  most  responsible  trusts  ever  committed  to  a  public 
servant  of  the  Crown;  he  had  quitted  it  witii  the 
unqualified  approbation  of  the  Ministry  that  appointed 
him ;  and  he  was  now  returning  to  Europe  fbom  an- 
other and  subordinate  command  to  endeavour  to 
obtain  reparation  for  years  of  calumny  and  detraction 
earned  by  a  conscientious  discharge  of  his  duty  at  St. 
Helena.  There  however  his  reception  was  such  as 
almost  to  atone  for  the  sufferings  and  annoyances  of 
the  past.  Military  honours  were  paid  him  on  landing, 
a  public  entertainment  was  given  him  by  the  inha- 
bitants, and  another  by  the  military  of  the  colony. 
He  remained  on  the  island  only  three  days,  and  on  the 
evening  of  the  last  he  was  attended  to  the  water- 
side by  those  who  welcomed  him  as  their  guest,  and 
he  was  cheered  by  them  as  he  embarked. 

The  tribute  was  spontaneous,  and  as  such  was 
deeply  felt  by  the  man  who  had  so  long  been  the  ob- 
ject of  unmerited  odium.  It  was  also  the  more  valu- 
able as  offered  in  the  place  where  his  character  was 
best  known  and  his  conduct  most  fully  understood. 

Short  as  was  his  stay  at  St.  Helena,  the  ex-Oo- 
vemor  did  not  fail  to  visit  Longwood — that  q)ot  on 
which  the  interest  of  Europe  had  be^i  for  more  than 
five  years  so  keenly  concentrated.  And  what  was 
the  sight  that  met  his  eye  ?  Since  his  departure  the 
place  had  been  appropriated  to  the  meanest  uses. 
The  chief  approach  to  it  now  was  through  a  large  pig- 
sty, which  occupied  the  site  of  what  had  formerly 
been  the  offices.    Out  of  the  windows  of  what  had  once 


Ohap.  XXXI.       DESECRATION  OP  LONGWOOD,  331 

been  the  biUiard-room,  through  broken  panes,  pro- 
traded  bundles  of  hay ;  and  a  thrashing-machine  was 
placed  in  the  closet  which  adjoined  the  bed-room. 
The  bed-room  itself — that  room  in  which  Napoleon 
Bom^)arte  had  breathed  his  last — was  converted  into 
a  stable  t  The  garden  in  which  he  had  soothed  some 
of  the  weary  hours  of  his  captivity  was  no  longer  a 
garden.  Its  walks  were  cut  up,  its  shrubs  removed, 
its  grotto  and  its  fountains  gone.  But  let  due  praise 
be  given  to  the  utilitarian  motive  for  this  dreary 
change.  The  plot  of  ground  had  become  a  potato- 
field,  and  those  who  authorised  these  acts  had  the 
consolation  of  knowing  that,  however  feeling  might  be 
outraged,  and  sentiment  shocked,  they  at  all  events 
put  money  into  their  pockets  by  the  miserable  trans- 
formation. 

When  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  reached  England,  he  found 
that  the  Duke  of  Wellington  was  at  the  head  of  the 
Ministry,  and  Earl  Bathurst  President  of  the  Council. 
He  hastened  to  the  latter,  and  consulted  him  as  to 
the  expediency  of  publishing  an  answer  to  Sir  Walter 
Scott's  work.  Lord  Bathurst,  however,  did  not  en- 
courage him  in  this  design ;  nor  indeed  did  he  take 
the  same  view  as  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  of  the  unfavour- 
able effect  of  that  writer's  remarks.  He  told  him 
that  no  difference  was  felt  in  the  sentiments  of  Go- 
vernment towards  him,  and  they  required  no  refuta- 
tion of  charges  which  they  did  not  believe.  Moreover, 
he  said  diat  Sir  Hudson's  best  chance  of  succeeding 
to  the  government  of  Ceylon  was  by  being  on  the 
spot  when  a  vacancy  occurred ;  and  he  advised  him 
to  return  there  without  delay.  Before  leaving  Eng- 
land, Sir  Hudson  Lowe  had  an  audience  of  the  Duke 
of  Wellington,  and  endeavoured  to  obtain  from  him 
a  promise  of  his  interest,  in  the  event  of  the  vacancy 


332  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXXI. 

occurring.  The  Duke,  however,  replied  that  he 
never  did,  and  never  would,  make  any  such  promise 
beforehand ;  and  that  he  did  not  think  the  Colonial 
Secretary,  Sir  "Greorge  Murray,  would  be  justified  in 
doing  so.  But  he  added  that,  in  his  opinion,  the  ex- 
Qovemor  of  St.  Helena  had  been  very  hardly  used ; 
and  when  Sir  Hudson  observed  that  the  object  of  his 
application  to  Government  had  always  been  either  to 
obtain  a  situation  corresponding  in  rank  to  that  which 
he  had  filled  at  St.  Helena,  or  the  means  of  an  ho- 
nourable retirement,  if  Gh)vernment,  from  motives 
of  policy,  did  not  think  fit  to  employ  him,  the  Duke 
answered,  that  no  motive  of  policy  would  prevent  him 
fix)m  employing  him  (Sir  Hudson)  where  his  services 
might  be  useful.  On  this  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  suggested 
that  an  opportunity  might  occur  of  sending  him  in 
some  capacity  to  the  Russian  army,  which  at  that 
time  was  engaged  in  a  campaign  against  the  Turks ; 
but  the  Duke  of  Wellington  shortly  replied,  **We 
have  kept  out  of  that ;  we  have  kept  out  of  that." 

Sir  Hudson  Lowe  then  spoke  on  the  subject  of  a 
pennon,  stating  the  circumstances  under  which  he 
had  before  applied  for  one ;  but  the  Duke  made  imme- 
diate objections,  saying  that  Parliament  would  not 
grant  it.  Sir  Hu^on  replied,  that  he  had  always 
been  desirous  to  have  the  question  referred  to  Parlia- 
ment, and  was  ready  to  stand  or  fall  by  its  decision. 
The  Duke  of  Wellington,  however,  said,  it  was  use- 
less to  urge  the  matter  any  further,  as  he  was  certain 
Mr.  Peel  would  never  make  any  such  proposal  to  the 
House  of  Commons. 

Sir  Hudson  Lowe  therefore  returned  to  Ceylon  and 
resumed  his  former  military  command  in  that  island, 
looking  forward  to  the  prospect  of  becoming  Qo- 
yernor  at  no  distant  period.     He    was,    however. 


:uAP.  XXXi:         LORD  TEYNHAM»S  ATTACK.  333 

doomed  to  disappointment.  The  expected  yacancy 
occurred  at  the  end  of  1830,  but  a  different  Ministry- 
was  then  in  power,  and  from  it  he  had  little  to  hope. 
Earl  Grey  was  Prime  Minister,  and  neither  he  nor 
his  colleagues  could  be  expected  to  sympathize  much 
with  the  former  guardian  of  Napoleon's  person,  of 
whom  it  had  been  so  long  the  fashion  of  their  party  to 
speak  as  the  inhuman  gaoler  of  an  injured  prisoner. 

To  show  the  kind  of  odium  which  attached  to  his 
name,  we  may  mention  an  incident  which  occurred  in 
1833.  In  the  course  of  a  debate  in  the  House  of 
Lords  on  the  19th  of  February  in  that  year,  respecting 
the  provisions  of  a  Coercion  Bill  for  Ireland,  Lord 
Teynham,  after  saying  that,  though  he  was  willing  to 
intrust  extraordinary  powers  to  the  then  Lord-Lieu- 
tenant of  Ireland  {tiie  Marquis  of  Normanby),  yet  it 
was  necessary  to  legislate  with  reference  to  those  who 
might  succeed  him.  "  Now  suppose,"  continued  Lord 
Teynham,  **  the  noble  Marquis  were  to  be  succeeded 
in  the  Government  of  Ireland  by  a  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe" — Here  the  speaker  was  called  to  order,  and, 
when  he  had  sat  down,  the  Duke  of  Wellington  im- 
mediately said,  **  I  do  not  rise  to  oppose  the  motion 
of  the  noble  Lord,  or  to  state  any  objection  to  the 
proposition  of  the  Lord-Lieutenant  being  assisted  by 
six  Privy  Councillors ;  but  I  do  rise  for  the  purpose 
of  defending  the  character  of  a  highly  respectable 
officer,  not  a  Member  of  this  House,  from  the  gross 
imputation  thrown  upon  him  (by  implication)  by  the 
noble  Lord ;  and  certainly  a  grosser  one  I  never  heard 
uttered  within  these  walls.  When  the  noble  Lord 
pays  a  tribute  of  respect  to  the  present  Lord-Lieu- 
tenant of  Ireland,  I  have  no  doubt  that  all  noble  Lords 
concur  in  the  same  opinion  he  has  expressed  of  that 
noble  Marquis ;  but  when  he  says  ^  the  noble  Marquis 


334  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.         Chap.  XXXI. 

may  be  succeeded  by  some  Sir  Hudson  Lowe/  I 
beg  to  know  what  the  noble  Lord  means  ?  I  have  the 
honour  to  know  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  and  I  will  say,  in 
this  House  or  elsewhere,  wherever  it  may  be,  that 
there  is  not  in  the  army  a  more  respectable  officer  than 
Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  nor  has  his  Majesty  a  more  faithful 
subject." 

Lord  Teynham. — "  Really,  my  Lords,  I  had  no  in- 
tention of  aspersing  the  private  character  of  Sir  Hud- 
son Lowe.  No  doubt  the  testimony  the  noble  Duke 
bears  to  it  is  perfectly  correct.  !Ehit  as  regards  his 
public  conduct  while  Governor  of  St.  Helena,  I  say, 
and  will  maintain  it  as  a  Peer  of  Parliament,  that  he 
is  cried  out  upon  by  all  the  people  of  Europe  as  a 
person  not  fit  to  be  trusted  with  power." 

Earl  Bathurst. — "  Perhaps  it  is  conferring  too  much 
importance  on  the  matter  to  offer  any  answer  to  the 
noble  Lord's  remarks ;  but  after  his  observations  on 
the  late  Governor  of  St.  Helena,  that  he  so  conducted 
himself  in  that  capacity  as  to  have  been  found  &ult 
with  in  every  part  of  Europe,  I  deny  that  such  was 
the  case;  the  charge  is  directly  false.  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe  behaved,  in  his  very  responsible  capacity,  in  a 
manner  highly  to  Ws  credit :  all  well-informed  persons 
on  the  Continent  of  Europe  knew  what  his  conduct 
was,  and  approved  it." 

A  day  or  two  afterwards  Lord  Teynham  made  the 
following  apology  for  his  unwarrantable  attack : — "  In 
rising  to  present  two  petitions  on  the  subject  of  tithes, 
I  beg  to  state — what  I  should  have  stated  more  ex- 
plicitly on  a  former  evening  (if  I  had  not  been  called 
to  order,  or  rather  interrupted,  upon  my  making  an 
observation  in  which  I  mentioned  the  name  of  that 
gaUant  officer  Sir  Hudson  Lowe)  —  I  now  beg  to 
state  that  it  was  not  my  intention  to  impute  im- 


Chap.  XXXI.    DUKE  OP  WELLIKGTOITS  TESTIMONY,       335 

proper  conduct  to,  or  to  make  any  reflection  upon, 
that  individual.  I  merely  used  the  name  of  that 
gallant  person  hypothetically,  in  order  to  show  the 
danger  of  placing  any  portion  of  his  Majesty's  subjects 
under  military  power,  upon  an  uncertainty  into  whose 
hands  that  power  might  hereafter  &11.  I  trust,  there- 
fore, that  the  friends  of  the  gallant  General  in  this 
House  will  believe — ^and  that  through  them  he  may 
be  informed — thdt  it  was  not  my  intention  to  bring 
any  accusation  against  him/' 

Sir  Hudson  Lowe  wrote  and  thanked  the  Duke  for 
his  prompt  and  generous  defence,  and  his  Grace  re- 
plied in  tie  following  note : — 

**  My  dear  General,  "  s.  Saye,  Feb.  21, 1833. 

**I  have  received  your  letter  of  the  20th.  I 
assure  you  that  I  considered  that  I  did  no  more  than 
my  duty  upon  the  occasion  to  which  you  refer  in  re- 
pelling a  very  gross  and  marked  insinuation  against 
an  oflBcer,  in  his  absence,  for  whom  I  entertained  the 
highest  respect  and  regard.  The  discussion  ended  in 
a  way  that  must  be  highly  satisfactory  to  all  your 
friends.    Ever,  my  dear  (General,  yours  most  feith- 

^^y*  "Wellington. 

"  LidnL-General  Sir  Hudson  Lowe.** 

Sir  Robert  Wilmot  Horton  was  apointed  the  new 
Governor  of  Ceylon,  and  Sir  Hudson  Lowe's  hopes  of 
preferment  were  at  an  end.  He  returned  to  England 
in  1831,  and  never  afterwards  had  any  public  employ, 
ment  or  received  any  pension.  In  a  memorial  he 
drew  up  in  1843,  after  alluding  to  the  state  of  in- 
activity in  which  he  had  been  kept  for  twelve  years, 
he  said, — *^  The  Government  of  the  island  of  Ceylon 
had  thrice  &llen  vacant,  and  the  chief  authority  in  the 


336  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXXI. 

Ionian  Islands  (where  my  local  services  at  their  libera- 
tion and  in  the  discharge  of  civil  and  military  duties 
subsequently  had  contributed  to  form  a  strong  claim 
for  re  employment)  ^  four  times,  during  the  period  of 
which  I  have  been  speaking.  Vacancies  had  also 
arisen  on  other  stations ;  but  on  none  of  these  occa- 
sions were  either  my  local  or  general  services,  or  any 
claim  arising  from  past  disappointments,  taken  into 
that  consideration  which  I  should  have  hoped  might 
have  been  deemed  to  be  their  due. 

"  The  several  commands  in  India  had  also  repeatedly 
fallen  vacant  during  the  above  period,  but,  although 
my  name  had  been  taken  down  as  a  candidate  for 
employment  in  that  quarter,  no  result  followed." 

Sir  Hudson  died  in  1844,  in  the  seventy-fifth  year  of 
his  age.  He  died  poor,  for,  although  while  Ck)vemor 
of  St.  Helena  his  salary  had  been  liberal,  amounting 
to  12,000/.  a-year,  the  expense  of  the  situation,  the 
high  prices  of  every  article  of  consumption  in  the  is- 
land, and  his  own  hospitable  mode  of  living,  allowed 
him  to  save  little.  He  therefore  left  no  provision  for 
his  family,  and  the  late  Sir  Robert  Peel  recommended 
Miss  Lowe,  the  unmarried  daughter  of  Sir  Hudson,  to 
the  Queen  for  a  small  pension  which  at  the  time  was 
at  his  disposal,  **  in  recognition  of  the  services  of  her 
father." 

'  Here  it  is  right  to  notice  what  was  omitted  in  the  Memoir  of  Sir 
Hudson  Lowe  in  chapter  iii.  of  vol.  i.,  that  he  received  from  the  inha- 
bitants of  Santa  Maura,  one  of  the  Ionian  Islands,  on  ceasing  to  be  its 
Governor  in  1812,  a  most  complimentary  address ;  and  also  a  sword  from 
the  Members  of  Council,  which  was  voted  to  him  in  the  following  flattering 
terms : — **  Per  caratterizzare  quindi  all'  adorabile  nostro  Lowe  nella  piii 
animata  ed  onorevole  forma  gl'  ingenui  sentimenti  della  viva  nostra  ricco- 
nosoenza,  orede  doveroso  il  Govemo  Provisorio  di  quest'  Isola,  doverglisi 
dedicare  a  nome  di  tutta  la  grata  popolazione  Leucadiense  mia  sciabla 
d'oro,  su  cui  con  simbolleggianti  configiirazioni,  ed  espressivi  emblemi  siano 
incisi  li  suoi  singolari  meriti  rapporto  a  noi,  nonch^  Ic  nostre  riconoscenti 
sensazioni.'* 


Chap.  XXXH.  REVIEW  OF  EVIDENCE,  337 


CHAPTER  XXXII. 

REVIEW  OF  THE  EVIDENCE  AS  AFFECTING  THE  BRITISH  GOVERN- 
MENT AND  SIR  HUDSON  LOWE. 

We  have  now  brought  our  narrative  to  its  close; 
but  it  may  perhaps  be  thought  neither  useless  nor 
irrelevant  briefly  to  review  the  evidence  that  has 
been  adduced,  and  say  a  few  words  as  to  its  result 
and  eflfect.  There  are  obviously  two  questions  to 
consider — questions  which  are,  in  themselves,  quite 
distinct,  but  which  the  public  have  been  apt  to  con- 
found. These  are,  first.  What  was  the  conduct  of  the 
British  Government  towards  Napoleon  Bonaparte 
when  his  surrender  at  Rochefort  placed  him  as  a  pri- 
soner in  their  hands  ?  and,  secondly.  What  was  the 
conduct  of  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  to  whom  was  com- 
mitted the  responsible  office  of  guarding  the  captive 
and  carrying  out  the  instructions  of  the  Ministry? 
The  Government  might  be  in  fault,  and  yet  Sir 
Hudson  Lowe  be  acquitted  of  all  reproach ;  or  again, 
they  might  be  blameless,  and  he  might  deserve  to  be 
condemned.  Let  us  separate  the  cases,  and  deal  with 
each  according  to  its  merits, 

I  have  already  endeavoured  to  show  that  the  as- 
sumption of  Napoleon,  that  his  surrender  was  volun- 
tary, and  therefore  that  he  had  a  right  to  be  treated 
as  a  guest  and  not  as  a  prisoner,  had  no  foundation  in 
fact.  He  had  but  a  choice  of  evils.  Escape  was  all  but 
impossible ;  and  the  only  real  alternatives  were,  either 
to  give  himself  up  to  one  of  the  hostile   powers 

VOL.  III.  z 


338  CAPnVITT  OP  NAPOLEON.        Chap.  XXXII. 

arrayed  against  him,  or  try  another  desperate  chance 
on  the  battlefield  with  the  broken  fragments  of  a  van- 
quished and  dispirited  army  against  the  combined 
forces  of  Europe.  If  he  were  again  beaten,  death  or 
surrender  was  inevitable,  and  what  sane  man  believes 
that  even  Napoleon  could  have  successfiiUy  contended 
with  such  tremendous  odds  as  were  against  him,  if  he 
had  attempted  to  retrieve  his  ruined  fortune  by  an- 
other battle  ?  He  weighed  the  counsel  of  the  devoted 
officers  who  were  willing  to  fight  for  him  to  the  last; 
but  he  saw  that  the  scheme  was  hopeless,  and  he 
rejected  it.  What  then  remained  ?  Nothing  but  sur- 
render. He  chose,  for  good  reasons  of  his  own,  the 
deck  of  a  British  man-of-war  as  his  place  of  refiige 
from  a  worse  calamity ;  but  this  act  of  his  gave  him 
no  more  rights  than  he  possessed  a  few  hours  before, 
when  he  was  still  deliberating  whether  he  should  not 
put  himself  at  the  head  of  the  army  behind  the  Loire, 
and  risk  the  chances  of  another  action  with  Wel- 
lington. No  denial  can  fiJsify — no  sophistry  can 
alter — this  fiskct  It  is  proclaimed  in  the  page  of  his- 
tory, and  that  page  must  be  torn  out  before  we  can 
admit  that  England  was  bound,  by  any  principle  of 
justice,  or  any  canon  of  international  law,  to  receive 
as  an  uninvited  guest  her  most  persevering  and  ran- 
corous enemy.  Rancorous,  indeed,  we  may  call  him, 
when  we  remember  the  proclamations  he  issued  to  his 
generals  and  armies  in  the  Peninsula.  They  were 
told  to  drive  the  "hideous  leopard"  into  the  sea, 
and  the  victor  at  Assye,  Vimiero,  Talavera,  and  Ba- 
d^jos,  was  contemptuously  designated  as  a  "sepoy 
general."  England  was  the  Carthage  which  the 
Scipio  of  France  was  to  destroy.  "  Cette  lutte  contre 
Carthage  sera  dScidSe  dans  les  plaines  des  Espagnes'' 
The  language  of  his  official  journal,  the  '  Moniteur,* 


Chap.  XXXIL  DUTY  OP  ENGLAND.  339 

was,  **  Gtod  grant  that  a  hundred  thousand  English 
may  present  themselves  before  us  in  the  open  field  I 
The  Continent  has  always  been  their  tomb  I" ;  and  it 
was  in  the  following  terms  that  he  addressed  his  Ad- 
mirals from  the  camp  of  Boulogne:  **QoI  lose  hot 
a  moment:  once  gain  possession  of  the  Channel  for 
twenty-four  hours,  and  England  is  ours.  We  shall 
then  have  avenged  six  centuries  of  insult  and  shame/' 
What  then  was  England  to  do  ?  Was  she  to  treat 
with  the  honours  due  to  a  crowned  head  and  give  an 
asylum  on  her  shores  to  him,  whom  she  had  only  a 
few  months  previously,  in  conjunction  with  the  Allied 
Powers  in  solemn  Congress  assembled,  denounced  as 
an  outlaw,  and  with  whom  she  and  they  had  sworn  to 
combat  until  the  disturber  of  the  world's  peace  was 
subdued?^  Something,  perhaps,  might  have  been 
said  for  this,  if  the  tide  of  time  could  have  been 
rolled  back,  and  the  events  which  followed  the  abdi- 
cation at  Fontainebleau  in  1814  had  been  forgotten. 
But  were  the  escape  from  Elba,  and  the  bloody  cam- 
paign of  Waterloo,  without  warning  and  significance  ? 
England  would  have  been  a  traitress  to  Europe,  if  she 
had  not  secured  the  person  of  Ns^leon  in  such  a 
way  as  to  render  any  outbreak  of  his  mad  ambition 
all  but  impossible.  But  this  could  not  have  been 
accomplished  if  he  had  been  permitted  to  reside  in 
Britain,  unless  we  had  kept  him  in  some  fortress  a 
closely-guarded  prisoner.  And  Napoleon  denied  our 
right  to  do  this.  His  claim  was  to  be  received  as 
a  guest,  and  as  such  of  course  he  would  have  been 
entitled  to  complain  of  restrictions  on  his  liberty. 

'  '*  Lee  Puissances  d^larent,  en  oons^uenoe,  que  Napoleon  Buona- 
parte 8*est  plac^  hors  des  relations  civiles  et  sociales,  et  que,  comme  ennemi 
et  perturl)ateur  du  repos  du  monde,  il  s'est  livr^  k  la  vindicte  publique." — 
Extract  from  the  Protocol  of  the  Congress  of  Viennoi^  March^  1815, 

z  2 


340  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.        Chap.  XXXn. 

Mere  anryeillance  would  have  been  a  mockery,  and 
no  custody,  short  of  that  which  the  stone  walls  of  a 
prison  aflForded,  would  have  been  secure.  The  danger 
of  proximity  to  France  was  not  now  a  matter  of 
opinion,  but  of  fact.  Experience  had  shown  that  the 
faith  of  treaties  could  not  bind,  nor  reverses  check, 
the  ambition  of  Napoleon,  The  hopes  of  every  nwd- 
content  in  France  would  have  turned  to  him  so  long 
as  his  return  was  a  possible  contingency;  and  the 
very  circumstance  of  his  near  neighbourhood  would 
have  given  birth  to  a  thousand  plots  for  the  overthrow 
of  the  Bourbons.  Nor  must  we  imagine  that  these 
plots  would  not  have  been  seconded  by  some  amongst 
ourselves.  Many  were  so  infatuated  as  still  to  look 
upon  Bonaparte  as  the  child  and  champion  of  the 
li^ench  Revolution,  which  they  defended  and  admired; 
and  his  place  of  residence  in  this  country  would  have 
been  the  rallying-point  of  disaffection  and  focus  of 
political  intrigue. 

The  British  Government,  therefore,  determined  to 
remove  Napoleon  far  from  Europe,  in  which  for  the 
space  of  twenty  years  he  had  kept  alive  the  flames  of 
war.  They  wished  to  grant  him  as  much  liberty  as 
was  consistent  with  safe  custody,  and  abridge  as  little 
as  possible  the  comforts  and  even  luxuries  to  which  he 
had  been  accustomed.  For  this  purpose  they  selected 
St.  Helena,  the  climate  of  which  was  healthy,  and  its 
situation  such  as  enabled  them  to  combine  the  re- 
straints of  confinement  with  a  due  regard  to  the  per- 
sonal convenience  of  the  exile.  It  was  a  place  which 
a  French  writer  had  described  in  1804  as  an  Isle  of 
Calypso— a  spot  worthy  to  have  given  birth  to  the 
(Joddess  of  Beauty — so  sunny,  cheerful,  and  healthy 
was  it  i  *    And  in  a  report  published  in  the  same  year 

*  Voyage  par  M.  Bory  de  St.  Vincent.    An  XIII.  (1804), 


QulP.  XXXII.  THE  IMPERIAL  TITLE.  341 

at  Paris,  by  order  of  the  First  Consul^  St.  Helena  was 
called  a  terrestrial  paradise,  where  ttie  air  was  pure 
and  the  sky  serene;  where  health  shone  in  every 
countenance,  and  diseases  contracted  in  India  were 
immediately  cured/ 

We  wish  not  to  avail  ourselves  of  the  plea  that 
Napoleon's  own  treatment  of  hie  prisoners  would  have 
justified  England  in  adopting  severer  and  sterner  mea- 
sures. We  hold  it  to  be  an  unworthy  argument  that  a 
great  nation  should  measure  its  sense  of  what  is  due 
to  a  fallen  foe  by  his  own  conduct  towards  others  in 
the  day  of  his  prosperity  and  power.  But  we  think 
that  complaints  of  our  injustice  and  cruelty  came  with 
a  bad  grace  fi*om  one  who  never  showed  commiseration 
or  indulgence  towards  those  whom  the  fortune  of  war 
threw  into  his  hands.  The  murder  of  the  Due  d'Eng- 
hien  was  an  act  which  would  have  made  the  harshest 
treatment  of  Napoleon  appear  to  be  only  a  measure  of 
righteous  retribution.  His  conduct  towards  the  Queen 
of  Prussia  showed  his  indiflFerence  towards  the  feelmgs 
of  the  unfortunate.  His  own  fevourite  maxim,  which 
he  more  than  once  repeated  at  St.  Helena,  was  that  la 
politioagitisti/ica  tutto — "  policy  justifies  everything  " — 
and  even  he  could  not  deny  that  this  plea  would  have 
entitled  us  to  deal  with  him  in  any  maimer  most  ex^ 
pedient  for  the  interests  of  Europe. 

The  next  question  is,  whether  England  ought  to 
have  accorded  to  Napoleon  the  imperial  title.  I  have 
already  expressed  my  own  opinion  that  it  would  have 
been  more  magnanimous  to  have  done  so,  and  that  we 
might  have  humoured  the  sensitive  pride  of  our  pro- 
strate enemy  by  allowing  him  to  retain  the  style  of 
appellation  to  which  he  had  been  so  long  familiar.  I 
know  not  whether  many  will  be  disposed  to  agree  in 

*  Se6  Pictorial  Hist,  of  EDgland,  vgl  iv.  p.  36. 


342  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.        Chap.  XXXIL 

this  view ;  but  it  is  only  feir  to  state  that  it  was  from 
no  narrow-minded  feeling  of  vindictiveness,  but  from 
grave  reasons  of  state  policy,  that  the  Britii^  Gk)vem- 
ment  came  to  a  different  conclusion.  They  thought 
that  they  could  not  without  inconsistency  grant  to 
Napoleon  when  vanquished  the  title  which  they  had 
steadily  refused  to  him  in  the  plenitude  of  his  power. 
They  had  carried  on  the  war  with  him,  not  as  the  Em- 
peror of  France,  but  as  a  successful  adventurer  at  the 
head  of  an  immense  army  which  coerced  the  will  of 
the  French  nation.  They  had  been  no  party  to  the 
treaty  of  Paris,  which  recognised  him  as  Emperor  of 
Elba,  for  Lord  Castlereagh  expressly  reftised  to  sanc- 
tion it  with  his  signature.  Louis  XVIII.  had  been 
received  in  France,  not  as  a  ruler  imposed  upon  the 
people  by  foreign  bayonete,  but  as  their  legitimate  and 
rightful  sovereign.  There  could  not  be  at  the  same 
time  an  Emperor  and  a  Eang  of  the  same  country, 
and  we  had  never  ceased  to  recognise  the  head  of  the 
Bourbon  family  as  King.  It  might  be  asked,  as  Sir 
Walter  Scott  in  an  able  argument  on  the  subject  has 
put  the  question,  "If  Napoleon  was  acknowledged 
Emperor  of  France,  of  what  country  was  Louis  XVUJ. 
King  ?  "  And  there  would  have  been,  to  say  the 
least  of  it,  an  awkward  appearance  of  discourtesy  to 
that  monarch  if  we  had,  by  giving  the  title  of  Empe* 
ror  to  Bonaparte,  seemed  to  sanction  what  Louis 
could  look  upon  only  as  an  usurpation  of  his  own 
rights.  Moreover,  the  English  Ministry  felt  that  the 
imperial  style  could  in  future  be  only  a  mockery  and 
a  sham  as  regarded  Napoleon  himself,  while  it  mi^t 
cause  serious  embarrassment  in  the  mode  of  dealing 
with  him  at  St.  Helena.  **His  purpose,"  says  Sir 
Walter  Scott,*  "in  tenaciously  claiming  the  name  of 

^  Life  of  Napoleon  Buonaparte,  yol.  ix.  p.  138. 


Chap.  XXXTL  THE  DIPEBIAL  TITLE.  343 

a  sovereign,  was  to  establish  his  claim  to  the  imma- 
nities  belonging  to  that  title.  He  had  already  ex- 
perienced at  Elba  the  use  to  be  derived  fix)m  erecting 
a  barrier  of  etiquette  betwixt  his  person  and  any  in- 
convenient visitor.  Once  acknowledged  as  Emperor, 
it  followed  of  course  that  he  was  to  be  treated  as  such 
in  every  particular ;  and  thus  it  would  have  become 
impossible  to  enforce  such  regulations  as  were  abso- 
lutely demanded  for  his  safe  custody^  Sudi  a  status, 
once  granted,  would  have  furnished  Napoleon  with 
a  general  argument  against  every  precaution  which 
mi^t  be  taken  to  prevent  his  escape." 

In  addition  to  these  reasons  it  was  thought  a  matter 
of  vital  importance  at  the  time  to  lessen  the  prestige  of 
his  name,  which  had  such  a  strange  influence  over  the 
minds  of  men,  that,  even  when  he  was  doing  his  utmost 
to  injure  England,  the  country  which  he  hated  most, 
he  found  apologists,  if  not  partisans,  in  the  ranks  of  the 
Opposition  in  the  British  Parliament  And  having 
once  come  to  this  decision,  the  Gh>vemment  resolved 
to  act  consistently.  They  refused  to  become  parties 
to  any  proposal  which  might  seem  to  keep  alive  his 
pretensions  to  the  title  which  they  denied  him.  It 
was  on  this  ground  that  Lord  Bathurst  directed  Sir 
Hudson  Lowe  not  to  encourage  in  Napoleon  the  idea 
of  assuming  an  incognito^  which  it  would  have  seemed 
invidious  to  refuse,  and  might  have  caused  some  em- 
barrassment to  allow.  The  conduct  of  the  English 
Ministry  towards  Napoleon  was  based  on  the  principle 
of  truth.  They  in  effect  said  to  him,  "  We  will  not, 
now  that  you  are  our  prisoner,  give  you  the  shadow  of 
a  crown,  when  we  have  constantly  opposed  your  claim 
to  the  reality.  You  renounced  tiie  title  of  First  Con- 
sul,  which  we  acknowledged,  and  you  assumed  another 
which  we  have  never  recognized.    We  will  not  suflFer 


344  CAPnVITT  OP  napoleon.        Chap.  xxxil 

you  now  to  mimic  the  forms  and  assert  the  privileges 
of  sovereignty  in  our  intercourse  with  you,  for  we 
have  never  reckoned  you  in  the  number  of  crowned 
heads."  These  are  reasons  which,  whether  they  be 
capable  of  refutation  or  not,  were  not  to  be  lightly 
disregarded,  and  they  are  such  as  made  the  English 
Government  determine  not  to  grant  the  style  of  Em- 
peror to  Napoleon. 

The  next  point  to  consider  is  the  actual  treatment 
of  Napoleon  while  under  the  guardianship  of  England. 
And  here,  when  all  the  facts  of  the  case  are  AiUy  and 
fairly  known,  it  does  seem  impossible  to  make  good 
any  charge  against  the  Ministry  of  the  day.  To  pro- 
vide effectually  against  his  evasion  was  an  essential 
condition.  But  having  made  this  point  secure,  Lord 
Bathurst  and  his  colleagues  showed  an  anxious  desire 
to  study  his  wishes  and  promote  Ws  comfort. 

They  required  indeed  that  he  should  be  accom- 
panied by  an  orderly  ofBcer  when  he  rode  beyond  the 
boundary  of  his  limits,  and  that  the  correspondence 
with  and  from  Longwood  should  pass  through  the 
hands  and  be  submitted  to  the  eye  of  the  Gk)vemor. 
But  what  was  there  unreasonable  in  this?  Let  it 
not  be  forgotten  that  active  minds  were  continually  at 
work,  planning  the  possibility  of  rescuing  the  captive 
at  St.  Helena.  A  dash  down  a  ravine,  and  the 
strokes  of  a  few  oars,  might  have  set  Napoleon  free,  if 
the  most  unremitting  care  had  not  been  taken  to  pre- 
vent secret  concert  and  intelligence  with  the  external 
world.  We  have  it  on  the  authority  of  Bertrand  that 
the  hopes  of  the  French  exiles  were  turned  to  America, 
and,  had  any  relaxation  of  the  stringency  of  our  watch 
rendered  the  design  practicable,  there  would  have 
been  no  lack  of  adventurers  ready  to  attempt  it>  who 
would  have  deemed  themselves  sufficiently  rewarded 


Chap.  XXXH.    HIS  TREATMENT  AT  ST.  HELENA.  345 

by  the  iclat  of  the  enterprise  if  it  had  proved  successftil. 
Many  a  romantic  scheme  was  formed  for  the  purpose 
and  abandoned.  But  why  ?  Because  it  was  known 
that  the  regulations  opposed  an  invincible  obstacle  in 
the  way  of  its  execution,  and  the  sleepless  vigilance 
of  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  was  not  to  be  deceived. 

But  a  range  was  given  to  Napoleon  within  which 
he  might  enjoy  all  the  privacy  of  retirement,  and  as 
much  freedom  from  restraint  as  he  could  possibly 
desire.  His  table  was  served  on  a  liberal,  and  even 
luxurious,  scale.  There  was  a  constant  supply  of 
expensive  wines.  Ten  or  twelve  saddle-horses  were 
kept  for  him  and  his  officers.  No  expense  was  spared 
in  rendering  the  house  at  Longwood  as  comfortable 
as  circumstances  would  allow,  although  we  freely 
admit  that  it  never  was  a  suitable  residence  for 
Napoleon.  This  the  Governor  always  felt,  and  he 
made  every  exertion  to  provide  a  better.  The  ma- 
terials for  a  new  house  were  sent  out  from  England 
as  soon  as  it  was  found  that  the  island  did  not  fiimish 
the  means  of  building  one  fit  for  his  abode.  The 
reiterated  instructions  of  Lord  Bathurst  to  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe,  contained  not  only  in  official  despatches  but  in 
private  letters,  were  to  show  his  captive  every  indul- 
gence compatible  with  the  security  of  his  person. 
Surely,  with  Lamartine,  we  may  call  this  a  respectful 
captivity,  although  it  was  characterised  as  a  martyr* 
dom ;  and  we  may  challenge  those  who  assert  that  the 
conduct  of  the  English  Government  was  wanting  in 
humanity  to  point  out  a  single  authentic  instance  by 
which  that  charge  can  be  supported. 

But  not  a  syllable  of  thanks  or  acknowledgment 
ever  passed  the  lips  of  Bonaparte.  The  system,  or, 
as  the  French  called  it,  the  policy,  at  Longwood 
was  to  keep  alive  a  spurious  sympathy  in  Europe 


346  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.        Chap.  XXXII. 

on  their  behalf  by  a  tale  of  imaginary  wrongs,  as 
if  the  English  Ministry  delighted  ta  mortify  their 
prisoner  by  a  series  of  mean  and  petty  persecutions. 
It  was  for  this  object  that  the  plate  was  broken  np 
for  sale — that  exa^erated  complaints  were  made 
when  the  provisions,  owing  to  some  accidental  n^ect 
of  the  purveyor,  were  either  deficient  in  quantity  or 
indifferent  in  quality — that  an  attempt  to  check  waste 
was  represented  as  parsimonious  thrift,  and  the  iron 
railing,  sent  fi*om  England  to  ornament  the  enclosure 
of  the  grounds  and  prevent  cattle  from  trespassing, 
was  designated  as  an  iron  cage.  And  let  it  not  be 
forgotten  that  every  shilling  expended  upon  the  esta- 
blishment at  Longwood  was  derived  from  the  taxaticm 
of  the  people  of  England.  Those  whom  he  had  never 
spoken  of  in  the  zenith  of  his  power  except  in  the  most 
opprobrious  terms — "  that  nation  of  shopkeepers," 
as  he  contemptuously  called  them — cheerfully  contri- 
buted a  portion  of  ^eir  wealth  to  alleviate  the  dis- 
comforts of  his  situation  and  minister  to  his  indul- 
gence. They  enabled  him  to  maintain  a  numerous 
retinue,  who  kept  up  around  him  the  formalities  of 
a  court,  and  served  him  with  the  ceremony  of  royal 
etiquette. 

That  he  might  have,  in  some  respects,  been  better 
off  at  Longwood  we  need  not  deny,  but  his  own 
obstinacy  exposed  him  to  gratuitous  annoyance.  He 
secluded  himself  in  his  chamber  and  enfeebled  his 
health  because  a  road,  which  he  had  never  used,  was 
for  a  time  withdrawn  from  his  limits,  and  he  persisted 
in  this  mode  of  life  long  after  he  knew  that  the  road 
was  open  to  him  as  before.  When  workmen  were 
employed  to  make  some  addition  to  his  rooms  he  com- 
plained of  the  noise  and  insisted  that  they  should  be 
dismissed.     After  the  removal  of  O'Meara  he  pre- 


Chap.  XXXTT.        CONDUCT  OF  SIR  H.  LOWE.  347 

ferred  to  suffer  illness  rather  than  call  in  a  medical 
attendant,  who  resided  at  Longwood  for  the  express 
object  of  watching  over  his  health.  He  displayed  a 
tenacity  of  purpose  and  obstinacy  of  will  which,  if  it 
had  been  shown  in  the  heroic  endurance  of  unavoid- 
able misfortune,  would  have  been  sublime,  but  which, 
when  employed  in  the  creation  of  grievances  and 
repulse  of  proffered  kindness,  was  only  contempt- 
ible. A  man  who  is  ingenious  In  inflicting  annoy- 
ance upon  himself  will  seldom  want  the  opportunity. 
He  may  generally  defeat  the  well-meant  intentions 
of  those  who  endeavour  to  mitigate  his  lot,  but  it 
is  hard  that  he  should  be  allowed  to  fasten  upon 
them  the  responsibility  of  his  own  self-imposed 
restraints. 

And  wherein  did  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  fail  to  carry 
out  the  humane  wishes  of  the  British  Grovemment  ? 
We  admit  that  his  manner  was  not  attractive,  but  he 
had  too  few  opportunities  of  personal  intercourse  with 
Napoleon  to  render  this  a  matter  of  any  moment. 
Indeed,  at  the  first  interview,  before  it  was  known 
that  his  sense  of  duty  was  as  rigid  as  that  of  Sir 
George  Cockbum,  the  impression  he  made  was  favour- 
able. "This  new  Governor  is  a  man  of  very  few 
words,  but  he  appears  to  be  a  polite  man,"  was  Napo- 
leon*s  remark  to  O'Meara,  And  here  it  is  only  fair 
to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  to  quote  fi'om  a  manuscript 
found  amongst  his  papers,  in  which  he  had  commenced 
a  narrative  of  the  events  of  his  government  at  St. 
Helena,  but  did  not  proceed  beyond  a  few  pages,  his 
own  account  of  the  feelings  and  temper  of  mind  with 
which  he  accepted  and  endeavoured  to  fulfil  the  duties 
of  his  arduous  task.  He  says,  "  I  may  truly  declare 
that  I  undertook  the  charge  intrusted  to  me  upon 
public  principle ;  for,  opposed  as  it  was  to  my  own 


348  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.        Chap.  XXXIT. 

inclination,  I  yet  made  no  stipulations ;  I  sou^t  no 
advantages;  whatever  was  granted  me,  whether  of 
military  distinction  or  pecuniary  stipend,  was  given 
unsolicited.  •  I  received  the  appointment  with  grati- 
tude, as  an  honour  conferred  upon  me,  although  an 
honour  attended  certainly  with  very  onerous  and 
anxious  duties,  and  I  hoped  to  justify  the  choice  of  my 

sovereign  by  my  conduct I  had  some  motives 

for  believing  that  I  could  render  his  (Napoleon's)  con- 
finement as  little  irksome  to  him  as  the  circumstances 
of  the  case  would  admit  of.  I  knew  his  country  and 
his  countrymen,  and  looked  upon  both,  not  only  with- 
out prejudice,  but  with  aflFectionate  regard.  I  recol- 
lect the  time  when  I  had  said  that,  if  I  were  not  a 
native  of  Great  Britain,  which,  could  it  be  a  matter 
of  choice,  would  be  my  first  wish,  I  should  be  proud 
to  be  a  native  of  Corsica."  And  again, — "I  trust 
that  it  will  clearly  be  seen  by  the  following  pages 
that  the  worst  charges  which  Napoleon  Bonaparte 
could  raise  against  me  were  an  insensibility  to  every 
instance  of  violence  which  he  showed  to  me,  and  a 
facility  at  detecting  the  motives  of  much  of  his  con- 
duct, which  were  unavoidably  mortifying,  because  he 
had  objects  in  view  of  deep  interest  to  him  in  many  of 
his  words  and  acts,  intended  to  appear  merely  as  the 
consequence  of  anger  and  intemperance. 

**I  trust  that  it  will  fiirther  be  evident  that,  if  per- 
secution  existed  at  St.  Helena,  /was  the  object  of  it ; 
and  that  it  was  often  moved  in  unsuspected  and  dis- 
tant quarters,  and  directed  by  unseen  and,  to  the 
world,  unknown  agents.  It  will  certainly  be  evident 
that  I  never  resented  this  treatment.  I  considered  it 
only  an  inconvenience,  although  a  serious  one,  be- 
longing to  the  appointment  which  I  had  accepted. 

"But  more  than  this  will  be  made  plain,  and  I 


Chap.  XXXII.      SCX)TT'S  'LIFE  OF  NAPOLEON.'  349 

hope  acknowledged  by  the  reader.  I  claim  credit  for 
haying  studiously  consulted  the  personal  convenience 
and  comfort  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte  and  his  followers. 
To  the  former  my  instructions,  as  well  as  my  inclina- 
tion, obliged  me  to  show  every  indulgence  consistent 
with  his  personal  safety ;  and  the  approval  recorded 
both  of  the  particular  acts  and  general  conduct  with 
which  I  executed  my  instructions  includes  a  direct 
testimony  that  I  did  treat  my  prisoner  with  the  in- 
dulgence which  the  British  (Jovemment  desired,  and 
his  situation  demanded.  The  occurrences  which  will 
be  presently  laid  before  the  reader  will  prove  that 
this  course  was  steadily  pursued  amidst  a  series  of 
provocations  and  intrigues  which  were  intended  to 
produce  treatment  of  an  opposite  character,  and  so  to 
give  real  cause  of  complaint,  for  purposes  which  it 
will  appear  were  of  more  importance  to  the  prisoner 
than  any  temporary  inconvenience  he  was  prepared  to 
suffer  from  measures  of  severity.  The  absence  of  all 
severity  was  his  real  grievance." 

Let  us  now  say  a  few  words  as  to  those  chapters  of 
Sir  Walter  Scott's  *Life  of  Napoleon'  in  which  he 
discusses  the  question  of  the  charges  brought  against 
the  Governor  of  St.  Helena.  After  mentioning  that  - 
the  correspondence  of  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  with  the 
British  (government  had  been  laid  open  to  him  by 
Lord  Bathurst,  he  reviews  under  two  separate  heads 
the  alleged  grievances  of  Napoleon ;  first,  as  they 
arose  out  of  the  instructions  of  the  Ministry ;  and 
secondly,  as  to  the  mode  in  which  those  instructions 
were  said  to  have  been  executed  by  the  Governor  of  St. 
Helena.  With  reference  to  the  first  point,  he  examines 
in  detail  the  instructions  and  regulations  consequent 
upon  them,  and  ably  vindicates  them  from  the  charge 
of  unnecessary  strictness  and  severity.    He  also  shows 


350  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.         Chap.  XXXH. 

that  the  complaints  of  the  French  at  Longwood  against 
Sir  George  Oockbum,  whose  conduct  has  been  fia^- 
vourably  spoken  of  by  the  historians  of  the  Captivity 
as  fair,  honourable,  and  conciliatory,  were  really  with- 
out foundation.  He  then  proceeds  to  consider  the 
character  and  conduct  of  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  and  it  is 
impossible  not  to  see  that  the  view  he  takes  is  upon 
the  whole  unfavourable.  "It  would  be  unjust,"  he 
says,  "  to  condemn  him  unheard  who  has  never  fairly 
been  put  upon  his  defence,  and  the  evidence  against 
whom  is  of  a  very  suspicious  nature ;"  and  he  admits 
*<  the  impossibility  of  producing  impartial  evidence  on 
the  subject  of  a  long  train  of  minute  and  petty  inci- 
dents, each  of  which  necessarily  demands  investigation, 
and  is  the  subject  of  inculpation  and  defence."  But 
the  impression  which  he  leaves  upon  the  mind  of  the 
reader  is,  that  some  of  the  charges  cannot  be  success- 
fully met  The  points  in  which  Sir  Walter  Scott  seems 
to  have  thought  that  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  fisuled,  were  a 
want  of  proper  command  of  temper  in  his  intercourse 
with  Napoleon,  and  a  want  of  steadiness  of  purpose, 
arising  from  an  oppressive  sense  of  the  importance  and 
the  difficulties  of  his  situation.  "  This  over  anxiety," 
he  says,  "  led  to  frequent  changes  of  his  regulations, 
and  to  the  adoption  of  measures  which  were  after- 
wards abandoned  and  perhaps  again  resumed.  All  this 
uncertainty  occasioned  just  subject  of  complaint  to  his 
prisoner ;  for  though  a  captive  may  become  gradually 
accustomed  to  the  fetters  which  he  wears  daily  in  the 
same  manner,  he  must  be  driven  to  impatience  if  the 
mode  of  them  be  altered  from  day  to  day." 

This  passage  conveys  the  idea  that  frequent  and 
harassing  changes  were  made  by  the  Governor  in 
his  rules,  and  that  his  conduct  with  respect  to 
them  was  marked  by  vacillation,  the  eflfect  of  which 


Chap.  XXXH.  THE  RESTRICTIONS.  351 

was  to  annoy  and  irritate  Napoleon.  And  if  such 
were  really  the  case,  he  must  have  infused  much 
needless  bitterness  into  the  cup  which  his  prisoner 
had  to  drink  ;  and  it  would  prove  him  to  haye  been 
very  unfit  for  the  delicate  office  which  he  had  to  per- 
form, and  which  in  so  peculiar  a  degree  required  a  firm, 
consistent,  and,  at  the  same  time,  conciliatory  course 
of  action.  But  is  it  true  that  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  did 
behave  towards  Napoleon  in  the  manner  imputed  to 
him?  Did  he  capriciously  and  vexatiously  change 
the  regulations  which  had  been  once  established? 
The  reader  has  before  him  in  these  volumes  all  the 
evidence  that  exists  on  the  subject,  and  he  can  deter- 
mine for  himself  how  far  the  allegation  is  correct. 
The  instances  cited  by  Sir  Walter  Scott  by  way  of 
example  are  two:  first — the  restriction  by  the  Go- 
vernor of  Ni^leon*s  limits  to  two-thirds  of  their 
original  space,  and  the  restoration  of  them  shortly 
afterwards  to  their  previous  extent;  and  second — 
the  relaxation  at  times  of  the  rule  which  required 
that  Napoleon  should  be  seen  every  day  by  an 
orderly  officer.  Let  us  consider  both  these  subjects 
of  complaint. 

The  original  limits  of  Napoleon  embraced  a  circuit  of 
twelve  miles.  Four  of  these  consisted  of  a  road  which 
descended  from  Longwood  into  a  ravine,  and  then, 
rismg  to  the  opposite  side,  ran  along  Woody  Ridge  to 
Hutt's  Gute.  The  ravine,  therefore,  was  within  the 
limits.  Li  it  were  numerous  cottages,  which  Napo- 
leon had  entered,  and  to  some  of  the  inhabitants  he 
had  given  money.  This  was  thought  to  be  an  objec- 
tionable practice,  and  the  only  mode  of  preventing  it 
was  by  either  interdicting  him  fi:t)m  the  ravine,  or 
making  aa  orderly  officer  accompany  him  in  his  rides. 
To  the  latter  plan  he  had  an  insuperable  aversion. 


352  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.         Chap.  XXXH. 

The  only  alternative,  therefore,  seemed  to  be  to  cat 
off  the  ravine  from  the  limits.  This  necessarily  cat 
off  also  the  road  along  Woody  Ridge,  which  coold 
be  reached  only  by  first  crossing  the  ravine.  Bat 
Niq)oleon  had  never  once  osed  that  road  since  the 
arrival  of  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  at  St.  Helena.  It  was 
therefore  thought  that  there  could  be  no  hardship  in 
excluding  it  from  the  limits,  in  order  to  get  rid  of  the 
diflSculty  about  the  ravine.  This  was  the  real  object  of 
the  Regulations,  as  altered  in  October  1816.  But  as 
the  policy  of  the  exile  at  Longwood  was  to  represent 
every  act  of  the  (Jovemor  as  an  oppression,  and  he 
complained  bitterly  of  the  loss  he  had  sustained  in 
not  being  allowed  to  ride  unattended  along  a  road 
which,  when  it  was  open  to  him,  he  had  never  once 
made  use  o^  Sir  Hudson  soon  afterwards  withdrew 
the  regulation  and  restored  the  road  to  the  limits,  ac- 
companying the  concession  with  a  request/  which  was 
(perhaps  not  unreasonably)  construed  by  Bonaparte 
into  a  command,  that  he  would  not  go  off  the  road 
while  on  horseback,  for  this  would  have  enabled  him 
to  visit  the  cottages  of  the  blacks  in  the  ravine,  and 
in  other  respects  have  fitcilitated  clandestine  meetings. 
The  restrictions  imposed  by  the  Governor,  in  respect 
of  the  limits,  were  these  and  no  more.  Every  sub- 
sequent change  was  in  Napoleon's  favour,  and  more 
and  more  space  was  afterwards  accorded  to  him,  until 
even  Montholon  warmly  thanked  Sir  Hudson  Lowe 
for  what  he  had  done  for  them.  Can  it  then  be  said 
that  his  cdnduct  towards  his  prisoner  in  this  matter 
was  such  as  to  justify  complaint  ?  and  did  he  need- 
lessly harass  Napoleon  by  frequent  and  capricious 
changes  in  the  limits  ?     Surely  all  that  is  required  to 

*  "  On  est  inviU  de  se  bomer  k  la  route  principale."    See  Letters  and 
Documents  in  vol.  i.  Na  46. 


Chap.  XXXH.  HIS  TREATMENT  IN  EXILE.  353 

vindicate  him  from  the  charge  is  to  state  the  facts 
truly  as  they  have  been  here  detailed. 

As  regards  the  second  of  the  two  instances  given  by 
Sir  Walter  Scott, — that  which  relates  to  the  rule  re- 
quiring the  orderly  oflScer  daily  to  see  Napoleon, — he 
himself  says,  **  Perhaps  the  Governor  may  be  in 
this  case  rather  censured  as  having  given  up  a  point 
impressed  upon  him  by  his  original  instructions,  than 
blamed  for  executing  them  too  strictly  against  the 
remarkable  person  who  was  his  prisoner."  It  would 
be  hard  indeed  if  the  considerate  conduct  of  Sir 
Hudson  Lowe,  in  conniving  to  a  certain  extent  at  the 
breach  of  the  rule  which  required  that  the  orderly 
officer  should,  once  every  day  at  least,  see  Napo- 
leon, were  to  be  made  a  matter  of  reproach  against 
him.  The  mere  omission  of  this  duty  at  certain 
intervals,  owing  to  the  almost  insuperable  difficulties 
thrown  in  the  way  of  its  discharge  by  Bonaparte  him- 
self, and  the  enforcement  of  the  rule  at  periods  when 
it  became  absolutely  necessary  to  ascertain  by  ocular 
evidence  the  presence  of  the  prisoner  in  the  island, 
must  in  all  fairness  be  attributed  to  motives  of  kind- 
ness and  humanity,  and  cannot  be  construed  into  a 
hardship  or  a  grievance.  There  never  was  a  time 
when  Napoleon  could  have  been  misled  into  the  belief 
that  the  regulation  was  abandoned ;  and  he  knew  per- 
fectly well  that  it  was  only  to  avoid  the  appearance  of 
rudeness  and  the  risk  of  actual  collision,  that,  when  he 
shut  himself  up  for  days,  and  even  for  weeks  together, 
in  the  privacy  of  his  chamber,  the  orderly  officer  did 
not  force  his  way  into  the  house  and  execute  the  com- 
mands imposed  on  him  by  his  instructions.  We  may 
therefore  dismiss  this  charge  as  one  that  is  unfounded 
and  untenable. 

Few  things  irritated  Napoleon  more  than  the  firm- 

VOL.  III.  2    A 


354  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.         Cha^.  XXXIL 

ness  of  the  Governor  in  not  allowing  any  correspond- 
ence to  pass  between  the  French  at  Longwood  and  the 
inhabitants  of  the  island,  unless  it  had  been  previoiKilj 
submitted  to  his  inspection.  But  in  this  Feq)ect  Sir 
Hudson  Lowe  had  no  option.  He  was  only  obeying 
the  express  and  positive  command  of  his  Government^ 
who  insisted  that  he  should  read  all  letters  written  by 
the  Exile  and  his  attendants  before  they  were  de- 
livered to  the  persons  to  whom  they  were  addressed. 
This  is  an  office  which  must  always  give  pain  to  an 
honourable  mind.  But  the  necessity  of  the  case 
admitted  of  no  alternative.  It  would  have  been  in 
the  last  degree  dangerous  to  permit  sealed  communi- 
cations to  take  place,  the  contents  of  which  were  un- 
known to  the  Governor.  Let  it  not  be  forgotten  that 
Napoleon  never  for  a  moment,  until  the  hand  of  death 
was  upon  him,  abandoned  the  hope  of  leaving  St. 
Helena-  I  have  said  that  I  do  not  believe  he  seri- 
ously entertained  any  plan  of  secret  escape,  but  this 
was  only  because  the  precautions  taken  to  prev^t  it 
rendered  it  hopeless,  if  not  impossible.  But  active 
partisans  were  at  work  in  Europe  and  in  America 
plotting  on  his  behalf,  and  his  eagle  eye  was  ever  on 
the  watch  scanning  the  horizon  and  looking  for  deli- 
verance. He  had  made  O'Meara  his  creature,  and 
through  him  established  communications  with  agents 
in  London.  To  prove  this  we  have  cmly  to  refer  to 
the  contents  of  tiie  intercepted  letters  which  were 
addressed  to  O'Meara  at  St.  Helena  under  a  feigned 
name ;  and  the  letter  from  the  Cape  of  Grood  Hope, 
written  to  the  same  person,  shows  that  some  clan- 
destine scheme  was  then  in  contemplaticm.  These 
volumes  demonstrate  that,  notwithstanding  all  the 
vigilance  of  the  English  (Jovemment  and  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe,  Napoleon  and  his  officers  were  able  to  corrupt 


Chap.  XXXII.     CALUMNIES  ON  SIR  HUDSON  LOWE.         355 

the  fidelity  of  persons  who,  for  the  sake  of  a  bribe, 
secretly  conveyed  documents  to  Europe.  The  kind- 
ness of  the  Governor  in  permitting  visitors  to  relieve 
by  their  presence  the  tedium  and  monotony  of  exile 
was  unscrupulously  abused ;  and  it  was  made  a  boast 
by  the  French  that  they  had  no  diflSculty  in  sending 
packets  of  letters  to  their  friends  with  whom  they 
wished  to  communicate.  Moreover,  let  it  not  be 
forgotten  that  immense  pecuniary  resources  were  at 
the  command  of  Bonaparte  in  Europe,  and  that,  if 
unrestricted  communication  had  been  allowed,  he 
might  from  St.  Helena  have  been  directing  a  vast 
conspiracy  for  another  revolution  in  France,  and  fur- 
nishing the  means  for  carrying  its  objects  into  effect. 

If  he  had  succeeded  in  making  his  escape  the  voice 
of  indignant  Europe  would  have  cried  shame  on  the 
lax  custody  of  England ;  and  who  would  then  have 
dared  to  vindicate  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  fix)m  the  charge 
of  culpable  remissness  and  gross  neglect  of  duty  ?  The 
case  was  well  and  forcibly  put  by  Lord  Bathurst  when, 
in  answer  to  Lord  Holland's  attack  upon  the  (Jovem 
ment  in  the  House  of  Lords  on  the  18th  of  March, 
1817,  with  reference  to  the  treatment  of  Napoleon,  he 
said,^ — "Let  them  suppose  that,  instead  of  sitting  to 
discuss  whether  a  little  more  or  little  less  restriction 
should  be  imposed,  they  had  thus  to  examine  Sir 
Hudson  Lowe  at  their  bar :  *  How  and  when  did  he 
escape  ?  *  *  In  the  early  part  of  the  evening  and  from 
his  garden.*  *  Had  his  garden  no  sentinels  ? '  *  The 
sentinels  were  removed/  '  Why  were  they  removed  ?  * 
*  General  Bonaparte  desired  it — they  were  hateful  to 
his  feelings ;  they  were  then  removed,  and  thus  was 
he  enabled  to  escape.'     What  would  their  Lordships 

»  See  vol.  ii.  p.  841. 

2  A  2 


356  CAPnVITT  OF  napoleon.        Chap.  XXXU. 

think  of  such  an  answer?"  And  what,  we  may 
ask,  would  Europe  have  thought^  if  escape  from  St. 
Helena  had  followed  the  escape  from  Elba,  and  Bona- 
parte had  reappeared  in  France  to  light  up  the  flames 
of  civil  war  and  involve  the  Continent  in  a  conflagra- 
tion? 

If  the  facts  contained  in  these  volumes  do  not  dis- 
prove the  charge  brought  against  the  Governor  of  St. 
Helena  of  unfeeling  harshness  in  the  discharge  of  his 
duty,  no  mere  assertion  can  or  ought  to  have  that 
effect.  It  is  not  difficult  to  account  for  the  impression 
which  has  so  long  prevailed  that  he  persecuted  his 
captive  with  gratuitous  annoyance,  and  showed  to- 
wards him  no  mark  of  civility  or  attention,  but  treated 
his  misfortunes  with  insult ;  for  it  is  the  studied  object 
of  the  works  of  O'Meara,  Santini,  Las  Cases,  and 
Antommarchi,  which  have  chiefly  formed  public  opi- 
nion on  the  subject,  to  convey  and  confirm  this  idea. 
But  is  not  the  very  reverse  of  this  the  truth  ?  Was 
not  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  rather  the  object  than  the  author 
of  insult  and  provocation  ? 

The  French  officers,  writing  under  the  eye  and  dic- 
tation of  Napoleon,  addressed  to  the  Governor  letters 
full  of  the  most  cutting  sarcasm,  as  if  for  the  very  pur- 
pose of  provoking  him  to  reply  in  a  manner  unbecom- 
ing his  position.  As  he  himself  once  said  in  a  letter  to 
Earl  Bathurst, — "  Where  the  attack  is  all  on  one  side, 
and  the  accuser  thinks  himself  at  liberty  to  use  every 
weapon  that  falls  under  his  hand,  fair  or  foul,  and  has 
a  shield  in  his  own  adversity  against  any  arm  but 
that  of  self-defence  being  raised  to  resist  his  blows, 
the  contest  has  every  advantage  for  him.*' 

Bertrand,  Montholon,  and  Las  Cases  gave  them- 
selves unbounded  licence  of  misrepresentation  in  their 
correspondence  with  him.    They  did  not  hesitate  to 


Chap.  XXXH.  CONCLUSION.  357 

distort  the  simplest  &cts,  aud  in  their  adroit  hands 
acts  of  kindness  were  made  to  assnme  the  appearance 
of  indignity  and  outrage.  When,  contrary  to  ihe  strict 
letter  of  his  duty,  he  allowed  presents  marked  with 
the  impress  of  an  imperial  crown  to  be  sent  to  Long- 
wood,  but  at  the  same  time  called  attention  in  cour- 
teous terms  to  the  irregularity  of  the  proceeding, 
what  was  Count  Bertrand's  reply  ?  *  "  The  Emperor 
was  surprised  to  find  in  your  letter  that  you  conceived 
it  was  your  duty  not  to  transmit  these  objects.  *  If  I 
acted,*  say  you,  *in  perfect  conformity  with  the  esta- 
blished rules,  I  ought  to  delay  sending  them.'  In  that 
case,  Sir,  you  would  have  done  well  to  withhold  them. 
.  .  .  The  Emperor  tmll  not  accept  of  fatxmrs  from  any- 
bodt/j  nor  be  indebted  for  anything  to  the  caprice  of 
any  one,  but  he  claims  to  be  made  acquainted  with  the 
restrictions  imposed  upon  him."  When  the  (Governor 
proposed  to  replace  a  temporary  tent  by  the  erection 
of  a  wooden  saloon  for  the  convenience  of  Napoleon, 
he  was  told  that  his  oflFer  was  a  mockery,  and  of  a 
piece  with  the  rest  of  his  conduct  since  he  had  been 
(Governor  of  the  island.  It  would,  however,  be  tedious 
to  go  through  the  catalogue  of  instances  where  his 
advances  were  repelled  with  contumely,  and  his  desire 
to  alleviate  the  discomforts  of  captivity  was  thwarted 
by  the  obstinate  conduct  of  those  who  dreaded  nothing 
so  much  as  the  having  no  grievance  to  complain  of. 
It  would,  in  feet,  be  giving  a  needless  epitome  of  the 
evidence,  which  must  be  fi*esh  in  the  recollection  of 
the  reader. 

One  word  in  conclusion.  It  has  been  hinted  to  the 
author  that  he  has  undertaken  an  ungracious  and 
unpopular  task: — ^ungracious,  because  it  may  have 

'  See  Tol.  ii.  pp.  154, 165. 


358  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Chap.  XXXII. 

the  appearance  of  apathy  towards  the  misfortunes 
of  Napoleon  to  record  the  littleness  of  his  conduct  at 
St.  Helena,  and  dispel  the  illusion  that  prevails  on 
the  subject  of  his  confinement  there ; — and  unpopular, 
because  the  public  have  made  up  their  minds  that  Sir 
Hudson  Lowe  was  unfit  for  the  oflBce  which  he  held, 
and  a  defence  of  him  may  involve  the  writer  who 
attempts  it  in  some  degree  of  odium. 

Even  if  it  were  so  I  should  not  be  deterred ;  but 
I  have  no  such  fears.  It  is  time  that  the  truth  should 
be  known,  and  it  is  never  too  late  to  repair  a  wrong. 
If  injustice  has  hitherto  been  done,  fix)m  the  want  of 
proper  information  and  a  too  ready  belief  in  the 
fictions  contained  in  the  works  which  treat  of  the  Cap- 
tivity, it  ought  to  be  a  source  of  pure  satisfaction  to 
any  man  to  be  the  means  of  remedying  that  injustice. 
I  have  too  much  confidence  in  that  love  of  fair  play 
which  is  one  of  the  characteristics  of  Englishmen,  to 
believe  that  they  will  be  unwilling  to  change  an 
opinion,  unfavourable  to  the  character  of  another,  so 
soon  as  it  is  made  clear  to  them  that  that  opinion  has 
been  formed  upon  data  which  are  incorrect.  The 
worshippers  of  Napoleon  may  be  offended  when  they 
see  the  heroic  proportions  of  their  idol  disappear; 
but  that  is  no  reason  why  the  veil  should  not  be 
drawn  aside,  which  has  hitherto  concealed  its  true 
dimensions  from  our  view.  It  must  not  be  allowed 
to  cast  its  shadow  over  the  reputation  of  others  whose 
only  offence  was  that  they  did  not  bow  down  to  its 
influence,  and  offer  the  incense  of  flattery  at  its 
shrine,  but  firmly  and  feithfiiUy  discharged  their  duty 
to  Europe  and  the  world. 


LETTERS  MD  DOCUMENTS, 


m  THE  NATUBB  OF 


PROOFS   AND    ILLUSTRATIONS. 


LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS, 

IN  THE  NATUBE  OF 

PROOFS  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS. 
No.  118. 

To  Lieut.-Gbnebal  Sib  Hudson  Lowe,  K.C.B. 

Sir,  Cobnial  Office,  Downing  Street,  Jan.  1, 1818. 

I  have  received  and  laid  before  the  Prince  Begent  your 
despatch  No.  89,  in  which  you  transmit  various  communications 
which  have  passed  between  yourself  and  Count  Bertrand  relative 
to  the  restrictions  imposed  upon  General  Buonaparte  and  the 
possibility  of  admitting  any  further  relaxation.  His  Royal 
Highness  is  happy  to  observe  that,  as  the  discusdon  originated 
in  your  offer  of  additional  indulgences  to  General  Buonaparte, 
so  it  has  been  marked  throughout  by  a  disposition  on  your  part 
to  adopt  any  arrangement  which  might  be  satisfactory  to  him, 
provided  that  it  afforded  no  essential  facilities  for  intrigue  or 
escape.  Nor  does  his  Royal  Highness  see  less  reason  to  ap- 
prove your  forbearance  in  passing  over  without  reply  or  com- 
ment those  parts  of  Count  Bertrand's  verbal  and  written  com- 
munications which,  whether  they  be  considered  as  the  effects  of 
his  own  irritation  or  of  that  of  General  Buonaparte,  were  as  little 
applicable  to  the  subject  under  discussion  as  they  are  on  other 
grounds  undeserving  of  any  serious  notice.  From  a  review  of 
the  papers  transmitted  by  you,  it  appears  that  the  complaints 
advanced  by  General  Buonaparte  against  the  restrictions  imposed 
upon  him  may  be  comprehended  under  two  heads : — 

1st.  He  complains  that  the  contracted  extent  of  the  limits 
within  which  he  may  take  exercise  unaccompanied  by  a  British 
officer,  and  the  posting  of  sentries  round  Longwood  at  sunset. 


362  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  No.  118. 

debar  him  from  taking  exercise ;  and,  2ndly,  that  his  interoourse 
with  the  inhabitants  is  subject  to  your  intervention,  and  his  cor- 
respondence with  them  subject  to  your  inspection. 

As  Count  Bertrand  has  admitted  that  the  first  head  of  ob- 
jection has  been  obriated  by  your  recent  extension  ci  bos  former 
limits  for  exercise,  and  by  tiie  other  arrangements  which  you 
considered  yourself  authorised  to  adopt,  it  is  not  necessary  that 
I  should  adyert  particularly  to  that  part  of  the  discission 
further  than  to  express  my  approbation  of  the  relaxation  in  this 
particular  to  whidi  you  haye,  out  of  regard  to  the  health  of 
Greneral  Buonaparte,  been  induced  to  accede. 

Considering  it,  however,  not  improbable  that,  notwithstand- 
ing the  acquiescence  of  Count  Bertrand  in  the  existing  arrange- 
ment with  respect  to  the  sentries,  the  posting  of  them  at  sunset 
may  again  be  brought  forward  as  a  cause  of  complsdnt,  I  deem 
it  advisable  to  acquaint  you  by  this  opportunity  that  the  utmost 
degree  of  indulgence  which  can  be  consented  to  would  be  to 
defer  posting  them  till  9  o'clock  during  the  heat  of  the  summer 
months,  and  that  only  under  the  condition  that  General  Buona^ 
parte  should  at  that  hour  be  seen  by  the  officer  at  Longwood, 
with  a  view  of  insuring  his  being  in  the  house  at  the  time  when 
the  guards  are  stationed  round  it. 

The  second  head  of  complaint,  viz.  the  restrictions  imposed 
upon  his  intercourse  and  correspondence  with  the  inhabitants, 
is  one  upon  which  there  can  be  but  little  prospect  of  satisfying 
all  the  pretensions  advanced  by  Count  Bertrand.  It  cannot 
escape  your  observation  that,  as  these  demands  cannot  be  re- 
presented as  interfering  in  any  way  with  his  taking  exercise,  his 
declaration  that  he  would  not  take  any  unless  they  were  con- 
ceded was  an  unworthy  attempt  to  abuse  the  interest  you  had 
taken  in  the  preservation  of  his  health.  With  respect  to  cor- 
respondence, I  confess  that  I  see  no  practicable  alternative  but 
that  of  adhering  to  the  regulations  already  in  force  or  admitting 
an  unrestricted  communication  between  General  Buonaparte  and 
the  inhabitants  on  all  subjects  and  for  all  purposes.  A  permission 
to  send  and  receive  sealed  letters,  whether  under  colour  of  private 
business  or  under  any  other  pretence,  is  incompatible  with  the 
situation  of  a  prisoner  of  war,  and  is  liable  to  the  greatest  ob- 
jections, as  such  a  relaxation  of  the  existing  rules  would  in  efiect 
be  to  abandon  one  of  the  best  securities  against  a  successful 


No.  118.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  363 

attempt  at  escape.  You  will  therefore  on  this  point  adhere  to 
the  instructions  under  which  you  have  hitherto  acted. 

With  respect  to  intercourse  with  the  inhabitants,  I  see  no 
matmal  objection  to  the  placing  it  upon  the  footing  recently 
suggested  hy  Count  Bertrand,  as  it  is  one  which  he  represents 
would  be  more  consonant  to  General  Buonaparte's  wishes.  The 
Count's  proposition  is  that  a  list  of  a  given  niunber  of  persons 
resident  in  ^e  island  should  be  made  out,  who  shall  be  at  once 
admitted  to  Longwood  on  the  General's  own  invitation,  without 
a  previous  application  being  made  to  your  Excellency  on  each 
invitation.  You  will  therefore  consider  yourself  at  liberty  to 
accede  to  the  suggestion  of  Count  Bertrand,  and  you  will  for 
this  purpose  direct  him  to  present  to  you  for  your  approbation 
a  list  of  persons,  not  exceeding  fifty  in  number,  resident  in  the 
island,  who  may  be  admitted  to  Longwood  at  seasonable  hours 
without  any  other  pass  than  the  invitation  of  General  Buona- 
parte, It  being  understood  that  they  are  on  each  occasion  to 
deliver  in  the  invitation  as  a  voucher,  with  their  names,  at  the 
barrier.  In  pving  your  approbation  to  the  list  you  will,  as  far 
as  is  conristent  with  your  duty,  consult  the  wishes  of  General 
Buonaparte ;  but  you  will  let  it  be  clearly  understood  that  you 
reserve  to  yourself  a  discretionary  power  of  erasing  from  the 
list  at  any  time  any  of  these  individuals  to  whom  you  may  have 
found  it  inexpedient  to  continue  such  extraordinary  facility  of 
access,  and  you  will  take  especial  care  that  a  report  be  always 
made  to  you  by  the  orderly  oflScer  of  the  several  persons  ad- 
mitted to  Longwood  upon  General  Buonaparte's  invitation. 

With  respect  to  the  visits  of  strangers  who  may  arrive  at  St. 
Helena,  General  Buonaparte  has  not  expressed  much  solicitude 
for  a  change  in  the  existing  regulations.  His  reluctance  to 
gratify  the  idle  curiosity  of  strangers  is  a  natural  feeling,  to 
which  every  attention  should  be  shown ;  and  it  is  satisfactory 
to  know  that  under  the  existing  regulations  the  General  is 
protected  from  all  rude  intrusions  of  that  description,  as  no 
stranger,  although  he  has  received  your  Excellency's  permis- 
sion, can  be  admitted  at  .Longwood,  unless  he  has  received 
that  of  the  General  also.  I  am  aware  that  in  giving  your 
permission  you  have  shown  great  delicacy,  but,  after  what  has 
been  again  stated  on  this  subject,  you  will,  I  am  sure,  be  in- 
clined to  be  still  more  select,  confining  the  permission  to  those 


364  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  No.  118. 

whose  situation,  character,  or  acquirements  are  such  as  to  render 
it  probable  that  General  Buonaparte  might  take  an  interest  in 
their  conya:^sation. 

It  only  remains  for  me  to  deure  that  you  will  take  propar 
opportunity  of  making  known  to  General  Buonaparte  the  &ial 
dJecision  upon  the  several  points  which  you  transmitted  hcnne 
for  consideration.  I  shall  be  ^cerely  happy  if  the  rdaxations 
which  you  have  already  made,  and  which  you  are  hereby  au- 
thorised to  make,  should  in  any  degree  tend  to  reconcile  Ge- 
neral Buonaparte  to  the  ^tuati<m  in  which  he  is  placed,  and 
induce  him  to  adopt  a  course  of  life  more  suited  to  hb  oomfcHrt 
and  his  health.  But  should  he,  as  Count  Bertrand  has  de- 
clared that  it  b  his  purpose  to  do,  dedine  taking  necessary 
exerdse  within  the  limits,  which  he  now  admits  to  be  adequate, 
unless  the  restriction  upon  his  corre^ndence  is  removed.  His 
Majesty's  Government  will  only  have  to  regret  that  the  attempts 
made  to  diminish  the  privations  to  which  he  is  necessarily  sub- 
jected should  be  firustrated  by  his  own  determination  to  impose 
upon  himself  restraints  much  more  severe  than  any  against 
which  he  has  most  vehementiy  remonstrated. 

I  have  the  honour,  Ac 

Bathubst. 


No.  119. 


LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS. 


365 


o> 


Mill 

m^    *»    ^   'O 


a  I  ?  8  -  *  4  f 

•5  •*  ♦*   rf  •:?   >»  33  as 


366 


CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON. 


No.  119. 


(fl^  g  a© 

•  J3  13  *  '2  2 

1 2  5 1 :  •" 
gl*-    - 

a"* 

§  §-3  §'3  ► 

a   ^  ^  ,a  Jq  .14 


^  S  3  I       B 


No.  H». 


LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS. 


367 


lulls 


lg§, 


II  ;l 


I 

I 

J 


{ 


n 

li 
|1 

ll 


lis 
fig 

Hi 

HI 


368 


CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON. 


No.  119. 


I 


2  ^  -3  2  f 
1  a  •?"' 


u:^% 


9>    «« 

•2  « 


ill's -g 


No.  119. 


LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS. 


369 


111  ^4 

ho  O   ^  S    9 

tM  ®  -^  J  ^ 

o 


fl  "g   « 


a   ^    u 


1 ^ 


Ho, 

•£  5  .a  ^ 
^^^.b  3  5  3 

5  -!  1 1  -!  §j  s 


3  3^33 


VOL.  III. 


370 


CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON. 


No.  119. 


g-oa 


I 

o 

'3 


I 


No.  119. 


LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS. 


371 


2  I  a 


'ii'M 


§8l 


S.  8   d 

11' 


•11 


•s  g  St  a  i 

Hill*- 

.a  S«s. 

2  -^  .«  S  5  I 
«  if  g>  i  i  m 


2  B  2 


372 


CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON. 


No,  119. 


1 


;        No.  119. 


LETOERS  AND  IXK^UMEOT^. 


373 


8:2^ 


.§  -§  ^  -s  § 


374 


CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON. 


a  9  §  -'  ^  ^ 


No.  119. 


II 11 II 


1-1 1 "  -  -5  « i  .  g 

|"£  a  s  s.«-Sl  §-5! 


If  I 


^  ;q'  .-  *-  -  0 

fl   d   o   «  ^  «S 

^  :S  ^  g  I  5  : 


No.  119. 


LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS. 


376 


ist 


IslJiill  I 


Slaf  IIP    ,;a 


376  CAPTIVITY  OF  KAPOLEON.  No.  130. 

No.  120. 
To  Earl  Bathukst,  K.G. 
My  Lord,  St.  Helena,  January  20,  1818. 

From  the  tenor  of  various  communications  I  have  re- 
cently had  the  honour  to  address  to  your  Lordship,  and  wherein 
I  have  had  occasion  to  speak  of  Mr.  O'Meara,  it  will  have  been 
readily  inferred  there  must  have  been  a  great  dissatisfaction 
experienced  in  more  than  one  instance  at  his  general  line  of 
conduct.  If  I  have  hitherto  omitted  bringing  forward  all  the 
circumstances  which  have  given  rise  to  the  above  feeling  in 
respect  to  him,  it  has  been  because  it  is  only  recently  I  have 
been  enabled  to  unravel  the  whole  chain  of  his  system  of  pro- 
ceeding, and  to  ascertain,  by  force  of  interrogatories,  those 
tan^ble  points  which  most  expose  the  principles  upon  which  he 
has  been  acting ;  and  because,  though  feeling  no  delicacy  for 
some  time  past  with  respect  to  removing  him  from  his  present 
oflSce,  upon  my  own  responsibility  alone,  founded  on  what  your 
Lordship  had  already  once  written  to  me  regarding  him,  I  felt 
the  real  diflSculty,  in  other  respects,  of  reconciling  this  act  with 
the  regard  and  consideration  which  might  be  thought  due  to 
Napoleon  Bonaparte ;  sensible  I  should  expose  myself  to  the 
moat  violent  clamour,  by  depriving  him  of  the  only  medical 
advice  in  which  it  would  be  stated  he  had  confidence,  and  the 
deprivation  of  which  might,  with  a  person  of  his  extremely 
obstinate  mind,  create  a  real  injury  to  his  health  in  the  state 
he  now  is.  The  evil  of  his  stay  I  have  not,  however,  in  any 
degree  been  less  sensible  of;  but»  it  is  quite  certain  Napoleon 
Bonaparte  would  at  present  reject  any  medicaJ  oflScer  recom- 
mended by  me,  whilst,  if  he  was  peiroitted  himself  to  make  a 
selection,  it  might  only  double  any  mischief  that  may  spring 
from  the  communications  he  has  had  with  the  present  one; 
and  so  long  therefore  as  there  appeared  to  me  the  possibility  of 
reconciling  the  stay  of  Mr.  0*Meara  with  any  regard  to  the 
interests  of  the  public  service,  any  change  which  did  not  well 
provide  against  a  recurrence  of  the  same  inconvenience  (whilst 
it  might  on  the  other  hand  lead  to  greater,  on  accoimt  of  the 
complaints  th^t  would  arise  if  a  specific  cause  was  not  assigned 
for  his  removal)  presented  no  decisive  advantage.    As  matters^ 


No.  120.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  377 

however,  how  stand,  I  should  imagine  his  removal  may  take 
pla^e  consistent  with  the  opinion  of  all  parties,  and,  so  far  as  I 
am  individually  concerned,  I  am  willing  to  expose  myself  to  all 
the  responsibility,  and  inconvenience  at  the  same  time,  which 
may  attach  to  my  recommendation  of,  or  even  decision  on  it. 

I  shall  now  take  a  review  of  Mr.  O'Meara's  line  of  proceed- 
ing from  the  first  period  of  my*  acquaintance  with  him.  The 
opinion  given  to  me  of  him  by  Rear-Admiral  Sir  George  Cock- 
bum  was  much  in  his  favour.  The  punctuality  and  attention 
of  his  communications,  and  the  readiness  with  which  he  gave 
information  of  everything  which  occurred  under  his  observation 
at  Longwood,  evinced  to  me,  that,  though  attached  to  Napoleon 
Bonaparte  more  apparently  as  his  own  domestic  surgeon  than 
as  one  placed  near  him  by  the  British  Government,  he  con- 
sidered his  duties  as  a  British  officer  towards  the  latter  para- 
mount to  every  other  consideration.  Certain  views,  however, 
which  I  had  taken  of  his  character,  would  still  have  induced 
me  to  remove  him  upon  my  arrival  at  this  island,  had  not  the 
decided  repulse  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte  to  receiving  the  advice 
of  Mr.  Baxter,  and  the  suspicions  insinuated  that  I  was  sent 
out  here  to  poison  him,  proved  the  difficulty  I  should  have  to 
encounter  in  placing  any  other  person  than  Mr.  O'Meara  near 
him.  Mr.  O'Meara's  conduct  gave  me  no  cause  to  repent  of 
my  not  removing  him,  nor  was  my  attention  particularly  called 
to  any  particular  act  of  his  until  I  had  the  honour  of  receiring 
your  Lordship's  letter  of  the  12th  of  July,  1816,  enclosing*  a 
copy  of  a  letter  which  had  appeared  in  the  Portsmouth  news- 
paper. My  proceedings  in  this  case  have  been  already  reported 
to  your  Lordship.  The  communication  I  had  with  him  on  this 
occasion  brought  forward  the  avowal  that  he  had  suffered  Count 
Montholon  to  leave  a  copy  of  his  letter  to  me  with  him,  and 
that  it  had  been  in  his  possession  for  some  days.  His  excuses 
and  arguments  did  not  in  any  degree  exculpate  him  from  this 
act,  which  gave,  on  the  contrary,  the  strongest  suspicion  he  was 
rendering  his  aid  to  the  promidgation  of  the  contents  of  that 
letter ;  but  his  delivering  of  it  to  me,  and  the  communication  at 
the  same  time  of  a  **  secret  and  confidential  letter,"  addreseed 
to  him  from  a  person  in  the  Admiralty,  encoura^ng  his  writing 
to  England  relations  of  his  conversations  with  Napoleon  Bona- 
parte, with  the  alarm  he  appeared  to  be  in  at  having  accepted 


378  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  No.  120. 

Count  Montholon's  letter,  seemed  to  oflTer  some  pledge,  in  the 
discovery  that  had  been  made,  for  his  future  more  correct  line 
of  proceeding.  His  conduct  for  a  long  time  subsequent  was 
conformable  to  this  expectation ;  and  your  Lordship  will  have 
received  various  communications  on  subjects  of  great  interest 
which  it  might  have  been  difficult  to  obtain  through  any  other 
channel.  They  came  to  me,  I  wish  to  observe,  generally  unso- 
licited, verbally  repeated  by  Mr.  O'Meara  in  the  first  instance, 
and,  when  afterwards  conunitted  to  writing,  always  done  for  the 
purpose,  as  I  acquainted  him,  of  being  sent  home,  very  few  indeed 
being  the  subjects  of  conversation  introduced  betwixt  him  and 
Napoleon  Bonaparte  that  sprang  from  any  suggestion  whatever 
of  mine ;  and  amongst  all  the  letters  of  which  I  have  addressed 
copies  to  your  Lordship  from  Mr.  O'Meara,  not  one,  as  I 
believe  (except  those  where  it  is  so  expressed  to  have  been 
done),  has  thus  originated,  though  a  reference  to  my  desire  of 
his  relating  in  writing  (to  which  he  never  offered  iiie  slighest 
objection,  but,  on  the  contrary,  appeared  gratified  with  the  idea 
of  their  being  transmitted  with  his  name  to  England)  what  he 
had  before  verbally  informed  me  of  may  be  frequentiy  found 
in  them. 

It  was  shortly  before  and  during  the  time  of  Count  Las 
Cases'  separation  from  Longwood  Mr.  O'Meara's  communica- 
tions were  most  frequent ;  but  it  was  at  this  time  also  the  prin- 
ciples by  which  he  was  guided  began  to  create  the  strongest 
doubt.  I  had  required  him  to  present  a  report  of  the  state  of 
health  of  the  son  of  Count  Las  Cases ;  he  presented  me  one, 
recommending  he  should  be  sent  to  Europe,  drawn  out  evidently 
in  the  spirit  and  designs  entertained  at  Longwood ;  it  occa- 
sioned two  questions  from  me,  which  were  answered  by  another 
letter  equally  in  the  same  strain.  It  was  impossible  to  misun- 
derstand the  view  with  which  these  reports  were  written ;  and, 
having  had  some  conversation  with  him  upon  them,  he  was  led 
to  draw  out  a  report  more  analogous  to  the  strict  line  of  his 
medical  duty.  It  was  of  this  latter  report  a  copy  was  trans- 
mitted to  your  Lordship  with  my  general  ones  respecting  Count 
Las  Cases.  I  need  only  enclose  a  copy  of  the  first  reports 
addressed  to  me,  and  request  your  Lordship  to  compare  them 
with  that  of  which  I  transmitted  the  copy  to  your  Lordship,  to 
point  out  how  much  Mr,  O'Meara  was  then  rendering  himself 


No.  120.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  379 

the  instrument  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte's  views,  and  how  strongly 
he  was  advocating  the  ground  upon  which  the  representations 
of  Count  Bertrand  and  Mr.  O'Meara  have  been  recently  made 
to  me  with  so  much  force  respecting  the  state  of  Napoleon 
Bonaparte's  own  health.  I  might  have  been  justified  in  remov- 
ing him  upon  the  receipt  of  these  reports,  viewing  the  spirit  in 
which  the  first  were  written;  still,  to  lay  restraint  upon  his 
medical  opinions  in  a  case  where  the  persons  he  was  attending 
were  speaking  of  life  and  death,  at  the  moment  when  also  there 
was  ground  for  real  anxiety  regarding  them,  would  appear  an 
obnoxious  measiure.  It  was  besides  precisely  at  this  moment 
Mr.  O'Meara  presented  himself  to  me  as  the  proposer  of  an 
intermediation  between  Napoleon  Bonaparte  and  myself  through 
Rear-Admiral  Sr  Pulteney  Malcolm ;  that  Napoleon  Bonaparte 
was  in  the  most  humble  and  submissive  mood  he  had  shown 
himself  since  my  arrival ;  and  that  a  severe  blow  was  at  the 
same  time  experienced  by  him  at  the  removal  of  Count  Las 
Cases.  He  was  at  this  time  also  ill,  and  to  have  removed  Mr. 
O'Meara  from  him  upon  such  a  ground  as  that  above  referred 
to  was  not  even  practicable.  The  intermediation  proposed  by 
Mr.  O'Meara  fell  to  the  ground  from  causes  which  are  here 
briefly  mentioned.  The  principal  hindrances  on  my  mind 
were, — Istly,  The  remarks  Napoleon  Bonaparte  made  on  my 
first  answer  to  his  proposal,  which  Mr.  O'Meara  took  down  in 
writing  and  brought  me  a  copy  of,  being  in  a  style  and  spirit 
quite  repugnant  to  his  first  communication ;  2ndly,  The  obser- 
vations communicated  to  me,  rigned  in  the  name  of  Napoleon, 
upon  the  regulations  of  the  9th  of  October,  concluding  with  an 
assertion  of  downright  and  positive  falsehood,  which  I  had  for- 
tunately the  opportunity  of  proving  to  be  so,  by  having  seen  a 
few  days  before  a  relation  of  the  circumstances  to  which  it 
referred,  given  in  a  directly  opposite  manner  in  a  journal  kept 
by  Count  Las  Cases  under  the  direction  of  Napoleon  Bona- 
parte himself.  I  felt  fiiUy  persuaded  besides,  from  other  causes, 
it  was  a  relief  from  restraint,  and  not  reconcilement,  that  was 
sought  after ;  that  the  one  would  not  follow  without  a  sacrifice 
of  my  duty  on  the  other ;  and,  haviog  rescinded  the  regulations 
most  complained  of,  and  taken  up  tny  stand  upon  those  where 
I  could  not  yield  any  further,  until  I  had  replied  to  the  obser- 
vations presented  to  me  (in  breach,  as  it  appeared  to  me,  of  the 


380  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  No.  120. 

original  proposal  Mr.  O'Meara  brought),  I  determined  to  let 
matters  take  their  ordinary  course.  Mr.  O'Meara,  who  was 
very  solicitous  the  intermediation  ^ould  proceed,  came  fre- 
quently backwards  and  forwards  to  me  upon  this  matter,  saying 
Napoleon  Bonaparte  did  not  want  me  to  make  any  reply  to  his 
observations,  that  he  had  merely  sent  them  for  my  information ; 
but  I  did  not  choose  such  a  paper  dK)uld  go  without  an  answer. 
As  for  intermediation,  there  could  be  no  necessity  for  it  in 
what  I  might  myself  be  disposed  to  yield  without  it,  and  to  this 
opinion  Napoleon  Bonaparte  himself  assented ;  I  had  sufficient 
motive  therefore  in  this,  and  in  the  remarks  and  observations  of 
Napoleon  Bonaparte  before  adverted  to,  for  not  following  the 
course  which  he  and  Mr.  O'Meara  had  wished  me  to  pursue, 
the  result  of  which  I  was  well  persuaded  could  produce  no 
advantage  to  me,  whilst  it  might  ^ve  rise  to  false  hopes,  and 
create  consequent  disappointment,  to  Napoleon  Bonaparte  him- 
self. As  Mr.  O'Meara  has  appeared  ance  the  departure  of 
Rear- Admiral  Sir  Pulteney  Malcolm  to  lay  great  stress  on  my 
not  having  gone  on  with  the  negociation  of  which  he  was  the 
first  proposer,  I  have  on  this  account  introduced  the  above 
remarks  regarding  it. 

Early  in  the  month  of  June,  1817,  happening  to  go  to  Long- 
wood,  and  seeing  Mr.  O'Meara,  he  related  to  me  a  piece  of 
news  of  which  he  had  just  informed  Napoleon  Bonaparte, 
respecting  the  dissolution  of  the  French  Chambers  A  vessel 
had  arrived  from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  and  Sir  Pulteney 
Malcolm  had  sent  me  a  Cape  newspaper,  containing  the  account 
of  Lord  Exmouth's  victory,  but  no  other  paper  was  mentioned, 
nor  any  other  news;  I  learnt  however  he  had  received  an 
English  paper  of  late  date.  I  wrote  a  note  to  him,  of  which  a 
copy,  with  the  answer,  is  enclosed.  I  hoped,  by  the  mode  of 
suggestion  adopted  in  my  note  to  the  Admiral,  to  attain  the 
object  I  had  in  view  without  speaking  to  Mr.  O'Meara  himself. 
I  found  afterwards,  however,  Mr.  O'Meara  still  continued  in 
the  habit  of  delivering  papers  to  Napoleon  Bonaparte  which  he 
had  received  from  Sir  Pulteney  Malcolm.  Captain  Poppleton, 
the  orderly  officer,  had  been  also  requested  to  deliver  some, 
and  referred  to  me.  I  caused  it  to  be  communicated  to  him  as 
a  general  rule,  without  reference  to  the  name  of  any  particular 
individual,  that  he  was  to  deliver  no  papers  but  those  whidi 


No.  120.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  381 

came  througb  me.  He  mentioned  this  order  to  Mr.  O'Meara, 
who  still,  however,  continued  upon  his  own  authority  to  deliver 
papers  which  he  had  received  from  the  Admiral ;  but  having 
upon  one  occasion  thought  fit  to  carry  up  with  him  two  papers 
of  a  later  date  than  any  I  had  myself  received,  which  the  post- 
master had  shown  to  the  Admiral,  and  then  delivered  to  Mr. 
O'Meara,  I  thought  further  delicacy  was  out  of  season,  and 
spoke  both  to  the  postmaster  and  Mr.  CMeara  very  particu- 
larly on  the  subject.  They  attempted  to  justify  themselves  on 
the  ground  that  such  things  had  been  permitted  to  be  done 
during  the  time  of  Sir  George  Cockbum,  without  referring  to 
the  want  of  analogy  between  his  particular  situation  and  that  of 
his  naval  successor.  Upon  this  occasion  I  particularly  questicmed 
Mr.  O'Meara  upon  the  mode  in  which  he  had  commimicated 
the  news  about  the  dissolution  of  the  French  Chambers.  It 
was  impossible  to  obtain  from  him  any  direct  reply ;  that  is, 
whether  he  delivered  the  paper  which  contained  the  news  to 
Napoleon  Bonaparte,  or  merely  repeated  it  from  memory  (the 
difierence  not  material  when  it  is  considered  that  the  news  was 
mentioned  to  Napoleon  Bonaparte  before  it  was  made  known  to 
me).  The  whole  I  could  obtain  from  him  was,  he  could  not  say 
positively  that  he  had  not  delivered  the  paper.  He  did  not 
know  in  what  newspaper  he  had  seen  it,  but  had  delivered 
newspapers  which  he  had  received  from  the  Admiral  on  that 
same  day  to  Napoleon  Bonaparte, — Portsmouth  ones.  Napoleon 
Bonaparte,  upon  the  question  from  Mr.  O'Meara,  thought  it 
was  verbally  he  had  heard  the  news ;  Count  Montholon  thought 
he  first  saw  it  in  the  *  Tunes ;'  in  short,  the  memory  of  all  had 
failed  on  this  occasion ;  and  Sir  Pulteney  Malcolm  himself,  who 
had  stated  to  me  in  the  first  instance  that  the  paper  which  con- 
tained the  news  (a  Scotch  one)  had  been  mislaid,  afterwards 
informed  me  he  had  destroyed  it,  on  account  of  a  letter  which 
had  appeared  in  the  same  paper  fit)m  an  officer  of  his  ship, 
which,  as  it  was  written  from  this  island,  it  would  have  been 
improper  I  should  have  seen. 

To  discuss  such  matter  with  Mr.  O'Meara,  who  was  a  naval 
surgeon,  borne  as  supernumerary  of  the  Admiral's  ship,  or  with 
the  Admiral  himself,  your  Lordship  will  feel  must  have  been  a 
matter  of  great  delicacy ;  but  it  was  invariably  latterly  in  such 
kind  of  dilemmas  I  found  myself  placed.    Upon  the  newspapers 


382  CApnvnr  of  kapoleox.  ko.  120. 

arriTiDg  here  with  the  reports  of  your  Lordship's  speech  in  Par- 
liament, Mr.  O'Meara  came  ahnort  immediately  afterwards  to 
me  to  commonicate  the  remarks  whidi  Napoleon  Bonaparte  had 
made  upon  it.  Upon  questioning  him  if  he  had  repeated  them 
anywhere  else,  he  said,  ^  At  the  Admirar$"  confining  himself 
however,  as  he  informed  m^  to  the  mere  mention  of  Nap<deon 
Bonaparte  having  said  tbefe  were  untruths  in  the  speech.  I 
blamed  him  for  having  repetited  the  remark  at  all ;  he  evinced 
great  insensibility  to  my  observations  in  this  as  well  as  in  every 
other  instance  since  the  occasion  of  his  delivering  up  to  me 
Count  Montholon's  letter,  when  he  appeared  in  some  d^ree 
sensible  of  the  error  he  had  committed, — ^latterly,  however, 
affecting  to  treat  it  as  a  trifle,  and  justifiable  on  the  mere 
ground  of  curiosity  alone.  I  am  thus  particular  in  referring 
to  the  above  circumstances,  as  I  conceive  they  have  had  a 
decided  influence  upon  the  line  of  conduct  Mr.  O'Meara  has 
been  since  pursuing,  trusting  to  a  degree  of  support  in  a 
channel  where  finally  I  feel  certain  it  will  be  found  to  fail  him, 
particularly  when  a  knowledge  is  obtained  of  the  circumstances 
which  will  be  hereafter  referred  to. 

The  next  instance  to  notice  was  on  my  receiving  Count  Ber- 
trand's  letters  in  the  month  of  July  last,  when,  observing  the 
falsity  of  some  information  they  had  received  at  Longwood 
respecting  my  preventing  the  man  who  had  brought  the  bust 
of  Napoleon  Bonaparte's  son  ft*om  landing  on  the  island,  I 
requested  Mr.  O'Meara  to  ascertain  by  whom  such  information 
had  been  ^ven,  saying,  at  the  same  time,  I  had  received  two 
very  extraordinary  letters  from  Count  Bertrand,  which  I  feared 
would  compel  me  to  take  some  strong  measure  regarding  him, 
but  not  charging  him  to  repeat  this  at  Longwood ;  on  the  con- 
trary, desiring  him  to  confine  himself  solely  to  the  inquiry  I 
had  requested  him  to  make  as  to  the  person  who  had  given  the 
information.  Mr.  O'Meara  on  this  occasion  expressed  his 
regret  I  had  not  gone  on  with  the  intermediation  he  had  pro- 
posed through  Sir  Pulteney  Malcolm,  and  brought  forward,  to 
my  surprise,  several  arguments  to  prove  I  ought  to  have  done 
so.  He  spoke  also  very  freely  upon  other  points, — of  your 
Lordship's  speech  in  Parliament,  of  no  answer  having  arrived 
to  the  proposal  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte's  assuming  an  incognita 
name,  of  his  complaints  about  the  restrictions  he  was  under, — 


No.  120.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  383 

the  whole  matter  of  which,  except  in  what  relates  to  the  pro- 
posal about  assuming  an  incognita  name,  which  was  not  again 
brought  forward,  will  be  found  fiilly  detailed  in  various  conver- 
satiouQ  where,  to  obtain  a  knowledge  of  his  opinions  and  senti- 
ments, or  rather  of  those  entertained  at  Longwood  (which  he 
appeared  to  me  only  to  repeat),  I  renewed  the  topics  with  him 
until  I  was  enabled  to  fully  develop  the  train  of  argument  and 
thinking  which  influenced  his  line  of  conduct.  The  memo- 
randa^ which  accompany  this  letter  give  every  detail  on  the 
subject.  Your  Lordship  will  not  fail  to  observe  in  the  earliest 
of  them  the  insidious  manner  in  which  Mr.  O'Meara  obtained 
my  reception,  as  from  himself,  of  a  paper  in  which  he  had  taken 
down  some  grossly  insulting  expressions  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte 
in  respect  to  me,  and,  after  hearing  my  remarks  upon  it,  car- 
ried ihese  back  as  a  reply  to  him ;  when  on  my  seeing  Mr. 
O'Meara  the  next  day  he  acquainted  me  that  Napoleon  Bona- 
parte had  charged  him  to  deliver  this  paper  to  me,  wishing 
then  to  make  it  a  matter  of  official  communication  by  suggest- 
ing I  should  address  Coimt  Bertrand  upon  it.  It  was  upon  this 
occasion  I  declared  to  him  he  had  not  my  authority  for  con- 
versing with  Napoleon  Bonaparte  on  any  other  subject  than  his 
medical  duties ;  that  I  did  not  order  him  not  to  reply  when  he 
spoke  to  him,  but  he  must  in  such  case  act  upon  his  own  respon- 
sibility. Your  Lordship  will  also  observe  the  indifference  marked 
by  Mr.  O'Meara  in  respect  to  continuance  in  his  situation,  ap- 
pearing to  me  in  fact  frequently  to  act  upon  a  system  of  pro- 
vocation which  might  compel  me  to  a  forcible  removal  of  him. 
To  all  hints,  however,  of  his  desire  or  his  readiness  to  quit  his 
situation  I  always  replied  by  saying,  if  he  would  write  to  me  on 
the  subject  and  apply  to  be  removed  I  would  take  it  into  con- 
sideration, but  would  act  upon  no  verbal  communication. 

The  avowal  of  the  pledges  ^ven  to  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  and 
their  concealment  from  me,  which  forms  the  subject  of  a  further 
report,  will  however  present  the  best  means  to  form  a  conclu- 
sive judgment  upon  the  whole  of  Mr.  O'Meara's  proceedings. 

I  have  the  honour,  &c., 

H.  Lowe. 


*  Notes  of  the  Governor's  conversations  with  O'Meara  in  July,  August, 
and  October,  1817,  and  in  January,  1818. 


384  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  No.  121,  122. 

No.  121. 

To  Likut.-Genekal  Sir  H.  Lowe,  K.C.B. 
(Private.) 
My  dear  Sir,  Downing  Street,  January  23,  1818. 

You  had  some  time  since  occasion,  in  a  private  letter  to 
Lord  Bathurst,  tq  allude  to  a  correspondence  carried  on  by  Dr. 
O'Meara  with  an  individual  in  the  Admiralty,  the  object  of 
which  was  to  convey  to  this  country,  otherwise  than  through 
your  intervention,  reports  of  the  conduct  and  observations  of 
General  Buonaparte,  so  far  as  they  were  of  a  nature  to  excite 
interest.  Lord  Bathurst  thinks  it  proper  that  you  diould  be 
informed  that  this  correspondence  is  still  kept  up,  and  that  it  is 
so  with  his  Lordship's  knowledge ;  for  as  the  letters  received 
from  Dr.  O'Meara  are  regularly  submitted  to  Lord  Bathurst's 
perusal,  he  has  thought  it  advisable  not  to  do  anything  which,  by 
driving  Dr.  O'Meara  to  seek  another  channel  of  correspondence, 
might  deprive  Lord  Bathiu^t  of  the  knowledge  of  its  contents, 
and  of  the  objects  with  which  it  is  evident  that  his  communica- 
tions are  made.  I  am  sure  you  know  enough  of  Lord  Bathiu^ 
to  be  perfectly  assured  that  he  would  not  permit  his  opinions  to 
be  improperly  influenced  by  the  representations  which  might  be 
made  in  a  correspondence  of  this  description. 

Believe  me,  my  dear  Sir,  ever  yours  most  faithfully, 

Henry  Goulburn. 


No.  122. 
To  Earl  Bathurst,  K.G. 
My  Lord,  St.  Helena,  January  25,  1818. 

I  do  myself  the  honour  to  inform  your  Lordship  that, 
having  met  with  considerable  diflBculty,  particularly  since  the 
commencement  of  the  month  of  October  last,  at  which  time 
Napoleon  Bonaparte  began  to  confine  himself  to  his  room,  to 
obtain  any  satisfactory  information  respecting  him,  even  from 
Mr.  O'Meara,  who,  in  the  capacity  of  surgeon,  was  the  only 
British  subject  who  had  a  ready  access  to  him,  and  who  before 


Xo.  122.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  385 

this  period  had  never  appeared  to  hesitate  in  fully  communi- 
cating to  me  any  particulars  of  which  I  might  desire  to  be 
informed,  I  became  strongly  impressed  with  the  idea  of  some 
secret  engagement  or  understanding  betwixt  Napoleon  Bona- 
parte and  him,  which  prevented  information  being  afforded  me, 
as  had  been  heretofore  done.  I  had,  it  is  true,  before  this 
period,  declared  to  Mr.  O'Meara  he  had  not  my  authority  for 
communicating  with  Napoleon  Bonaparte  upon  any  other  sub- 
ject than  that  of  his  medical  duty,  and  that,  if  he  replied  to  him 
on  other  points,  the  responsibility  must  rest  upon  himself ;  but 
this  did  not  appear  to  be  considered  by  him  as  containing  that 
species  of  prohibition  which  prevented  him  from  hearing  or 
speaking  of  other  matters,  as  will  be  apparent  by  reference  to  a 
communication  he  made  to  me  on  the  16th  of  September,  as 
well  as  by  replies  he  has  at  various  subsequent  times  made  to 
me,  when  I  have  asked  him  questions  about  his  conversations, 
and  he  has  said,  ^^  Nothing  important^  nothing  interesting^*^ 
proving  sufficiently,  however,  he  continued  his  communications 
with  Napoleon  Bonaparte  upon  other  topics  than  those  of  his 
medical  duties,  guided  by  no  other  rule  than  his  own  discretion. 

I  have  already  had  the  honour  to  make  known  to  your  Lord- 
ship the  interdict  which  Napoleon  Bonaparte  placed  him  under 
in  the  middle  of  October,  of  transmitting  any  written  bulletins 
of  Ijis  health  to  me,  unless  under  circumstances  which  might 
have  rendered  them  subservient  to  Napoleon  Bonaparte's  par- 
ticular designs.  I  had  before  an  instance,  in  a  report  addressed 
to  me  by  Mr.  O'Meara  respecting  the  health  of  the  son  of 
Count  Las  Cases,  as  well  as  on  other  occasions  respecting 
Napoleon  Bonaparte  himself,  in  what  degree  he  could  render  a 
medical  report  subservient  to  a  particular  object ;  and  therefore, 
as  your  Lordship  has  already  been  advised  of,  decided  upon 
demanding  from  him  no  written  reports  at  all,  under  the  forms 
it  was  desired  to  present  them  to  me,  but  desired  the  con- 
tinuance of  his  verbal  information,  to  which  Napoleon  Bonaparte 
had  not  objected. 

Mr.  O'Meara  from  this  period  continued  giving  verbal 
information,  sometimes  to  Mr.  Baxter,  sometimes  to  myself, 
respecting  the  state  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte's  health;  but 
whenever  interrogated  upon  any  .point  whatever,  which  might 
throw  a  light  upon  the  particular  design  or  object  of  his  (Bona- 

VOL.  III.  2  C 


386  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  No.  122. 

parte's)  shutting  himself  up,  or  upon  any  question  whatever 
which  had  relation  to  my  duties  with  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  or 
to  Mr.  O'Meara's  communications  on  other  subjects  than  those 
of  his  profession,  he  either  maintained  a  most  absolute  silence, 
or  sought  to  evade  any  positive  answer ;  whilst  every  informa- 
tion respecting  the  state  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte's  health  was 
very  seldom  given  uncalled  for,  and  generally  only  obtained 
from  him  by  a  long  series  of  questioning.  A  direction  I  gave 
him  to  communicate  the  state  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte's  health 
to  the  orderly  officer  at  Longwood  (with  whom  Mr.  O'Meara 
lived)  met  with  compliance  only  once  in  a  week  or  ten  days ; 
and  Mr.  Baxter  experienced  that  kind  of  delay  in  receiving 
information  on  that  subject,  that  I  was  compelled  to  address  a 
direction  through  him  to  Mr.  O'Meara  to  give  his  informatioii 
more  frequently  uncalled  for ;  but  a  degree  of  reluctance  being 
still  apparent,  I  found  it  necessary,  at  Mr.  Baxter's  suggestion, 
to  desire  he  would  attend  regularly  twice  a  week  at  my  office, 
to  meet  Mr.  Baxter  there,  and  give  the  information  desired 
— information,  after  all,  only  drawn  from  one  source,  and  which 
fails,  consequently,  in  all  the  requisites  for  establbhing  a  legal 
and  judicial  opinion. 

In  a  letter  I  addressed  to  Count  Bertrand  on  the  18th  of 
November  I  referred  to  what  Mr.  O'Meara  had  said  to  me  on 
the  subject  of  the  interdict  which  Napoleon  Bonaparte  had 
placed  him  under.  A  few  days  afterwards,  on  the  25th  of 
November,  finding  that  Mr.  O'Meara  had  been  a  long  time 
with  Napoleon  Bonaparte  on  the  preceding  days,  sometimes 
more  than  an  hour  together,  I  asked  him  what  was  the  subject 
of  his  conversations ;  his  reply  to  me  was,  **  Nothing  interesting, 
nothing  particular,  nothing  of  sufficient  importance  for  me  to 
be  informed  of;  that  sometimes  he  did  not  speak  twelve  words 
in  an  hour."  Mr.  O'Meara  added,  he  did  not  wish  to  put  any 
questions  to  him,  but  confined  himself  to  medical  svijectSy  as  he 
had  been  desired  by  me.  I  asked  him  if  nothing  had  been 
said  to  him  on  the  subject  of  the  letter  I  had  written  to  Count 
Bertrand,  in  which  his  name  had  been  mentioned  ?  *'  Nothing." 
The  question  was  put  and  repeated  in  several  forms,  and 
always  the  same  reply.  Did  he  know  that  such  a  letter  had 
been  written?  **Yes."  Then  he  must  have  heard  it  from 
some  other  person.     Madame  Bertrand  had  mentioned  such  a  • 


No.  122.  LE'n^ERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  387 

letter  had  been  received ;  her  husband  was  sent  for  by  Napo- 
leon Bonaparte  just  as  he  had  received  it ;  he  opened  it,  but 
left  her  before  he  had  read  it;  she  did  not  know,  therefore, 
what  its  contents  were.  This  letter  Captain  Blakeney,  the 
orderly  officer,  had  sent  in  to  Count  Bertrand  when  he  was 
with  Napoleon  Bonaparte.  The  particulars  thereof,  as  related 
by  Mr.  O'Meara,  were  at  variance  with  what  Captain  Blakeney 
had  told  me,  and  the  natural  inference  I  drew  from  this  was, 
that  Mr.  O'Meara  had  either  seen  the  letter,  or  knew  more 
about  it  than  what  he  stated  to  me.  I  had  therefore  cautioned 
him  against  suffering  himself  to  be  drawn  into  the  perusal  of 
any  correspondence  betwixt  Napoleon  Bonaparte  and  myself, 
without  my  knowledge ;  but  not  making  any  remark  whatever 
on  this  head,  I  simply  confined  myself  to  comment  on  the  mys- 
tery and  concealment  he  was  practising  in  every  point,  when, 
witii  an  extreme  of  efirontery,  to  which  I  consider  he  must  have 
been  instigated  either  by  Napoleon  Bonaparte  himself  or  the 
persons  of  his  family,  he  told  me  he  would  not  be  a  spy  or  a 
"  mouton."  The  signification  of  the  latter  term  was  unknown 
to  me.  I  asked  him  the  meaning  of  it ;  he  replied,  "  a  person 
who  insinuates  himself  into  the  confidence  of  others,  for  the 
piurpose  of  extracting  information  or  secrets  from  them,  and 
tiien  repeats  it.** 

The  use  of  any  cant  French  term  at  all,  in  a  reply  to  me, 
when  questioning  him  on  a  point  of  duty,  from  a  person  in  Mr. 
O'Meara's  situation,  was  in  itself  an  act  of  disrespect ;  but  the 
signification  given  to  it,  after  the  reply  referred  to  in  the  first 
part  of  his  conversation,  viz.  "  that  he  confined  himself  to  medi- 
cal subjects  08  I  desired  him^^^  I  could  regard  in  no  other  light 
than  as  an  act  of  deliberate  insult,  and  therefore  desired  him 
immediately  to  quit  the  room ;  telling  him  at  the  same  time, 
were  it  not  for  consideration  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte's  health, 
he  should  not  stay  an  hour  longer  in  the  island.  As  there  was 
no  possibility  of  obtaining  any  information  of  Napoleon  Bona- 
parte's state  of  health  from  any  other  person  than  Mr.  O'Meara, 
without  the  use  of  force,  I  still  continued  to  require  his  attend- 
ance at  my  office. 

The  stream  of  his  information,  which  had  flowed  so  fiilly, 
naturally,  and  without  any  solicitation,  during  so  long  a  period, 
on  many  other  points,  had  however  suddenly  dried  up,  and  it 

2  C  2 


388  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  No.  122. 

was  with  diflSculty  an  answer  could  be  obtained,  even  to  the 
most  common  question,  which  his  means  of  observation  more 
than  that  of  any  other  person  enabled  him  to  reply  to.  I  was 
still  more  and  more  convinced  of  the  existence  of  some  collu- 
sion, and  on  the  18th  of  December,  after  a  series  of  questions 
put  to  Mr.  O'Meara,  whether  he  had  pledged  his  word  of 
honour  or  not  to  Napoleon  Bonaparte  upon  any  point  con- 
nected with  his  medical  duties,  I  put  the  question  to  him,  whe- 
ther he  had  pledged  his  word  to  secrecy  upon  any  other  subject 
He  affected  for  some  time  to  consider  all  the  questions  as  relating 
to  his  medical  duties  alone,  but  at  last  confessed  he  had  pledged 
himself  to  Napoleon  Bonaparte  in  the  following  terms — viz. 
not  to  reveal  the  conversations  that  passed  between  them- 
selves, except  they  had  a  tendency  to  his  (Napoleon  Bona- 
parte's) escape — last  May  was  a  twelvemonth. 

A  memorandum  is  enclosed  of  the  conversation  that  passed 
upon  this  occasion,  which  terminated,  as  a  former  one  had  done, 
by  my  directing  him  to  quit  the  room.  Five  days  after  I 
received  a  letter  from  him,  of  which  copy  is  enclosed.  As 
there  is  not  a  paragraph  in  it  in  which  some  remarkaUe 
omission,  perversion,  or  grossly  disrespectful  insinuation  is  not 
manifest,  and  as  silence  might  lead  to  misconstruction,  I  deter- 
mined on  directing  a  full  reply  to  be  sent,  of  which  a  copy,  as 
written  to  Mr.  O'Meara  by  Sir  Thomas  Keade,  is  also  trans- 
mitted. I  believe  to  have  developed  in  it  the  real  facts  and 
real  grounds  on  which  his  statement  stands,  and  can  appeal 
with  more  confidence  to  your  Lordship's  judgment  of  his  con- 
duct, by  reference  to  the  statement  contained  in  a  letter  written 
to  himself,  and  to  which  consequently  he  can  if  he  pleases  reply 
(through  the  means  I  have  indicated  to  him),  than  to  any  other 
form  or  representation  I  could  adopt. 

I  certainly,  in  the  mean  time,  consider  it  the  severest  tax 
upon  the  due  and  satisfactory  performance  of  my  duties  on  this 
island,  to  be  compelled  to  bear  with  the  further  residence  here 
of  this  person,  who,  being  perfectly  aware  that  delicacy  and  con- 
sideration for  the  situation  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte  will  at  the 
present  moment  prevent  my  removing  him,  thinks  he  can  act 
with  the  greater  liberty  ;  and  I  cannot  dissemble  from  your 
Lordship,  at  the  same  time,  the  almost  absolute  nullity  of  all 
restrictions  upon  communication  or  correspondence  with  Napo- 


No.  ICa.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  389 

leon  Bonaparte,  where  a  person  of  Mr.  O'Meara's  turn  of  mind 
and  disposition  is  permitted  to  remain  near  him ;  for  by  the 
pledges  given  he  has  set  himself  above  all  authority  whatever, 
even  that  of  Government,  as  to  the  restrictions  wWch  Parlia- 
ment has  authorized  it  to  place  on  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  by 
arrogating  to  himself  the  liberty  of  a  secret  and  wholly  unre- 
strained intercourse  upon  every  other  point  than  that  alone 
which  stands  declared  to  be  a  felony,  trusting  to  his  own  sub- 
tilty,  or  that  of  his  advisers,  for  an  escape  from  prosecution  or 
pursuit  on  any  other  point. 

I  have  the  honour,  &c. 

H.  Lowe. 


No.  123. 

A  M.  LK  Gknkbal  CoirrK  db  Montuolon,  Chaubellan,  etc. 

Longwood,  F^vrier  4,  1818. 
tTavids  oubli^  vos  anciens  torts,  Monsieur,  ou,  plutot,  je 
vous  les  avais  pardonnife.  J'esperais  que  vous  changeriez ;  je 
me  suis  trompe.  Vous  paratssez  destine  a  me  nuire  dans  toutes 
les  cireonstances.  Avant  que  vous  ne  fussiez  avec  TEmpereur, 
depuis  long-temps  j'etais  bien  avec  lui ;  depuis  que  vous  y  etes 
j'y  suis  mal.  Vous  etes  la  cause  des  mauvais  traitemens  dont 
il  m^accable ;  ils  sont  dcvenus  tels  qu'il  ne  m'est  plus  permis  de 
les  supporter  sans  me  deshonorer.  Cest  vous.  Monsieur,  qui 
etes  la  cause  de  tons  mes  malheiurs ;  je  vous  en  demande  satis- 
faction. J'espere  que  vous  savez  pourquoi  j'ai  differe  jusqu'a  ce 
jour.  Parce  que  j'ai  souffert  on  poiurra  apprecier  I'attachement 
que  j'avais  pour  l*Empereur.  Vous  avez  cm  triompher  en  me 
r^uisant  a  cette  dure  extremite  de  partir.  Vous  avez  cm  que 
mon  depart  serait  attribue  au  manque  du  courage  necessaire 
dans  une  situation  comme  la  mienne  ici;  vous  avez  cm  que 
cela  vous  ferait  valoir  davantage ;  vous  qui  restez — vous  qui 
n'dprouvez  que  de  bons  traitemens,  &c. :  vous  voilJt  d^trompe. 
Force  de  me  separer  de  FEmpereur,  a  qui  j'avais  sacrifi^  toute 
mon  existence,  pour  qui  j'ai  tout  perdu,  je  ne  partirai  qu'apres 
m'etre  venge  du  succes  de  vos  intrigues  et  de  vos  manoeuvres ; 
ou  bien  je  tomberai  sous  vos  coups,  mais  du  moins  d'une  maniere 
plus  honorable  et  plus  digne  d*un  homme  de  coeur  que  celle  que 


390  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  No.  123. 

vous  avez  employee  jusqu'ici ;  et  quelque  solt  mon  sort,  j  em- 
porterai  Testime  de  tous  les  honnetes  gens.  Voila,  Momieur, 
comme  je  veux  quitter  LoDgwood. 

G£n£ral.  Goukgaud. 

P.S.  Je  Buis  en  droit  de  choisir  les  armes ;  je  vous  Imsse  cet 
avantage,  mais,  vu  les  circonstances  oil  nous  nous  trourons,  il 
est,  je  crois,  necessaire  de  nous  concerter  sur  les  autres  disposi- 
tions. Je  vous  prie,  done,  de  me  dire  oil  nous  pourrons  avoir 
une  entrevue  a  ce  sujet 


A  MOK8IEUR  LE  GeKKBAL  GoUHGAUD,  CHEZ  LUI. 

Longwood,  F6vrier  4. 
J'ai  re^i  votre  lettre,  Monsieur.  Plusieurs  fois  depuis 
dix-buit  mois  nous  nous  sommes  mutuellement  provoques. 
L'Empereur,  en  ayant  ete  instruit,  a  exige  ma  parole  d'honneur 
que  je  n'accepterais  aucun  cartel  tant  que  je  serais  pres  de  lui. 
Effectivement  tout  duel  entre  noas  serait  un  grand  scandale  et 
un  surcroit  d'affliction  k  ajouter  a  sa  position.  Dans  d'autres 
circonstances,  quand  je  serais  libre  de  ces  devoirs,  j'accepterai 
votre  cartel.  Le  Comte  de  Montholon. 


A  MONSIEUB  LE  COHTE  DB  MoMTHOLOK. 

F^vrier4, 1818. 
II  me  semble,  Monsieur,  que  s'il  etait  vrai  que  FEni- 
pereur  eiit  exige  votre  parole  d^honneur  de  n'accepter  aucun 
cartel,  il  aurait  aussi  exige  votre  parole  d!hoftn€ur  que  vous 
vous  conduisiez  en  honnete  homme ;  car  vous  avouerez  qu'il  J 
aurait  eu  de  la  lachete  d'en  avoup  agi  comme  vous  I'avez  fait 
avec  moi,  lorsque  vous  pensiez  n'avoir  rien  a  craindre.  Refle- 
chisseZy  je  vous  prie,  a  tout  le  mal  que  vous  m'avez  fait  Vous 
parlez  de  scandale,  pourquoi  le  provoquez-vous  ? 

Le  Gj^n^ral  Gourgaud. 

Pi5.  Je  vous  renouvelle  encore  la  demande  d'une  entrevue. 


No.  121.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  391 

No.  124. 

Au  Likut.-Genebal  Sib  Hudson  Lowe. 

Monsieur  le  General,  Longwood,  F^vrier  8, 1818. 

Depuis  la  maladie  grave  que  j'ai  essuyee  ici  il  y  a  deux 
ans,  ma  sante  a  toujours  ete  plus  ou  moins  chancelante.  Tres- 
souvent  j'ai  ete  tourmente  par  de  nouvelles  attaques  de  dyssen- 
terie,  et  de  mal  au  foie  ;  k  ces  peines  physiques  se  sont  jointes 
des  peines  morales.  J'ai  eprouve  de  grands  chagrins;  leur 
influence  m'a  ete  fatale ;  elle  a  detruit  le  peu  de  sante  qui  me 
restait,  au  point  que  je  suis  force  de  vous  prier  de  vouloir  bien 
faciliter  mon  retour  en  Europe,  ou  I'air  de  ma  patrie  et  les 
soins  de  ma  famille  soulageront  tous  mes  maux.  J'ose  esperer, 
Monsieur  le  General,  que  vous  aurez  de  moi  assez  bonne 
opinion  pour  croire  que  je  n'agis  ainsi  que  par  les  motife  les 
plus  puissants.  J'ai  I'honneur  d'etre,  &c., 

Le  GtytRAh  Gouroaud. 

P.S.  Je  vous  serais  bien  oblig^  si,  en  attendant  mon  depart 
de  I'ile,  vous  pouviez  me  placer  dans  un  autre  lieu  que  Long- 
wood  ;  je  crois  que  le  changement  d'air  me  ferait  du  bien. 


^  L'EmPEBEUE  NAPOLiON. 

Sire,  Longwood,  F^vrier  11. 

Au  moment  de  m'eloigner  de  ce  s^jour  j'eprouve  un 
sentiment  bien  douloureux.  J'oublie  tout ;  je  ne  suis  occupe 
que  de  la  pensee  que  je  vais  me  separer  pour  jamais  de  celui  a 
qui  j'avfius  consacre  toute  mon  existence.  Cette  idee  m'accable ; 
je  ne  puis  trouvef*  de  consolation  que  dans  la  persuasion  ou  je 
suis  que  j'ai  toujours  fait  mon  devoir.  Je  cede  k  la  fatalite  I 
Dans  mon  malheur  j'ose  esperer.  Sire,  que  vous  conserverez 
quelque  souvenir  de  mes  services  et  de  mon  attachement,  que 
meme  vous  rendrez  justice  a  mes  sentimens  et  aux  motifs  de 
mon  depart,  et  qu'enfin,  si  j'ai  perdu  votre  bienveillance,  que 
je  n'ai  pas  perdu  votre  estime.  Daignez,  Sire,  recevoir  mes 
adieux,  et  agr^er  les  voeux  que  je  fais  pour  votre  bonheur. 
Plaignez  mon  sort,  et  qu'en  pensant  quelquefois  k  moi  votre 
Majeste  dise,  "  Celui-lit,  au  moins,  avait  un  bon  cceur ! " 

Je  suis,  &c., 

Gj^n^ral  Gouroaud. 


392  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON,  No.  125. 

M.  le  General  Baron  Gourgaud,  Fdvrier  12. 

Je  V0U8  remercie  des  sentimens  que  vous  m'exprimez 
dans  votre  lettre  d'hier.  Je  regrette  que  le  mal  du  foie,  qui 
est  si  funeste  dans  ce  climat,  ait  necessite  votre  depart  Vous 
etes  jeune,  vous  avez  du  talent,  vous  devez  parcourir  une  longue 
carriere ;  je  desire  qu'elle  soit  heureuse.  Ne  doutez  jamais  de 
Tinteret  que  je  vous  porte.  Napoleon. 


No.  125. 
Au  Prince  Mettebxich. 


Mon  Prince> 

Le  General  Gourgaud  part  aujourd'hui  poiu*  T  Angleterre 
sur  le  Camden.  Depuis  qu'il  a  quitte  Longwood  il  est  venu 
me  voir  presque  tons  les  jours.  tFai  mis  a  profit  ses  visites 
pour  me  procurer  de  nouveau  details  sur  Bonaparte  et  son  ex- 
istence a  Ste.  Helene.  Voici,  mon  Prince,  le  resume  des  con- 
versations que  nous  avons  cues  ensemble : — 

"  QvHa  dit  Bonaparte  de  la  mort  de  la  Princesse  Charlotte  f^ 
— "  II  I'a  regarde  comme  un  malheur  de  plus  dans  sa  position. 
Tout  le  monde  sait  que  la  Princesse  de  Galles  a  pour  lui  une 
admiration  presque  fanatique.  U  esperait  que  lorsque  sa  fille 
seriut  montee  sur  le  trone  elle  profiterait  de  Tempire  qu'elle 
avait  sur  elle  pour  le  faire  transporter  en  Angleterre.  *Une 
fois  la,'  disait-il,  'je  suis  sauve.'  II  m'a  dit,  en  apprenant 
cette  nouvelle,  *  Eh  bien,  voila  encore  un  coup  imprevu ;  c'est 
ainsi  que  la  fortune  dejoue  tons  nos  projets.' " 

"  Parle-t'il  quelquefois  de  son  avenir  ?" — "  II  est  persuade 
qu'il  ne  restera  pas  a  Ste.  Ilelene,  et  s'obstine  a  croire  que  le 
parti  de  I'opposition  parviendra  a  Ten  tirer.  H  parait  n'avoir 
pas  renonce  pour  tonjours  a  remonter  sur  le  trone.  'Si  je 
reviens  en  France,'  m'a-t-il  dit,  lorsque  nous  nous  sommes 
separes,  *venez  me  trouver ;  je  vous  accorderai  de  nouveau  ma 
protection.' " 

"  Que  peme-t4l  des  Bourbons  f* — "II  pretend  que  Louis 
XVIII.  est  revolutionnaire,  et  que  par  sa  conduite  il  s'expose 
aux  plus  grands  dangers.  *Ce  n'est  pas  ainsi,'  dit-il,  'que 
s'operent  les  changemens  de  dynastie ;  la  prudence  voulait  qu'il 
se  defit  de  tous  mes  marechaux.     II  fallait  mettre  hors  d'etat 


No.  125.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  393 

tout  ce  qui  n'etait  point  de  son  parti.  Labcdoyere  et  le  Mare- 
chal  Ney  n'etaient  pas  seuls  dangereux.' " 

^'  Parle-t'U  de  sa  femme  et  de  sonfilsf^ — "II  se  plaint  de 
Marie  Louise.  Selon  lui,  elle  n'aurait  jamais  id  quitter  Paris 
en  1814.  '  Au  lieu  de  Madame  de  Montebello  e'etait,'  dit-il, 
^  Madame  de  Beauveau  que  j'aurais  dd  placer  aupres  d'elle ; 
elle  I'aurmt  dirigee  autrement,  et  les  choses  n'en  serment  pas 
la.'  II  est  persuade  qu'il  serait  encore  sur  le  trone  s'il  avait 
epouse  une  Grande  Duchesse  de  Russie.  II  parle  souvent  de 
son  fils,  surtout  depuis  quelque  temps."    . 

"  Qu^a-t-il  dit  de  V affaire  du  Col<mel  Latapk^  et  de  cette 
pretendue  tentative  de  Venlever  f^ — "  II  dit  que  cela  pent  etre 
vrai,  mais  qu'il  connatt  ces  gens-la,  que  ce  sont  des  avcnturiers, 
et  que  jamais  il  ne  se  serait  confie  a  eux." 

^^  Pensez-vous  qu'il  puisse  B^4chapper  d'icif^ — "II  en  a  eu 
dix  fois  Toccasion,  et  il  Ta  encore  au  moment  meme  ou  je  vous 
parle." 

"  Je  voua  avom  que  cela  me  paratt  impossible" — " Eh  1  que 
ne  fait-on  pas  quand  on  a  des  millions  a  sa  disposition  ?  Au 
reste,  quoique  j'aie  a  me  plaindre  de  TEmpereur,  je  ne  le  tra- 
hirai  jamais.  Je  le  repete,  il  pout  s'evader  seul  et  aller  en 
Amerique  quand  il  le  voudra ;  je  n'en  dirai  pas  davantage." 

"/S'z?  le  pent,  que  ne  le  fait-ilf  L^essentiel  est  d'etre  hors 
cPici" — "  Nous  le  lui  avons  tons  conseille.  II  a  toujours  com- 
battu  nos  raisons  et  y  a  resiste.  Quelque  malheureux  qu'il  soit 
ici,  il  jouit  secretement  de  Timportance  qu'on  met  a  sa  garde, 
de  I'interet  qu'y  prennent  toutes  les  puissances  de  TEurope,  du 
soin  que  Ton  met  a  recueillir  ses  moindres  paroles,  &c.  II  nous 
a  dit  plusieurs  fois,  *  Je  ne  peuxplus  vivre  en  particulier ;  j'aime 
mieux  etre  prisonnier  ici  que  libre  aux  Etats-Unis.'  " 

"  Contintie-t'il  h  dcrire  son  histoire  ?" — "  II  en  ecrit  des  firag- 
mens,  mais  il  est  probable  qu'il  ne  Tachevera  jamais.  Quand 
on  lui  demande  s'il  ne  veut  pas  que  I'histoire  le  peigne  tel  qu'il 
a  ete,  il  repond  qu'il  est  souvent  plus  avantageux  de  se  laisser 
deviner  que  de  se  mettre  trop  a  decouvert  II  parait  aussi  que, 
ne  regardant  pas  ses  grandes  destinees  comme  finics,  il  ne  veut 
pas  devoiler  des  plans  dont  I'execution  n'a  pas  ete  entierement 
achevee,  et  qu'il  pent  reprendre  un  jour  avec  succes." 

"  Qui  de  vous  a  redige  la  farneuse  lettre  deM.de  Montho^ 
fon?"— "L'Empereur  lui-meme.     II  nous  en  a  dicte  la  plus 


394  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  No.  126. 

grande  partie.  II  serait  heureux  qu'il  s'en  f&t  tenu  la,  mais 
vousverrezincessammentparaltre  aLondres  de  pretendueslettres 
ecrites  par  des  capitaines  de  vaisseaux  marchands,  et  dans  lee- 
quelles  on  parle  beaucoup  de  TEmpereur.  Elles  sont  de  luL  Le 
style  en  est  plat,  les  details  puerils,  la  conception  mauvaise. 
Vous  aurez  peine  a  croire,  par  exemple,  que  I'ouvrage  public 
sous  le  nom  de  Santini  etait  de  lui.  II  se  fait  par  la  beaucoup 
plus  de  tort  qu'il  ne  croit ;  mais  perspnne  ne  peut  le  guerir  de 
cette  manie  d'ecrire.  En  general,  ce  n'est  ni  Bertrand  ni  Mon- 
tholon  qu'il  feUait  a  TEmpereur.  C'etait  le  Due  de  Rovigo, 
le  Due  de  Bassano,  des  hommes  a  caractere,  en  un  mot,  qui 
Teussent  empeche  de  faire  des  sottises.  Combien  n'en  avons- 
nous  pas  fait  depuis  que  nous  sommes  ici !" 

**  C(mment  est-il  dans  am  intMeur  ?" — "  Excellent  avec  ses 
domestiques ;  cherchant  a  donner  du  relief  a  tout  ce  qui  I'en- 
toure,  elevant  tres-haut  les  petits  talens  de  ceux  qui  en  ont,  e* 
en  pretant  a  ceux  qui  n'en  ont  point." 

'*  Q%t£lle  est  son  attitude  avec  les  perscrmes  de  sa  stUtef — 
"  Celle  d'un  souverain  absolu.  Je  Tai  souvent  vu  jouer  cinq 
beures  de  suite  aux  ecbecs,  et  soufirir  que  nous  fussions  de  bout 
pendant  tout  ce  temps  a  le  regarder." 

"  Comment  Madame  de  Monthohn  est-elle  parventte  h  lui 
plaire  f** — "  EUe  joue  la  femme  savante,  sait  assez  bien  This- 
toire  de  France,  et  ne  cesse  de  repeter  a  TEmpereur  que  Ton 
devrait  guillotiner  tons  les  jours  quatre-vingt  Parisiens  pour  les 
punir  de  I'avoir  train,  que  la  France  merite  d'etre  vingt  fois 
plus  malheureuse  qu'elle  ne  Test,  &c.  II  ecoute  tout  cela 
avec  plaisir."  Agreez,  mon  Prince,  je  vous  prie,  I'hommage  de 
mon  respect.  Sturmer. 

No-  126. 
A  Monsieur  le  Lieut.-Gekeral  Sir  Hodsok  Lows. 
Monsieur  le  Gouvemeur,  Longwood,  Avril  13, 1818. 

Le  Docteur  O'Meara  m'a  fait  connaltre  bier  qu'en  con- 
sequence d'un  ordre  emane  de  vous  il  etait  contraint  de  quitter 
cette  ile.  A  cette  occasion  j'ai  I'honneur  de  vous  prier  de  con- 
siderer  que  Monsieur  O'Meara  nous  a  ete  donne  par  votre 
Gouvemement  sur  notre  demande,  et  comme  nous  tenant  lieu 
d'un  medecin  Frangais ;  qu'il  a  notre  confiance ;  que  I'Einpe- 


No.  127.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  395 

reur  est  malade  depuis  sept  mois  d'une  maladie  chronique  de 
foie,  mortelle  dans  ce  pays,  et  qui  est  occasionnee  par  le  defaut 
d'exercice,  qu'il  n'a  pu  prendre  depuis  deux  ans,  par  Tabus  que 
vous  avez  fait  et  que  vous  faites  de  vos  pouvoirs ;  que  les  choses 
en  sont  arrivees  au  point  que  le  malade  a  besoin  d'etre  soigne 
tons  les  jours ;  que  depuis  deux  ans  vous  avez  youlu  chasser 
Monsieur  O'Meara  pour  le  remplacer  par  Monsieur  Baxter; 
que,  malgre  vos  instances  reiterees,  TEmpereur  s'est  refuse  a 
recevoir  le  medecin  qui  lui  inspire  une  invincible  repugnance. 
Considerez  que,  si  vous  otez  Monsieur  O'Meara  sans  le  rem- 
placer par  un  medecin  Franqais  ou  Italien  deja  connu,  vous 
obligez  le  Prince  h,  mourir,  prive  de  tout  secours.  II  y  est 
r^lu.  Son  agonie  en  sera  plus  douloureuse ;  mais  les  peines 
du  corps  sont  passageres,  tandis  que  I'opprobre  qu'une  conduite 
aussi  feroce  imprimera  sur  le  caractere  de  votre  nation  sera 
etemelle.  Je  suis  charge,  1,  de  declarer  que  le  Docteur 
O'Meara  est  le  seul  medecin  de  ceux  qui  sont  sur  ce  rocher  en 
qui  le  malade  mt  confiance ;  2,  de  protester  contre  son  renvoi, 
de  quelque  pretexte  qu'on  cherche  a  le  colorer,  a  moins  qu'il  ne 
soit  la  consequence  d'un  jugement  legal. 
J'ai  I'honneur,  Sec. 

Le  Comte  Bertrand. 


No.  127. 

A  Monsieur  lb  Lieut.-General  Sib  Hudson  Lowe. 

Monsieur  le  Gouvemeur,  Longwood,  Avril  24, 1818, 

Lorsque  le  12  Avril  j'ai  ete  instruit  par  le  Docteur 
O'Meara  qu'il  cessait  ses  fonctions  de  medecin  prfes  I'Empereur 
Napoleon,  je  me  suis  emprease  de  faire  dire  au  Major  Gorre- 
quer  que  je  le  priais  de  passer  chcz  moi,  ayant  des  communica- 
tions de  la  plus  haute  importance  a  lui  faire.  J'ai  dit  a  cet 
officier  que  j'avais  eu  intention  de  lui  faire  connaitre  combien 
nous  avions  ete  peines  de  ce  qu'on  eut  ote  la  foumitiu^  des 
vivres  a  la  maison  Balcombe,  que  le  voyage  du  chef  de  cette 
maison  a  Londres  ne  pent  pas  etre  une  ndson  pour  lui  oter  son 
emploi,  puisque  le  service  a  toujours  ete  fait  par  ses  associes^ 
Messieurs  Fowler  et  Cole,  et  que  Monsieur  Balcombe  ne  s'en 
est  jamais  mele  directement ;  mais  que  la  communication  que 


396  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  No.  128. 

je  venais  de  recevoir  du  Docteiir  O'Meara  etait  d'une  tout  autre 
importance,  que  TEmpereur  ne  pouvait  pas  rester  un  jour  sans 
le  secours  de  Monsieur  O'Meara.  Le  lendemain,  13,  j'ai  eu 
rhonneur  de  vous  ecrire  la  meme  chose.  J'espererais  avoir  une 
reponse  dans  la  joum^e  meme ;  nous  sommes  aujourd'hm  le  24, 
et  je  n*en  ai  aucune.  Voila  done  douze  jours  que  FEmpereur 
est  prive  de  toute  assistance  de  la  medecine.  Au  mois  d'Octo- 
bre  il  fut  quinze  jours  sans  voir  le  Docteur  O'Meara,  lorsque 
vous  elevates  Tetrange  pretention  de  lui  imposer  Fobligation  de 
faire  des  bulletins  sous  votre  dictee,  et  sans  qu'ils  fiissent  au 
prealable  soumis  a  TEmpereur  et  Tori^nal  laisse  dans  ses 
mains ;  mais  alors  sa  maladie  etait  a  son  commencement,  et 
aujourd'hui  elle  est  deja  avaucee.  Le  Comte  de  Montholon, 
qui  loge  dans  le  meme  corps  de  batiment  que  TEmpereur,  m'a 
fait  connaitre  que  le  18,  et  aujourd'hui,  24,  il  a  ete  eveille  a 
deux  heures  du  matin  par  le  valet-de-chambre  de  TEmpereur, 
et  est  reste  a  cote  du  lit  de  ce  Prince,  depuis  deux  heures 
jusqu'a  cinq  heures  du  matin,  temoin  de  ses  soufirances,  sans  y 
pouvoir  porter  aucun  adoucissement.  Vos  restrictions  du  10 
Avril  sur  Longwood  ont,  done,  deja  produit  VeSet  le  plus 
funeste.  Je  reitere,  done,  ma  demande  que  vous  restituiez  le 
Docteur  O'Meara  a  ses  fonctions,  en  cessant  de  le  vexer  et  de 
lui  faire  essuyer  de  mauvais  trsutemens,  en  levant  les  restrictions 
contraires  a  ce  qui  a  existe  depuis  trois  ans,  auxquelles  il  ne 
veut  ni  ne  pent  se  soumettre  sans  se  deshonorer.  Enfin  quel- 
ques  raisons  que  vous  puissiez  alleguer,  songez.  Monsieur,  aux 
consAjuences  de  prolonger  I'etat  actuel,  et  de  priver  TEmpereur 
du  medecin  de  son  choix  sans  avoir  pourvu  a  son  remplacement 
conformement  a  ma  lettre  du  13  Avril.  Si  vous  persistez  a  le 
faire,  cet  act  arbitraire  sera  caractAise  par  I'Europe,  par  votre 
nation,  et  meme  par  votre  Ministre.     J'ai  I'honneur,  &c. 

Le  Comte  Bertrand. 


No,  128. 
To  Lieut.-Geneeal  Sib  Hudson  Lowe,  K.C.B. 
Dear  Sir,  Downing  Street,  April  30,  1818. 


A  considerable  period  having  elapsed  since  any  sup 
of  clothing  was  sent  out  for  the  use  of  General  Buonaparte,  Lord 


No.  129.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  397 

Bathurst  bas  directed  me  to  draw  your  attention  to  this  subject, 
in  order  to  prevent  the  possibility  of  the  original  stock  being 
exhausted  before  a  fresh  supply  was  placed  at  your  disposal. 
From  the  temper  which  General  Buonaparte  has  so  frequently 
showp  on  similar  subjects,  it  is  not  improbable  that  he  might 
be  disposed  to  conceal  from  you  the  defidency  of  any  articles, 
either  of  necessity  or  comfort,  with  a  view  of  making  that  defi- 
ciency hereafter  a  subject  of  remonstrance  and  complaint,  and 
Lord  Bathurst  therefore  considers  it  advisable  that  you  should 
adopt  any  measure  which  you  may  consider  calculated  to  obtain 
satisfactory  information  as  to  the  state  of  his  wardrobe,  &c.,  in 
order  that,  if  deficient  in  any  essential  article,  that  deficiency 
may  be  speedily  supplied,  and  that  no  means  should  on  your 
part  appear  to  have  been  omitted  for  contributing  everything 
that  may  be  necessary  for  his  convenience  or  comfort. 

I  have  the  honour,  &c., 

Henry  Goulburn* 


No.  129. 

To  Lieut.-Genbral  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  K.C.B. 

Sir,  Do\vning  Street,  May  5,  1818. 

I  have  received  and  laid  before  the  Prince  Regent  your 
several  despatches,  to  No.  121  inclusive.  It  appears  clear,  as 
well  by  General  Gourgaud's  confession  as  by  other  intelligence 
which  I  had  received,  that  a  clandestine  correspondence  to  a 
considerable  extent  is  carried  on  by  the  inhabitants  of  Long- 
wood,  and,  as  there  is  little  or  no  communication  between 
Buonaparte  and  any  individual  in  the  island,  this  evasion  of 
your  regulations  must  be  effiected  by  the  opportunities  which 
Generals  Bertrand  and  Montholon  and  the  servants  of  the  esta- 
blishment of  Longwood  enjoy  of  having  frequent  intercourse 
not  only  with  those  who  visit  Longwood  but  with  the  other 
inhabitants  of  the  island;  it  will  therefore  be  necessary  to 
introduce  restraints  on  a  liberty  which  it  is  evident  has  been  so 
much  abused,  and  I  have  great  satisfaction  in  thinking  that 
you  may  apply  these  restraints  to  the  followers  of  General 
Buonaparte  without  extending  them  to  him,  as  you  must,  I  am 
sure,  always  feel  a  great  reluctance  to  impose  any  additional 


398  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  No.  130. 

restrictions  upon  him,  though  there  is  undoubtedly  not  the 
same  delicacy  with  regard  to  his  followers  and  servants,  whose 
residence  on  the  island  is  voluntary,  and  for  whose  intemperate 
and  unbecoming  conduct  there  is  not  the  same  allowance  to  be 
made.  You  will  therefore,  upon  the  receipt  of  this  desgatch, 
impose  such  restrictions  with  respect  to  the  communications 
between  General  Buonaparte's  followers  and  the  inhabitants  of 
St.  Helena  as  may  appear  to  you  necessary  to  prevent  the  con- 
tinuance of  any  clandestine  correspondence.  If  they  shall  remon- 
strate against  these  additional  restraints  being  applied  to  them, 
unless  they  are  also  extended  to  General  Buonaparte,  and 
represent  that  they  have  only  bound  themselves  to  submit  to 
such  as  were  established  with  regard  to  him,  you  will  inform 
them  that  if  they  do  not  submit  to  them  you  must  interdict  all 
intercourse  between  them  and  General  Buonaparte,  adding, 
however,  that  you  will  not  object  to  forward  any  representation 
which  they  may  think  proper  to  make  to  the  British  Govern- 
ment, provided  that  they  conform  to  the  regulation  which  pre- 
scribes that  the  letter  be  sent  to  you  unsealed. 

I  have  the  honour,  &c., 

Bathurst. 

No.  130. 

Au  Dr.  O'Meara. 

Monsieur,  Longwood,  ce  9  Mai,  1818. 

Depuis  le  mois  d'Octobre  vous  avez  cesse  de  faire  dcs 
bulletins,  ce  qui  a  donne  lieu  d'en  faire  de  faux.  L'Empere^ir 
desire  que  vous  ne  rendiez  compte  a  qui  que  ce  soit  de  I'ctiit 
de  sa  sante,  si  ce  n'est  au  Gouverneur,  s'il  le  requiert — surtout 
que  vous  n*en  parliez  a  aucun  medecin  ;  et,  pour  couper  court  a 
tout  ce  tripotage,  que  vous  redigiez  toutes  les  seraaines,  et  plus 
souvent  si  cela  est  necessaire,  un  bulletin  de  sa  sante,  dont  vous 
me  remettrez  Toriginal,  et  dont  vous  pourrez  envoyer  la  copie 
au  Gouverneur  s'il  le  desire.  Aussitot  que  vous  m'aurez 
repondu  sur  cet  article  vous  pourrez  reprendre  vos  fonctions  de 
medecin  de  Napoleon,  qui  en  a  besoin,  puisque  la  restriction  du 
10  Avril  est  levee,  et  que  vous  a^ssez  volontairement  et  sans  y 
etre  contraint.  J'ai,  &c., 

Le  Comte  Bertrand. 


Ko.  131.  LETTEUS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  399 

No.  131. 
To  Lieut.-General  Sie  Hudson  Lowe,  K.C.B. 
Sir,  Downing  Street,  May  16,  1818. 

I  have  every  reason  to  believe,  firom  the  information 
given  by  General  Gourgaud  to  Mr.  Goulbum,  of  which  the 
substance  is  communicated  in  my  despatch  No.  9,  that  the 
health  of  General  Buonaparte  has  not  been  in  any  essential 
manner  impaired  by  his  residence  at  St.  Helena;  that  the 
swelling  of  the  legs  has  not  been  more  frequent  or  more  ex- 
tended than  what  at  times  he  has  been  accustomed  to,  and  that 
the  accounts  therefore  which  Mr.  O'Meara  has  furnished  are 
very  fallacious.  The  manner  in  which  you  represent  that  Ge- 
neral Gourgaud  received  your  inquiries  after  General  Buona- 
jkirte's  health  induced  Mr.  Goulbum  to  make  more  particular 
inquiries  on  this  subject  at  his  first  interview  with  General 
Gourgaud,  and  the  determination  which  General  Buonaparte 
has  shown  not  to  admit  the  visit  of  any  medical  person  on 
whose  ability  and  integrity  a  reliance  would  be  placed,  or, 
indeed,  to  be  seen  by  any  English,  except  Mr.  O'Meara,  at  the 
times  when  his  health  was  stated  to  be  most  affected,  strongly 
confirms  the  truth  of  General  Gourgaud's  intelligence. 

It  is  unnecessary  to  examine  whether  Mr.  O'Meara  has  been 
induced  to  give  these  fallacious  reports  from  professional  igno- 
rance, or  from  a  blind  devotion  to  the  wishes  of  General -Buona- 
parte. I  am  however  disposed  to  attribute  it  to  the  latter 
motive,  more  especially  as  the  positive  refusal  of  General  Gour^ 
gaud  to  acquit  him  of  being  privy  to  that  clandestine  corre- 
spondence which  has  for  so  long  been  carried  on  between 
Longwood  and  Europe  (although  he  at  the  same  time  distinctly 
acquitted  him  of  all  knowledge  of  certain  other  criminal  trans- 
actions) gives  me  too  much  reason  to  believe  that,  as  far  as 
relates  to  correspondence,  Mr.  O'Meara,  if  he  has  not  been 
entirely  employed  by  General  Buonaparte,  has  at  least  readily 
connived  at  this  breach  of  the  existing  regulations.  He  is,  at 
any  rate,  unfit  to  continue  near  the  person  of  General  Buona- 
parte, and  I  have  therefore  no  longer  that  repugnance  which 
you  know  I  have  hitherto  felt  to  resist  his  being  withdrawn 
from  his  attendance  on  General  Buonaparte,  and  interdicted 


400  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  No.  132. 

all  further  interview  with  the  inhabitants  of  Longwood.  Admi- 
ral Plampin  will  receive  the  necessary  instructions  as  to  Mr. 
O'Meara's  future  destination. 

On  the  removal  of  Mr.  O'Meara  you  will  direct  Dr.  Baxter 
to  give  lus  mecUcal  attendance  to  General  Buonaparte  whenever 
it  may  be  required,  and  will  particularly  instruct  him  on  all 
occasions  to  consider  the  health  of  General  Buonaparte ;  you 
will  not  fail  to  acquaint  him  at  the  same  time  that^  should  he 
have  reason  to  be  dissatisfied  with  Dr.  Baxter's  medical  attend- 
ance, or  should  prefer  that  of  any  other  professional  man  on 
the  island,  you  are  perfectly  prepaured  to  acquiesce  in  his  wish 
on  the  subject,  and  to  permit  the  attendance  of  any  medical 
practitioner  selected  by  him,  provided  that  he  conform  strictly 
to  the  regulations  in  force. 

I  have  only  to  add  that  you  cannot  better  fulfil  the  wishes  of 
his  Majesty's  Government  than  by  giving  efiect  to  any  measure 
which  you  may  consider  calculated  to  prevent  any  just  ground 
of  dissatisfaction  on  the  part  of  General  Buonaparte  on  account 
of  any  real  or  supposed  inadequacy  of  medical  attendance. 

I  have  the  honour,  &c., 

Bathurst. 

No.  132. 
To  Ltedt.-Genkral  Sir  Hudbon  Lowb,  K.C.B. 
My  de^  Sir,  Downing  Street,  May  18,  1818. 

My  private  letter  of  the  29th  ultimo  will  have  explmned 
to  you  what  induced  me  to  withhold  my  consent  to  your  propo- 
sition that  Mr.  O'Meara  should  be  removed  from  Longwood. 
The  information,  however,  given  by  General  Gourgaud  has 
altered  the  case,  and  I  have  now  no  longer  any  difliculty  in 
giving  you  the  instruction  to  withdraw  him  from  a  situation  for 
which  he  has  shown  himself  so  unfit.  I  do  not  think  you  will 
be  authorized  in  seizing  his  papers,  but  you  may,  if  you  think 
proper,  send  for  him,  and  announce  to  him  the  purport  of  my 
instruction,  and,  having  done  so,  you  may  forbid  him  seeing 
either  General  Buonaparte  or  any  of  General  Buonaparte's  fol- 
lowers, except  in  the  presence  of  a  British  officer ;  and  you 
may  forbid  him  retimiing  to  Longwood  after  he  has  once  gone 
back  and  left  it. 


No.  138.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  401 

I  hope  my  despatch  respecting  Rosemary  Hall  may  reach 
you  before  you  have  completed  the  purchase.  General  Gour- 
gaud  considers  Longwood  as  the  situation  the  best  adapted  for 
**  surveUlance ;"  and  the  restrictions  which  you  will  feel  your- 
self authorised  to  impose  upon  Greneral  Buonaparte's  followers 
will)  I  trust,  obviate  the  objections  which  it  appears  you  had 
begun  to  entertain  against  it  As  General  Buonaparte  will  not 
avail  himself  of  the  liberties  he  has,  he  may  be  safely  left  in 
full  possession  of  them ;  and,  indeed,  in  his  situation  he  will  not 
have  so  much  facility  of  abusing  them.  It  is  the  followers  of 
Buonaparte  through  whom  all  the  clandestine  correspondence  is 
carried  on,  and  there  is  nothing  in  their  characters  or  situations 
which  requires  you  to  show  the  same  indulgence  towards  them, 
or  need  deter  you  from  imposing  any  restriction  which  is  neces- 
sary ;  I  am  sure  you  will  have  no  inclination  to  do  more. 

We  must  expect  that  the  removal  of  Mr.  O*  Meara  will  occar 
sion  a  great  sensation,  and  an  attempt  will  be  made  to  give  a 
bad  impression  on  the  subject  You  had  better  let  the  sub- 
stance of  my  instruction  be  generally  known  as  soon  as  you 
have  executed  it,  that  it  may  not  be  represented  tliat  Mr. 
O'Meara  has  been  removed  in  consequence  of  any  quarrel  with 
you,  but  in  consequence  of  the  information  furnished  by  General 
Gourgaud  in  England  respecting  his  conduct. 

I  am  yours  very  sincerely, 

Bathurst. 


No.  133. 
To  Libut.-Gehbbal  Sib  Hudson  Lowb,  E.C.B. 

My  dear  Sr,  Downing  Street,  May  23, 1818. 

Lord  Bathurst  is  apprehensive  that  he  has  not  explained 
to  you  with  sufficient  precirion  one  point  connected  with  the 
additional  restrictions  which  he  has  authorised  you  to  impose 
upon  the  followers  and  servants  of  General  Buonaparte,  and  has 
therefore  directed  me  to  state  that,  his  object  being  not  to 
impose  any  further  restraints  upon  General  Buonaparte  himself, 
but  to  restrict  the  intercourse  carried  on  with  the  inhabitants  of 
St  Helena  by  his  followers  and  servants,  he  is  desirous  that  you 
should  not  enforce  any  restrictions  against  them  when  in  com- 
VOL.  III.  2  D 


402  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  No.  134. 

pany  with  General  Buonaparte  which  may  be  made  by  him  a 
ground  for  refiising  to  take  exercise,  or  wUch  may  be  justly 
represented  by  him  as  diminishing  the  degree  of  liberty  in  this 
respect  which  he  at  present  enjoys. 

I  have  the  honour,  &c., 

IIenrt  Goulburn. 


No.  134. 
To  Major  Gobrequbr. 
Sir,  Long\v'ood,  July  10, 1818. 

The  progress  of  hepatitis,  with  which  Napoleon  Bona- 
parte has  been  affected  for  some  months,  having  increased  in  a 
manner  alarming  to  me,  I  commenced  administering  mercurial 
preparations  to  him  on  the  11th  of  June  last,  which  were  con- 
tinued until  the  29th,  when,  in  consequence  of  effects  produced 
by  the  humidity  of  the  season,^  and  also  perceiving  that  nervous 
irritability  was  produced  by  the  use  of  it,  I  judged  it  proper 
to  discontinue  tiie  remedy ;  but  having,  on  the  2nd  of  July, 
observed  that  the  above-mentioned   appearances   were  ame- 
liorated, I  commenced  mercurials  anew,  which  produced  a  con- 
siderable degree  of  nervous  a^^tion,  and  last  night  especially 
he  was  very  ill.     This  morning  I  was  called  at  half-past  five  by 
the  valet-de-chambre  to  see  him.     Finding  him  in  an  alarming 
state,  I  explained  to  him  as  forcibly  as  I  could  the  necesrity  of 
calling  a  consultation,  and  proposed  to  send  for  the  two  first 
medical  persons  in  the  island,  viz.  Mr.  Baxter  and  Mr.  Stokoe. 
He  manifested  a  repugnance  to  call  in  Mr.  Baxter,  but  he  at 
last  authorised  me  to  send  for  Mr.  Stokoe,  for  which  purpose  I 
wrote  him  a  letter  on  the  spot,  and  awoke  Captain  Blakeney 
in  order  to  have  it  sent  and  to  procure  him  a  pass.     Since  that 
time  I  have  seen  him  three  times,  and  have  found  considerable 
debility  to  prevail.     Mr.  Stokoe  came  up  about  three  o'clock, 
not  with  a  view  of  entering  into  a  consultation,  or  seeing  Napo- 
leon Bonaparte,  but  to  excuse  himself  upon  the  plea  of  the 
responsibility  being  too  great,  and  not  wishing  to  run  the  risk 

»  In  his  Journal  of  the  27th  of  June  ( Voice,  vol.  ii.  p.  412)  CMeara 
attributes  Bonaparte^s  illness  not  to  the  "  humidity  of  the  season,*^  but  to 
the  extreme  "  humidity  of  hi$  rooms  J" 


No.  136.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  403 

of  getting  himself  into  any  scrapes.  He  had  also  some  con- 
versation with  Count  Bertrand.  My  chief  reason  for  calling  on 
Mr.  Stokoe  was  to  obtain  his  opinion  relative  to  the  propriety 
of  continuing  the  mercurial  treatment  I  am  not  apprehensive 
of  any  immediate  danger  of  his  life,  and  tiie  question  hung 
upon  the  treatment  it  was  advisable  to  pursue,  on  one  side  to 
guard  agfiunst  the  deleterious  effects  of  tiie  remedy  upon  the 
delicacy  of  his  organs,  and,  on  tiie  other,  tiie  necessity  there 
was  of  administering  it  in  a  manner  so  as  to  effectually  eradi- 
cate the  disease.  I  must  beg  therefore  to  remain  at  Longwood 
to-morrow,  and,  indeed,  not  to  leave  it  until  he  recovers  from 
effects  caused  chiefly  by  debility  and  the  administration  of  the 
mercury  necessary  for  tiie  cure  of  the  complaint  I  beg  of  you 
to  submit  the  above  for  the  consideration  of  his  Excellency  the 
Governor,  and  remain  Yours,  &c., 

Barry  O'Meara. 


No.  136. 
To  Lieut.-Gbnbbal  Count  Montholon. 
Sur,  Plantation  House,  July  12,  1818. 

Having  understood,  by  a  report  received  from  Mr. 
O'Meara,  that,  in  consequence  of  the  serious  indisposition  with 
which  Napoleon  Bonaparte  was  affected  on  the  morning  of  the 
10th  instant,  he  had  acceded  to  a  suggestion  of  Mr.  O'Meara 
for  calling  in  otiier  medical  advice,  and,  although  then  unwilling 
to  receive  Mr.  Baxter,  had  consented  to  see  Mr.  Stokoe,  sur- 
geon of  H.M.S.  Conqueror,  but  that  Mr.  Stokoe,  for  reasons 
which  I  have  had  no  opportunity  to  inform  myself  of,  except  in 
a  general  manner  from  Mr.  O'Meara,  had  declined  entering 
into  consultation  with  him  on  the  occasion,  I  feel  myself  im- 
pelled to  intrude  upon  you  with  these  lines,  both  as  a  matter  of 
duty,  and  as  arising  from  an  earnest  and  sincere  desire  to  con- 
tribute every  possible  means  in  my  power  for  affording  relief,  to 
again  ofier  the  assistance  of  Mr.  Baxter,  or  of  any  other  medical 
person  in  this  island  whose  opinion  there  may  be  a  disposition 
to  consult  I  feel  the  less  hesitation  in  making  this  offer  as  Mr. 
O'Meara,  tiiough  he  has  not  had  recourse  to  what  is  conadered 
as  the  first  medical  advice  in  this  island,  viz.  that  of  Mr.  Baxter 
or  Dr.  Kay,  has  asked  the  opinion  of  another  medical  person, 

2  D  2 


404  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.        Nos.  136, 137. 

who  has  been  in  frequent  attendance  on  the  families  at  Long- 
wood,  viz.  Mr.  Liyingstone,  and  as  the  complaint  with  which 
he  has  stated  Napoleon  Bonaparte  to  be  aflPected  is,  I  under- 
stand, of  a  nature  where  any  delay  in  having  recourse  to  the 
best  medical  advice  which  can  be  obtained  may  be  attended 
with  very  serious  consequences.  In  taking  the  liberty  of  sub- 
mitting a  selection  from  among  different  persons  I  would  not 
wish  however  to  be  considered  as  holding  any  balance  of  opinion 
in  my  own  mind,  for,  setting  apart  any  pretension  arising  from 
the  superior  professional  rank  he  holds,  I  strongly  recommend 
Mr.  Baxter  for  his  professional  skill,  and  for  the  strength  and 
decision  of  his  judgment,  in  any  case  of  doubt  or  difficulty, 
persuaded  his  advice  is  that  which  would  give  the  most  satis- 
faction, I  have  the  honour,  &c, 

H,  LowB, 

No.  136. 

To  Admiral  Plaiipin, 

H.M.S.  Conqueror, 
Sir,  St.  Helena,  July  13, 1818. 

His  Excellency  the  Governor  having  done  me  the  honour 
to  show  me  Mr.  O'Meara's  letter,  wherein  he  states  my  objec- 
tions to  visit  General  Bonaparte,  and  finding  his  statement  not 
sufficiently  explanatory  of  my  motives,  I  beg  that  you  will  be 
pleased  to  communicate  to  his  Excellency  those  I  made  to  you 
when  I  had  the  honour  to  receive  your  commands  to  proceed  to 
Longwood,  viz.,  to  visit  him  alone  would  place  me  in  an  ex- 
tremely delicate  situation,  and  would  attach  a  degree  of  respon- 
sibility which  I  was  unwilling  to  take  upon  myself  but  that  I 
should  be  happy  to  share  it  with  any  other  medical  man  who 
might  be  permitted  to  see  him.  I  have,  &c., 

John  Stokob,  Surgeon. 


No.  137. 

A  Monsieur  le  Lieut.-G^nebal  Sib  Hudson  Lowe. 
Monsieur  le  Gouvemeur,  Longwood,  Juillet  20, 1818. 

Aujourd'hui  sont  arriv^  a  Longwood  Monsieur  le  Lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Lyster  et  Monsieur  Jackson  pour  faire  les  fono- 


No.  137.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  405 

tions  d'officier  d'ordonnance.  Nous  n'ayons  eu  jusqu'a  cette 
heure  qu'un  officier  d'ordonnance ;  c'est  une  nouveaute  fort 
desagreable  que  d'en  ayoir  deux.  Nous  avons  reconnu  avec 
surprise  que  le  Lieutenant-Colonel  Lyster  est  le  meme  qui  a 
commande  a  Ajaccio,  ville  ou  est  situee  la  maison  patemelle  de 
rSmpereur.  II  a  des  raisons  pour  le  considerer  comme  un 
ennemi  personnel.  II  a  en  cons^uence  refus^  de  le  recevoir 
pendant  trois  ans  qu'il  est  dans  ce  pays.  J'ai  fait  connaltre 
par  son  ordre  cette  circonstance  k  cette  officier  en  I'engageant 
k  suspendre  sa  prise  de  possession,  parce  qu'il  ne  pourrait  faire 
ici  qu'un  mauyais  sendee.  Jusqu'a  cette  heure  I'officier  d'or- 
donnance a  ete  un  Capitaine  bien  fame  du  regiment.  Lorsque 
le  53me  est  parti,  yous  ayez  remplace  le  Capitaine  Poppleton 
par  le  Capitaine  Blakeney,  qui  jouissait  d'une  excellente  repu- 
tation. Je  yous  prie,  Monsieur,  si  yous  ne  youlez  pas  encore 
empirer  beaucoup  la  position  des  choses,  de  faire  un  choix 
^galement  honorable  dans  le  regiment  qui  est  ici  en  gamison. 
Vous  connaissez  Tetat  ficheux  de  sante  ou  s'est  trouye  ce  Prince 
dans  les  mois  de  Mars  et  d'Ayril.  II  a  sorti  quelquefois  a 
trente  pas  de  sa  maison  pour  s'asseoir  sur  le  banc  que  yous  ayez 
enyoye.  II  y  restait  une  heure,  respirait  le  plein  air.  Cela 
lui  faisait  du  bien.  Yous  ayez  ordonne  au  jardinier  soldat  du 
66me  d'arreter  qui  lui  conyiendrait  sous  les  fenetres  meme  de 
I'Empereur,  ce  qu'il  a  fait.  De  domestique  yous  I'ayez  ainsi 
conyerti  en  agent  d' execution ;  cela  ayait  plus  d'inconyenient 
encore  que  de  mettre  des  sentinelles  sous  ses  fenetres.  Depuis 
ce  temps,  c'est  a  dire  depuis  cent  jours,  il  n'est  plus  sorti  de  ses 
murs,  et  n'a  plus  mis  la  tete  k  la  fenetre.  Comme  le  medecin 
insiste  tons  les  jours  pour  qu'il  respire  au  moins  une  heure  par 
jour  I'air  libre  pendant  les  bons  interyalles  de  sa  maladie,  je  yous 
prie,  Monsieur,  d'dter  ce  soldat  jardinier  et  de  le  remplacer  par 
un  jardinier  qui  n'ait  aucune  autre  fonction  que  sa  fonction  do- 
mestique. Le  sergent  d'ouyrier  parait  etre  inyeste  du  meme  pou- 
yoir.  Je  yous  prie,  Monsieur,  de  le  remplacer  ou  de  lui  defendre 
de  s'occuper  de  rien  autre  chose  que  de  ses  fonctions  d'ouyrier. 
Aujourd'hui  le  choix  de  I'officier  d'ordonnance  sera  une  raison 
de  plus  qui  empechera  ce  Prince  de  sortir,  et  dans  ceci,  comme 
dans  toute  autre  chose,  je  redamekqui  existait  ayant  toutesces 
innoyations.  J'ai  I'honneur  d'etre,  &c. 

Le  CoBfTB  Bbrtrand. 


406  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  No.  138. 

No.  138. 
To  Lieut.-Genebal  Sib  Hudson  Lows,  K.C.B. 
Sr,  Downing  Street,  July  21,  1818. 

I  hare  reoeiTed  and  laid  before  the  Prince  Regent  your 
geveral  despatches,  to  No.  135  inclusiTe.  The  only  point  upon 
which  1  deem  it  necessary  to  giye  you  any  particular  instruc- 
tions is,  with  respect  to  the  more  firequent  intercourse  which 
has  latterly  taken  place  between  the  Comnussioners  of  the 
Allied  Powers  resident  at  St  Helena,  and  the  attendants  of 
General  Buonaparte.  It  is  impossible  to  read  the  correspondence 
winch  you  haye  transmitted,  without  observing  that  the  efiect 
of  that  more  frequent  communication  between  the  Commis- 
sioners and  Longwood  has  been  to  excite  in  the  breast  of 
General  Buonaparte  and  his  followers  a  greater  dispodtion  to 
resist  your  authority  and  to  subject  you  to  insult  It  appears 
eyident  that  they  haye  misconstrued  the  desire  which  the  Com- 
missioners haye  naturally,  although  somewhat  indiscreetly, 
eyinced,  to  partake  of  their  society,  into  an  approbation  of  their 
conduct  towards  you ;  and,  thinking  that  they  might  rely  upon 
the  Commissioners'  protection,  have  at  once  ^yen  a  fireer 
scope  to  their  insolence  and  falsehood,  and  a  more  determined 
opposition  to  your  proper  authority.  Independent  of  what  is 
due  to  you  as  Goyemor,  it  is  for  the  interest  of  General  Buona- 
parte that  this  conduct  on  the  part  of  his  attendants  should  not 
pass  without  obsenration,  as,  if  continued,  it  would  necessarily 
lead  to  their  removal.  I  am  far  firom  imputing  to  the  Com- 
missioners, individually  or  collectively,  the  least  intention  of 
encouraging  this  disposition  on  the  part  of  Generals  Bertrand 
and  Montholon,  and  give  entire  credit  to  the  representations 
which  they  have  from  time  to  time  given  you  of  the  real  cha- 
racter of  this  intercourse ;  but  I  know  that  Generals  Bertrand 
and  Montholon  give  a  very  different  report  of  what  passes  on 
those  occasions ;  and  the  effect  of  this  unrestrained  intercourse 
with  those  persons  has  evidentiy  been  to  excite  in  them  a  belief 
that  their  disrespect  towards  you  is  not  disapproved  by  the 
Commissioners.  Having  seen  the  instructions  given  to  the 
Russian  Commissioner,  and  having  no  reason  to  believe  that 
the  instructions  ^ven  to  the  two  other  Commissioners  are  less 


No.  139.       LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.         407 

favourable  to  the  consideration  due  to  your  authority,  I  cer- 
tainly had  hoped  that  your  intimations  and  representations  on 
this  subject  would  have  been  more  attended  to ;  and  I  still 
flatter  myself  that  it  will  not  be  necessary  for  you  to  act  upon 
this  instruction ;  but  if  unfortunately  you  should  not  receive 
satisfactory  assurances  from  the  Commissioners,  you  will  in 
that  case  acquaint  them  that  the  Prince  Regent  has  deemed  it 
necessary  to  place  their  intercourse  with  Longwood,  as  private 
individuals,  under  restrictions  similar  to  those  which  exist  with 
respect  to  others ;  and  in  announcing  to  them  that  they  will  in 
future  enjoy  no  greater  liberty  in  this  respect  than  is  allowed 
generally  to  British  military  officers,  you  will  explain  to  them 
the  grounds  upon  which  His  Royal  Highness  has  thought  it 
incumbent  upon  him  to  adopt  this  determination.  You  will, 
however,  in  that  case,  distinctly  understand  and  explain  to  the 
Commissioners,  that  the  instruction  which  I  am  now  conveying 
to  you  applies  only  to  the  Commissioners  in  their  private  capa- 
city ;  and  that  if  at  any  time  General  Buonaparte  shall  consent 
to  receive  them  as  Commissioners  of  the  Allied  Powers,  under 
the  treaty  of  the  2nd  of  August,  1815,  you  will  not  oppose  any 
obstacle  to  their  visiting  Longwood  for  the  purpose  of  being 
presented  by  you  as  such  to  General  Buonaparte. 

I  have  the  honour,  &c. 

Batuurst. 


No.  139. 

To  Earl  Bathubst,  K.G. 


My  Lord,  St.  Helena,  July  27, 1818. 

I  have  the  honour  to  inform  yoiur  Lordship  that  Cap- 
tain Blakeney,  the  orderly  officer  at  Longwood,  having  com- 
pleted the  term  of  a  year  on  that  duty,  applied  to  me  to  be 
relieved  from  it  Although  unwilling  to  dispense  with  his 
services,  I  could  not  refuse  his  application,  and  it  became  there- 
fore necessary  for  me  to  look  out  for  a  successor.  The  greater 
number  of  llie  captains  of  the  66th  Regiment  were  married 
men,  and  had  families ;  and  those  who  were  not  so  were  not 
sufficiently  acquainted  with  the  French  language  to  offer  an 
advantageous  selection.     The  sending  an  officer  of  my  own 


408  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  No.  139. 

staff  would,  I  knew,  have  been  only  treated  as  an  outrage ;  my 
thoughts  turned,  therefore,  on  a  person  who  I  conceiyed  was 
one  of  the  last  on  the  island  against  whom  any  plausiUe  ground 
of  objection  could  be  fcnrmed — Lieutenant-Colonel  Lyster,  In- 
spector of  the  Island  SClitia. 

In  order  to  relieye  him,  however,  finom  a  part  of  his  duty,  I 
resolved  to  place  near  him  Lieutenant  Jackson,  of  the  Royal 
Staff  Corps,  whom  I  knew  to  be  perfectly  agreeable  to  the 
residents  at  Longwood,  to  attend  upon  them  when  beycmd  their 
limits ;  following  in  this  respect  a  course  which  had  been  before 
pursued  during  the  time  Major  Poppleton  was  orderly  officer, 
when  he  was  assisted  in  sudi  duty  by  an  officer  of  dragoons. 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Lyster  was  well  acquainted  with  French 
and  Italian,  the  languages  spoken  at  Longwood  ;  a  man  of  the 
best  temper,  the  kindest  and  most  inoffensive  of  dispositions. 
He  had  no  predilection  for  the  situation  when  I  offered  it  to 
him,  and  only  accepted  it  because  he  hoped  to  render  service 
in  it ;  resolved  to  spare  no  pwis  whatever  by  which  he  might 
add  to  the  comforts  of  the  detained  persons  and  their  femiilies, 
and  condliate  the  execution  of  his  duties  with  all  possible 
regard  to  their  feelings.  No  other  form  was  requisite  on  my 
part  than  that  of  acquainting  them  of  Captain  Blakeney's 
departure,  and  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Lyster's  appointment; 
but  I  thought  it  right  to  give  a  few  days'  previous  notice,  in 
order  that  if  there  was  any  objection  it  might  be  made  known 
to  me.  I  therefore  wrote  a  note  on  the  16th  of  July  to  Count 
Bertrand,  of  which  copy  is  enclosed,  and  on  the  next  day 
received  an  acknowledgment  for  it.  Four  days  elapsed  before 
Lieutenant-Colonel  Lyster  went  to  Longwood  to  relieve  Cap- 
tain Blakeney,  and  during  this  time  no  shadow  of  objection 
appeared  likely  to  arise  against  him ;  on  the  contrary.  Count 
Bertrand  sent  for  Lieutenant  Jackson,  and,  as  if  already  con- 
sidered to  be  assisting  the  orderly  officer  in  his  duties,  asked 
him  to  carry  a  message  to  me,  which  strictly  ought  not  to  have 
been  sent  but  through  Captain  Blakeney.  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Lyster's  arrival  at  Longwood  was  followed,  however,  by  the 
most  distinct  hostility.  I  had  hardly  received  the  report  of  his 
arrival  there,  and  of  his  first  visit  to  Count  Bertrand  (of  which 
copies  accompany),  before  a  letter  was  f(Hnvarded  to  me  from 
Count  Bertrand,  with  another  from  Colonel  Lyster,  of  which 


No.  139.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  409 

copies  are  also  transmitted.  I  sent  an  answer  to  Count  Ber- 
trand's  letter  the  next  morning.  The  following  day  I  received 
a  report  from  Lieutenant-Colonel  Lyster,  staling  the  refusal  of 
Mr.  CMeara  to  give  him  the  dmple  information  if  he  had 
seen  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  and  at  the  same  time  declining  to 
answer  as  to  the  state  of  his  health,  although  a  few  days  before 
he  had  stated  it  to  me,  as  a  reason  why  he  did  not  give  the 
orderly  officer  information,  that  he  did  not  ask  it  of  him. 
The  same  day  brought  me  another  letter  from  Count  Bertrand, 
which  I  resolved  to  send  back  to  him,  with  such  remarks  as  the 
false  assertions  it  contained  appeared  to  me  to  call  for.  At 
the  time  this  letter  was  sent  to  me,  Mr.  CMeara  was  equally 
active  as  Count  Bertrand  in  his  hostility  agdnst  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Lyster ;  for  the  following  morning,  the  23rd,  I  received 
a  report,  with  copies  of  a  correspondence  that  had  passed 
between  them,  to  which  reference  will  be  hereafter  made.  I 
had  already,  pursuant  to  your  Lordship's  instruction,  deter- 
mined on  Mr.  O'Meara's  removal  from  this  island,  and  wanted 
not  this  fresh  motive  to  hasten  his  departure ;  but  it  was  not 
until  the  25th  instant,  from  other  business  intervening,  I  was 
enabled  to  make  the  necessary  arrangement,  and  fix  the  time 
of  his  removal.  I  was  just  on  the  point  of  sending  my  orders 
for  this  purpose,  when  I  received  a  letter  from  Count  Bertrand, 
of  which  copy  accompanies.  Your  Lordship  will  judge  how 
extremely  disconcerted  I  must  have  been  at  the  contretemps 
produced  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Lyster's  personal  quarrel  with 
Count  Bertrand.  I  had  shown  to  him,  it  is  true,  what  the 
Count  had  said  in  his  letter  with  respect  to  him,  because  I  saw 
no  motive  for  concealing  what  was  said  from  any  officer  em- 
ployed on  so  delicate  a  duty  as  that  Colonel  Lyster  had  to 
execute,  conceiving  that  whatever  irritation  might  have  been 
felt  would  have  been  controlled  at  least  during  the  time  he 
might  conttrme  in  attendance  on  duty  at  Longwood.  I  did  not, 
however,  perhaps,  sufficiently  calculate  on  the  feelings  of  an 
officer  whose  character  through  life  had  passed  without  re- 
proach, and  who  was  wholly  unused  to  the  style  of  language  by 
which  the  persons  at  Longwood  have  made  it  their  invariable 
endeavour  to  irritate  and  to  provoke.  The  step  Lieutenant- 
Colonel  Lyster  had  taken,  of  challenging  Count  Bertrand,  and 
the  manner  in  which  he  spoke  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte  himself. 


410  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  No.  139. 

however  great  the  proyocation  might  have  been,  and  whatever 
allowance  I  might  be  inclined  to  make  for  the  feelings  of  lieu- 
tenant-Colonel Lyster,  it  was  impossible  for  me  to  approve; 
nor  could  I  suffer  it  even  to  remain  as  a  matter  of  the  least 
doubt  or  suspicion  that  my  decided  interposition  would  not  be 
immediately  used  for  the  protection,  not  only  of  Napoleon 
Bonaparte  himself,  but  for  that  of  any  person  who  was  under 
detention  with  him,  from  any  act  of  personal  violence  or  hos- 
tility in  the  circle  of  his  own  readence,  which  I  considered  as 
much  a  place  for  his  protection  as  for  his  security,  beyond 
which  he  had  no  other  asylum  to  look  for.  I  had  used  means 
of  interference  even  to  prevent  his  peace  being  disturbed  by  a 
quarrel  amongst  his  own  followers ;  I  therefore  addressed  an 
immediate  reply  to  Count  Bertrand,  of  which  copy  is  annexed, 
returning  at  the  same  time  his  letter  of  the  22nd  instant,  with 
my  remarks  upon  it  I  was  directly  afterwards  waited  upon  by 
Lieut.-Colonel  Lyster  himself,  who  I  found  had  addressed  a 
second  letter  to  Count  Bertrand,  who  had  not  however  judged 
it  expedient  to  forward  it  to  me.  It  appears  likely  he  had  not 
thought  proper  to  send  Lieut-Colonel  Lyster's  first  letter 
until  he  had  received  the  second,  which  must  have  rendered 
him  natiurally  apprehensive  of  some  still  more  unpleasant  conse- 
quence than  what  the  first  letter  had  threatened  to  produce ; 
but  the  steps  I  had  taken  for  Lieut-Colonel  Lyster's  removal, 
prevented  of  course  anything  whatever  occurring  between  them. 
I  did  not  fail  to  express  to  Lieut-Colonel  Lyster  my  dis- 
pleasure at  his  having  had  recourse  to  such  a  violent  measure, 
particularly  whilst  on  duty  at  Longwood,  as  also  for  the  manner 
in  which  he  had  referred  to  Napoleon  Bonaparte  himself.  I 
signified  to  him  at  tiie  same  time  that  he  was  not  to  return  to 
Longwood,  and  I  again  sent  Captain  Blakeney  thither.  I  have 
since  received  a  letter  from  Lieut.-Colonel  Lyster,  in  explana- 
tion of  his  conduct,  which,  with  the  enclosures  referred  to  in  it, 
I  have  the  honour  to  forward  for  your  Lordship's  more  full 
information.  I  have  the  honour,  &c 

H.  Lowe. 


No.  140.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  411 

No.  140. 

To  Eabl  Bathubst,  K.G. 
My  Lord,  St  Helena,  July  30, 1818. 

I  do  myself  the  honour  to  enclose  to  your  Lordship  a 
memorandum  which  has  been  furnished  to  me  by  Lieutenant 
Jackson,  of  a  conversation  which  occurred  between  Count  Mon- 
tholon,  Dr.  Verling,  and  himself  this  day.  It  appears  to  me 
altogether  of  a  very  remarkable  nature,  certainly  seeming  to 
imply  some  change  in  Napoleon  Bonaparte's  disposition,  par- 
ticularly as  to  the  point  of  contenting  himself  with  other  medical 
advice  than  that  of  Mr.  O'Meara,  even  should  a  French  or 
Italian  surgeon  not  arrive  here.  I  shall  endeavour  to  take  some 
steps  upon  this  matter  immediately  after  Mr.  O'Meara's  removal. 

With  respect  to  what  Count  Montholon  observed  about  my 
having  committed  myself  in  a  moment  of  anger,  I  can  with 
confidence  appeal  to  Admiral  Plampin,  Brigadier-General  Sir 
George  Bingham,  and  every  officer  of  my  staflT,  that  there  was 
nothing  of  momentary  anger  in  the  deliberation  that  was  taken 
on  the  subject  of  Mr.  O'Meara's  removal,  but  that  it  was  de- 
cided on  two  days  before  it  took  place,  viz.  the  23rd  July,  upon 
grounds  which  appeared  to  all  who  were  spoken  to  on  the 
subject  of  a  nature  to  render  any  delay  inexpedient,  if  not 
improper ;  in  fact,  I  believe  to  have  had  more  doubts  myself 
thsm  any  other  person.  With  regard  to  removing  Mr.  O'Meara 
a  month  sooner  or  a  month  later,  there  has  been  no  period  for 
some  time  past,  that  the  state  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte's  health 
had  been  spoken  of  so  favourably  as  the  last  time  I  addressed 
Mr.  O'Meara  on  the  subject.  His  replies  indicated  an  altera- 
tion for  the  better,  though  not  a  permanent  one. 

I  had  no  other  authority  than  Mr.  O'Meara's  that  Napoleon 
Bonaparte  was  taking  any  medicine ;  and  at  a  moment  when 
Mr.  O'Meara's  removal  was  looked  for,  and  particularly  when 
(as  there  is  reason  to  suppose  by  his  having  thought  fit  to  re- 
move part  of  his  baggage)  he  had  himself  received  some  in- 
timation on  the  subject  from  England,  it  is  not  likely  that  such 
a  groimd  for  not  immediately  removing  him  as  that  of  Napo- 
leon Bonaparte  requiring  medicine  in  some  form  or  for  some 
complaint  or  other  would  ever  have  been  wanting. 

The  refusal,  however,  of  Mr.  O'Meara  to  deliver  up  his 


412  CAPTIYITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  No.  141. 

medical  journal,  and  his  ready  connivance  with  the  views  of 
Napoleon  Bonaparte  to  prevent  me  from  satisfying  myself, 
through  any  person  of  my  own  confidence,  of  the  actual  state 
of  his  health,  and  the  exclusion  thereby  of  every  means  by 
which  legal  or  well-authenticated  proof  could  be  obtained  to 
justify  me,  supposing  any  consequence  to  result  from  my  placing 
too  implicit  a  reliance  on  Mr.  O'Meara's  statements,  he  with- 
holding at  the  same  time  the  only  document  in  his  possesion 
which  could  give  any  real  weight  to  them,  will,  I  feel  assured, 
exonerate  me  from  that  blame  which  Count  Montholon  has 
conceived  I  shall  be  .exposed  to,  even  if  my  proceedings  had  not 
been  based  on  your  Lordship's  instruction  to  me. 

It  is  remarkable  that  Coimt  Montholon  does  not  attempt  to 
dispute  the  propriety  of  my  removing  Mr.  O'Meara.  His 
argument  only  applies  to  the  moment  of  it.  In  fact,  my  letter 
of  the  26th  instant,  where  I  say,  if  Mr.  O'Meara's  medical 
attendance  is  so  desirable,  it  is  to  be  lamented  he  did  not  com- 
bine it  with  more  respect  and  obedience  to  the  regulations  of 
his  Government  in  other  points,  and  that  his  last  act  was  a 
breach  of  order  and  disavowal  of  authority,  remains  without 
reply. 

With  respect  to  what  Count  Montholon  said  on  the  subject 
of  restrictions,  I  shall  consider  what  can  be  done,  but  I  fear 
this  is  a  point  upon  which  considerable  difficulty  may  present 
itself;  none,  however,  which  there  shall  be  any  want  of  a  real 
endeavour  on  my  part  to  remove,  where  it  can  be  done  con- 
sistent with  the  primary  object  of  my  duty. 

I  have  ^e  honoiur,  &c 
H.  Lowe. 

No.  141. 

A  Monsieur  lb  Libut.-Gbnebal  Sib  Hudson  Lowe. 
Monsieur  le  Gouvemeur,  Longwood,  Juillet  24, 1818. 

J'ai  I'honneur  de  vous  envoyer  une  lettre  que  je  re^ois.* 
Le  vieillard  me  parait  en  demence.  II  ne  pent  avoir  con- 
naissance  de  ma  corrcspondance  officielle  que  par  vos  ordres. 
Je  ne  lui  r^ponds  ni  ne  lui  repondrai.     II  n'est  qu'un  man- 

*  The  letter  here  alluded  to  was  that  from  Colonel  Lyster,  oontaimng  a 
challeDge  to  Count  Bertraud.     Vide  pp.  33^6,  ante. 


No8. 142, 143.        LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  413 

dataire,  et  si  son  principal  officier  general  veut  me  demander 
raison  je  suis  pret  a  lui  faire  honneur. 

J'ai  rhonneur,  &c. 

Le  Comte  Bertrand. 


No.  142. 
A  MoNsiKUB  LS  Lixut.-Gensbal  Sir  Hudson  Lowb. 
Monsieur  le  Gouvemeur,  Longwood,  Juillet  26, 1818. 

Le  Docteur  O'Meara  a  quitte  hier  Longwood,  forc^  de 
laisser  son  malade  au  milieu  du  traitement  qu'il  dirigeait.  Ce 
matin  ce  traitement  a  cesse— -ce  matin  un  grand  crime  a  com- 
mence d'avoir  ex^tion.  Les  lettres  de  Monsieur  le  Comte 
Bertrand  des  13,  24,  26,  et  27  Ayril  dernier  ne  laissent  rien  k 
dire.  L'Empereur  ne  recevra  jamais  d'autre  m^edn  que  le 
Sieur  O'Meara,  parcequ'il  est  le  rien,  ou  celui  qui  lui  serait 
enyoy^  d'Europe  conform^ment  a  la  lettre  ci-dessus  dtee  du 
13  Ami.  J'ai  communique  la  lettre  que  vous  m'avez  ecrite 
hier ;  ce  que  j'ai  I'honneur  de  vous  ecrire  est  la  substance  de  la 
reponse  qu'on  m'a  charg^  de  vous  transmettre. 

Le  G^Ni^RAL  Comte  de  Montholon. 


No.  143. 
A  MoNsnsuR  LE  Lisut.-Gemeral  Sm  Hudson  Lowe. 
Monsieur  le  Gouvemeur,  Longwood,  Juillet  26, 1818. 

Je  re^ois  a  I'instant  la  lettre  que  vous  m'avez  fait 
I'honneur  de  m'ecrire  ce  soir.  Je  ne  pourrai  pas  la  montrer 
k  I'Empereur  avant  demain  midi,  car  il  a  et^  fort  mal  au- 
jourd'hui.  En  la  traduisant  je  m'aper^ois  d'une  erreur  ou  vous 
etes ;  vous  induisez  de  ce  qu'il  a  fait  appeler  le  Docteur  Stokoe 
en  consultation  qu'il  pourrait  recevoir  ses  services  comme  m^ 
decin  ordinaire :  j'ai  I'honneur  de  vous  donner  I'assurance, 
malheureusement  trop  positive,  que  meme  au  rale  de  la  mort  il 
ne  recevra  d'aide,  ne  prendra  de  remMes,  que  de  son  propre 
m^ecin  le  Seur  CMeara,  et  si  on  Fen  prive  il  n'en  recevra  de 
personne,  et  se  tiendra  pour  etre  assassin^  par  vous. 
J'ai  I'honneur,  &c. 

Lb  G6n£ral  Comte  de  Montholon. 


414  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  No.  lU. 

No.  144. 
To  Likut.-Genbbal  Sib  Hudson  Lowe,  K.C.B. 

Sir,  Downing  Street,  August  10, 1818. 

I  have  the  honour  of  transmittmg  to  you  the  copy  of  a 
letter  which  has  been  addressed  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for 
Foreign  Affairs  by  the  Cardinal  Gonsalvi,  relative  to  an  appli- 
cation made  by  Cardinal  Fesch  to  the  Prince  Regent  for  per- 
mission to  procure  and  send  to  St  Helena  a  Roman  Catholic 
priest  to  attend  on  General  Buonaparte.  I  am  to  acquaint  you 
that  his  Royal  Highness  sees  no  reason  to  withhold  his  assent  to 
this  application  on  behalf  of  General  Buonaparte.  You  will, 
therefore,  take  an  early  opportunity  of  communicating  to  Ge- 
neral Buonaparte  that.  Cardinal  Fesch  having  represented  to  the 
Pope  the  desire  of  General  Buonaparte  to  have  a  priest  resident 
at  Longwood  in  whom  he  may  confide,  the  General  having  stated 
himself  "  to  be  unavoidably  prevented  from  fulfilling  the  duties 
imposed  upon  him  by  the  rehgion  which  he  professes,  and  de- 
prived of  the  essential  comforts  which,  according  to  the  tenets 
of  his  faith,  may  be  derived  from  a  participation  of  the  Sacra- 
ments," the  Prince  Regent  has  signified  his  consent  that 
Cardinal  Fesch  shall,  agreeable  to  the  wishes  of  General 
Buonaparte,  select  a  priest  for  that  purpose,  and  that  this 
priest  will  have  permission  to  reside  at  Longwood,  subject  to 
such  conditions  as  it  may  be  necessary  for  him  previously  to 
subscribe. 

Observing  from  your  recent  despatches  that  General  Buona- 
parte has  expressed  a  msh  to  have  a  French  surgeon  of  known 
reputation  attached  to  the  establishment  at  Longwood,  and  to 
be  provided  with  a  cook  in  whom  he  may  be  able  to  place 
confidence,  I  have  availed  myself  of  the  same  opportunity  of 
making  the  wishes  of  General  Buonaparte  in  this  respect 
known  to  Cardinal  Fesch ;  and,  although  it  appears  that  the 
person  who  recently  served  him  in  the  latter  capacity  was  sud- 
denly removed  by  the  General's  direction  (for  no  fault  or  any 
inattention  to  his  duty),  I  nevertheless  have  so  little  disposition 
to  interfere  with  any  arrangement  which  General  Buonaparte 
may  consider  necessary  to  his  comfort  or  safety,  that  I  have 


Nos.  145,  146.        LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  416 

left  it  to  CariKnal  Fesch  to  select  persons  for  both  these  situa- 
tions, who  will  proceed  to  St  Helena  in  company  with  the 
Roman  Catholic  priest,  under  similar  engagements  as  to  the 
restriction  of  their  communication  and  inftercourse  with  the  in- 
habitants of  the  island. 

I  shall  not  fail  to  give  you  the  earliest  intimation  of  the 
names  of  the  individuals  selected  for  these  offices,  and  of  the 
pro  aUe  period  of  their  departure  from  this  country. 

I  have  the  honour,  &c. 

Bathurst, 


No.  145. 
To  Lisut.-Genbral  Sib  Hudson  Lows,  K.C.B. 
Sir,  Downing  Street,  August  27, 1818. 

It  appearing  by  a  letter  addressed  by  Messrs.  Baring  to 
General  Bertrand  on  the  13th  instant  that  the  General  had  it 
in  contemplation  to  forward  to  them  the  necessary  power  of 
attorney  for  selling  out  that  considerable  sum  of  money  which 
is  vested  in  his  name  in  the  Navy  5  per  Cents.,  and  of  which 
he  is  in  the  regular  receipt  of  the  interest,  and  it  being  on 
every  account  most  unadvisable,  with  a  view  to  the  security  of 
General  Buonaparte,  that  any  of  his  attendants  should  have 
so  large  a  sum  at  their  immediate  disposal  in  the  island,  I  am 
to  instruct  you  in  no  case  to  lend  your  assistance  to  the  verifi- 
cation of  General  Bertrand's  signature  attached  to  such  an 
instrument  I  have  the  honour,  &c. 

Bathurst. 


No.  146. 
To  Eabl  Bathubst,  K.O. 
My  Lord,  St.  Helena,  September  29, 1818. 

Your  Lordship  will  peruse  with  feelings  of  no  ordinary 
disgust  the  details  of  the  accompanying  report,  disclosing  such 
mean  and  unworthy  tricks  and  artifices  to  elude  the  regulations 
in  force  on  this  island,  to  establish  a  secret  correspondence  with 
Europe  for  pecuniary  and  other  concerns,  and  to  rmse  a  cabal 
at  the  same  time  on  the  island  itself  in  favour  of  Napoleon 


416  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  No.  146. 

Bonaparte,  as  it  could  have  been  hardly  expected  would  have 
been  at  once  brought  to  view. 

The  Marquis  de  Montchenu,  who  is  as  yet  uninformed  of 
what  has  been  done,  mentioned  to  me  itwo  days  since  that  Mr. 
CyMeara,  a  short  time  before  his  departure,  received  a  letter 
from  Lord  Melville  (I  repeat  what  the  Marquis  said,  and  whom 
I  immediately  set  right,  because  it  could  not  of  course  have 
been  Lord  Melville,  though  not  impossibly  one  of  the  dei^s  in 
the  department),  saying  he  was  to  be  recalled  from  his  situation 
here ;  that  he  had  shown  this  letter  to  the  persons  at  Longwood, 
but  that  Napoleon  felt  too  secure  of  the  effect  of  the  reports  of 
his  illness  to  admit  the  idea  of  the  removal  taking  place,  believ- 
ing neither  Government  nor  myself  would  dare,^  whilst  he  was 
supposed  to  be  so  ill,  to  deprive  him  of  Mr.  O'Meara's  assist^ 
ance.  This  information  the  Marquis  must  have  had  from  Count 
Balmain's  conversations.  Such  a  material  point  being,  as  he 
conceived,  gained,  Napoleon  appears  resolved  to  have  pushed 
to  the  utmost  limit  the  advantage  he  trusted  to  have  derived 
from  it.  Hence  the  vulgar  insolence  and  audacity  with  which 
Mr.  O'Meara  was  encouraged  to  act  towards  me,  by  which  he 
hoped  to  shake  in  some  degree  the  regard  due  to  authority ; 
the  cabals  sought  to  be  formed  amongst  the  officers  of  the  66th 
and  in  the  navy ;  the  pretensions  he  sought  to  establish  for  Mr. 
O'Meara  in  society  when  he  found  his  character  begin  to  droop ; 
and  all  the  prospectus  [?]  which  is  displayed  in  the  correspondence 
annexed  to  the  report,  deeply  laid  but  illusory,  and  only  proving 
how  easily  Napoleon  himself  can  be  rendered  the  dupe  of  igno- 
rant and  pretending  people,  and  to  what  mean  shifls  he  can  at 
the  same  time  descend.  The  blame,  however,  does  not  appear 
to  originate  wholly  in  him,  as  there  seems  to  have  been  at  least 
as  much  of  fanaticism  and  pretension,  with  an  eye  at  the  same 
time  to  the  trade  to  be  carried  on,  on  one  side,  as  of  excitement 
on  the  other. 

Whatever  may  have  been  said  by  General  Gourgaud  with 
respect  to  other  persons  that  have  been  employed  in  clandestine 
commimications,  I  could  never  'fix  a  direct  suspicion  on  any 
others  than  Mr.  O'Meara  or  Mr.  Balcombe  (however  assistance 
may  have  been  afforded  by  others  as  the  instruments  or  bearers), 
for  they  were  the  only  persons  who  by  their  official  situations 
had  free  access  to  the  persons  at  Longwood,  and,  if  they  were 


No.  146.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  417 

unprincipled  enough,  whilst  receiving  the  public  money  for  their 
services  there,  to  become  the  tools  for  any  indirect  purpose 
whatever,  it  was  next  to  impossible  to  prevent  it 

The  change  in  the  purveyorship  was  the  first  blow  against 
the  designs  that  had  been  forming,  and  the  little  noise  made  by 
Napoleon  about  it  convinced  me  he  was  apprehensive  of  the 
discoveries  that  might  be  made  in  that  quarter.  The  removal 
of  Mr.  O'Meara  levelled  the  whole  fabric,  and  hence  the  plots 
now  developed.  Mr.  Balcombe's  conduct  is  quite  inexcusable. 
I  had  uniformly  treated  him  and  his  family  with  attention  and 
kindness,  and  had  most  distinctly  and  repeatedly  cautioned  him 
in  a  friendly  manner  on  the  subject  of  his  intimacy  with  Mr. 
O'Meara,  pointing  out  to  him  even  the  very  delicate  situation 
in  which  he  might  be  eventually  placed  by  having  his  name 
coupled  together  with  that  of  Mr.  O'Meara  as  the  only  persons 
Napoleon  saw.  Mr.  Balcombe  will  perfectly  recollect,  if  reminded 
of  it,  the  pointed  warning  I  gave  him  in  my  office,  some  weeks 
before  he  left  this  island,  on  the  latter  point.  He  went  on 
headlong,  however,  in  an  increasing  intimacy,  until  he  became, 
as  it  appears,  completely  entangled.  When,  after  obtaining 
my  signature  to  a  requisition  for  certain  stores  he  was  to  em- 
bark on  board  the  Hyena  store-ship  for  the  use  of  the  esta- 
blishment at  Longwood,  he  got  an  order  subsequently  from  the 
Admiral  to  ship  stores  in  tenfold  quantity  on  his  own  account, 
in  prejudice  of  the  island  receiving  supplies  it  was  in  actual 
distress  for  by  the  same  ship,  I  remonstrated  with  him,  as  his 
conduct  merited,  in  opposing  or  undermining  the  arrangements 
he  knew  I  had  been  endeavouring  to  establish ;  but  this  was 
the  only  occasion  where  I  expressed  a  marked  dissatisfaction  to 
him,  although,  it  appears  to  me,  the  Admiral,  on  the  whole, 
had  more  reason  to  complain  of  the  mode  in  which  he  had  been 
circumvented  than  myself.  This  was  unconnected,  however, 
with  his  business  at  Longwood,  and  is  only  mentioned  lest  he 
might  be  referring  to  it,  which  neither  the  late  naval  Com- 
mander-in-Chief nor  the  present,  though  acting  with  the  best 
intentions,  can  feel  any  desire  he  should  do. 

I  cannot  sufficiently  express  my  sense  of  the  cordial  and 
zealous  support  I  have  received  throughout  from  Admiral 
Plampin  in  everjrthing  connected  with  the  afiairs  of  Mr. 
O'Meara.     His  reasons  for  not  showing  to,  or  leaving  with 

VOL.  III.  2  Fi 


418  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  No.  146. 

me,  the  letter  from  Mr.  Balcombe  to  Mr.  Stokoe  I  do  not 
entirely  enter  into ;  but  I  am  convinced  the  letter  oontidned 
nothing  which  could  throw  any  new  or  any  important  light  on 
the  subject  of  the  other  correspondence,  and  that  it  is  probably 
regard  to  Mr.  Stokoe,  with  some  feeling  of  consideration 
towards  Mr.  Balcombe  himself,  where  actual  necessity  did  not 
require  his  name  to  be  brought  forward.  The  Admiral  has 
been  somewhat  unpleasantly  placed  in  regard  to  the  latter,  by 
owing  to  him  the  obligation  of  his  present  place  of  residence, 
the  Briars,  which  Mr.  Balcombe,  to  his  own  great  inconyenieoee 
and  that  of  his  family,  yielded  up  to  the  Admiral  on  Us  arri?al 
here.  This  induced  at  first  a  great  intimacy  between  them, 
but  the  Admiral  now  sees  Mr.  Balcombe's  diaracter  and  line  of 
proceeding  in  the  true  point  of  view.  If  your  Lordship  reflects 
on  this  matter  ;  on  the  marked  support  given  to  Mr.  Balcombe 
by  all  the  naval  Commanders-in-Chief ;  that  his  house  was  the 
common  rendezvous  of  the  navy,  not  so  much  for  purposes  of 
hospitality  as  perhaps  to  create  distraction  and  make  a  party 
(Mr.  O'Meara  being  the  oracle  there) ;  on  the  conduct  of  the 
Conunissioners,  and  on  the  protection  given  by  Count  Balmain, 
in  particular,  to  Mr.  O'Meara,  because  juridical  proofs  were  not 
immediately  brought  forward  against  him, — it  will  be  felt  I  had 
many  difficulties  to  overcome  before  attaining  this  development 
of  what  has  been  passmg,  and  brining  about  a  right  diange 
in  persons'  sentiments  on  the  occasion :  but  I  cannot  speak  on 
this  subject  without  expressing  my  great  obligations  to  Sir 
Thomas  Reade,  whose  zeal,  activity,  and  intelligence,  on  this,  as 
well  as  on  every  other  occasion,  have  never  been  in  fault,  and  who 
has  been  a  mainspring  of  the  discoveries  that  have  been  made. 

Even  the  Admiral  told  me  he  had  difficulty  in  persuading 
some  of  his  own  officers  Mr.  O'Meara  was  not  a  much-injured 
man  (which,  however,  must  have  sprung  from  some  party  design, 
as  the  history  of  the  snuff-box  and  his  conununications  with  Mr. 
Vernon  were  sufficient  to  fix  his  character),  but  that  now  all 
voices  are  united  against  him.  Mr.  Stokoe,  the  Admiral  ssud, 
shed  tears  on  finding  how  much  he  had  been  deceived  by  him ; 
and  even  his  friend  Lieutenant  Beardon,  of  the  66th,  now 
speaks  of  him  as  one  of  the  *^  greatest  scoundrels,"  to  use  his 
own  terms,  he  ever  heard  of. 

Your  Lordship  will  observe  the  very  line  of  proceeding  which 


No.  146.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  419 

was  adopted  by  Mr.  Fowler.  It  shows,  however,  the  confidence 
with  which  lifc.  Hohnes  and  Mr.  Balcombe  must  have  been 
acting,  when  they  could  venture  to  implicate  Mr.  Fowler  so 
far  as  to  send  him  a  letter  and  a  box  of  French  books  under  a 
feigned  address.  Mr.  Cole,  the  other  partner,  has  not  appeared 
in  the  matter.  He  has  conducted  himself  with  great  prudence 
since  Mr.  Balcombe's  departure,  but  has  appeared  a  good  deal 
agitated  since  the  last  discoveries.  It  is  likely  to  prove  a  fatal 
thing  for  the  business  of  their  house ;  but  if  they  have  lost  the 
purveyorship  by  their  connection  with  Mr.  O'Meara,  it  is  not 
from  want  of  due  caution  to  Mr.  Balcombe,  and  this  I  am  par- 
ticularly solicitous  Sir  Thomas  Tyrwhitt  should  understand.  .  . 

I  have  observed  tiiat  part  of  Mr.  Balcombe's  letter  wherein 
he  says  the  opinions  of  Sir  George  Cockbum  and  Sir  Pulteney 
are  with  him.  I  can  never  believe  a  person  holding  the  high 
official  ffltuation  of  Sr  Greorge  Cockbum  would  ofiTer  opinions 
to  Mr.  Balcombe  on  a  subject  of  such  delicacy  as  that  he 
adverts  to,  but,  if  he  should  have  done  so,  I  am  quite  ready  to 
meet  and  refute  them.  If  Sir  Pulteney  has  ofiered  such  opinions 
in  private,  I  am  persuaded  he  will  not  think  of  maintaining 
them ;  but  should  he  have  expressed  opinions  on  such  subject 
to  any  person  in  official  situation,  or  uttered  tiiem  publicly,  I 
should  desire  to  learn  it,  as  I  am  quite  prepared  for  any  discus- 
sion on  such  points  with  him 

Napoleon  is  as  yet  uninformed  of  what  has  been  passing. 
To  have  admitted  only. two  English  persons  near  him  for 
upwards  of  a  twelvemonth,  and  those  to  be  proved  his  mere 
tools,  can  afibrd  him  no  agreeable  subject  of  reflection,  particu- 
larly if  he  should  by  chance  discover  that  the  one  of  them,  a 
surgeon  of  a  man-of-war,  was  formerly  dismissed  the  army  by 
the  sentence  of  a  court-martial,  and  that  the  other,  who  had 
been  a  mate  of  an  Indiaman,  had  been  equally  dismissed  the 
Company's  service  for  some  gross  act  of  insubordination  towards 
the  commander  of  his  ship.  The  anecdotes  which  are  current 
here  I  have  no  reason  to  doubt  the  truth  of,  yet  such,  with  Mr. 
Warden,  are  the  chief  selections  Napoleon  has  made.  He  has 
not  moved  out  since  the  last  report  which  mentioned  it  In 
other  respects  he  continues  the  same. 

I  have  the  honour,  &c., 

H.  Lowe. 
2  E  2 


420  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  No.  147. 

No.  147. 

To  Eabl  Bathurst,  K.G. 

My  Lord,  St.  Helena,  October  12,  1818. 

In  my  letter  of  the  18th  September  I  had  the  honour 
to  acquaint  your  Lordship  of  the  particulars  of  a  conversation 
I  had  with  Count  Montholon  on  that  day  respecting  the  intro- 
duction of  the  orderly  officer  and  surgeon  in  attendance  at 
Longwood  to  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  adverting  at  the  same  time 
to  the  principal  motive  which  urged  me  to  propose  their  pre- 
sentation to  him,  viz.  that  of  endeavouring  to  obtain,  in  the 
least  painful  way  to  Napoleon  Bonaparte  himself,  the  execution 
of  that  part  of  the  orderly  officer's  duty  which  requires  he  should 
make  daily  reports  of  his  actual  presence  on  the  spot 

The  orderly  officer  saw  him  on  that  day  immediately  after 
my  conversation  with  Count  Montholon,  and  I  had  therefore 
reason  to  suppose  the  object  in  a  degree  obtained.  Several 
days,  notwithstanding,  elapsed  without  the  same  opportunity 
being  affi)rded.  Napoleon  Bonaparte  kept  himself  entirely  con* 
fined  to  his  room,  with  his  blinds  dosed,  or,  if  he  opened  the 
window  to  admit  a  little  air,  a  curtain  was  immediately  drawn 
across  it  In  other  respects  matters  went  on  in  such  a  manner 
about  the  house  as  to  leave  no  doubt  of  his  being  within  it ;  but 
still  I  was  not  satisfied  that  anything  less  than  frequent  per- 
sonal observation  should  be  considered  by  the  orderly  officer  as 
containing  a  satisfactory  proof  upon  which  to  ground  his  reports 
to  me. 

Several  motives  nevertheless  still  combined  to  make  me  act 
with  every  delicacy  to  Napoleon  Bonaparte  on  this  occasion. 
He  for  some  days,  as  was  stated  by  persons  of  his  family,  did 
not  rise  from  his  bed ;  and,  although  he  ought  in  such  case  to 
have  admitted  a  surgeon  to  see  him,  yet,  viewing  the  serious- 
ness of  his  protests  against  receiving  tiie  visits  of  any  medical 
person  on  the  island,  and  the  conflict  he  must  have  had  to  sus- 
tain in  his  own  mind  before  descending  to  admit  how  absurd 
and  unreasonable  such  protests  were,  I  felt  reluctant,  believing 
a  certain  degree  of  indisposition  might  prevail,  though  from 
confinement  alone,  to  urge  any  too  hasty  intrusion,  whether  of 
the  orderly  officer  or  surgeon,  upon  him.    Another  motive  pre- 


No.  147.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  421 

sented  itself  in  the  circumstance  of  the  new  house  building  for 
him:  the  work  had  commenced  within  a  stone's-throw  of  his 
own  windows  (in  a  spot,  however,  it  is  to  be  observed,  approved 
by  him,  so  far  as  Count  Montholon's  opinion  upon  the  occasion 
could  be  considered  as  his) ;  it  was  thus  not  possible  for  him  to 
show  himself  at  his  window  or  in  his  garden  without  being 
exposed  to  the  gaze  of  all  the  workmen.  Incessant  rain  and 
wind,  at  the  same  time,  presented  a  quite  sufficient  and  natural 
reason  for  his  not  quitting  the  house.  Foreseeing  the  argu- 
ments which  might  be  offered  as  to  the  building,  I  had  directed 
an  extensive  sod  parapet  to  be  thrown  up  between  the  place 
where  the  workmen  were  employed  and  his  garden,  so  as  to 
completely  prevent  any  of  the  persons  employed  either  from 
seeing  him  or  passing  to  his  house  or  garden.  Having  com- 
pleted this  work,  and  the  reports  of  the  orderly  officer  con- 
tinuing the  same — that  it  was  impossible  to  obtain  a  view  of  his 
person — ^I  resolved  to  have  another  interview  with  Count  Mon- 
tholon,  and,  as  he  had  very  readily  attended  upon  me  when  I 
sent  for  him  to  the  orderly  officer's  room,  I  waived  the  same 
ceremonial  on  the  present  occasion  by  calling  upon  him :  this 
interview  took  place  on  the  30th  September.  A  detail  of  the 
conversation  which  ensued  is  transmitted.  I  merely,  on  this 
occasion,  introduced  the  subject  of  my  former  application  for 
the  presentation  of  the  orderly  officer  and  the  surgeon.  Count 
Montholon  had  not  obtained  any  answer,  but  promised  one  the 
ensuing  day.  No  answer  arriving,  I  waited  upon  him  the  3rd 
October,  and  found  a  reply  had  been  ^ven  in  the  negative.  It 
became  now  therefore  expedient  to  put  the  question  of  the 
orderly  officer's  seeing  Napoleon  Bonaparte  upon  another  foot- 
ing. I  stated  at  once  to  Count  Montholon  the  substance  of  the 
reports  I  had  received  from  the  orderly  officer,  and  what  my 
instructions,  as  well  as  his,  required.  A  long  conversation 
ensued,  of  which  the  details  accompany  [this]. 

On  the  5th  instant  I  again  waited  upon  Coimt  Montholon,  to 
know  what  might  be  the  result  of  his  communication  with  Na^ 
poleon  Bonaparte — the  details  also  of  this  conversation  are  an- 
nexed. I  introduced  the  subject  of  the  letter  under  a  false 
name  for  Mr.  O'Meara,  and  of  the  effect  which  must  be  pro- 
duced upon  the  opinion  of  the  public  in  general  by  observing 
that  for  upwards  of  a  year  past  the  only  English  persons  whom 


422  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  No.  147. 

Napoleon  Bonaparte  had  admitted  to  his  presence  were  two 
*^qid  abetment  igarea  mr  leur%  devoirs.^*  Count  Montholon 
evinced  great  surprise  at  boUi  communications^  and  I  am  in- 
dined  to  ascribe  much  of  the  change  which  has  apparenUy  since 
taken  place  to  my  mention  of  them. 

On  the  7th  instant  a  message  was  sent  by  Count  Montholon 
to  Major  Gorrequer,  to  beg  to  speak  to  him.  It  was  intimated 
to  Major  Gorrequer  at  the  same  time  by  the  orderly  officer 
that  it  was  to  ask  explanation  upon  some  parts  of  my  conversa- 
tion. I  suggested  to  Major  Gorrequer  to  be  cautious  in  his 
replies,  but  at  the  same  time  not  to  omit  tiie  opportunity  of 
giving  any  proper  explanation  tiiat  might  be  requimL  A  detail 
of  the  conversation  which  passed  accompanies  [this],  and  I  had 
much  satisfaction  at  the  mode  in  which  Major  Gorrequer  mar 
naged  his  arguments  and  replies  on  tiie  occa^on. 

Explanation  was  required  from  myself,  and  I  waited  upon 
Count  Montholon  the  next  day  to  offer  it  This  I  thought  was 
best  done  by  communicating  to  him  the  instructions  of  the 
orderly  officer,  the  conversation  I  had  with  Count  Bertrand  on 
the  subject  of  tiiem  in  tiie  first  month  after  my  arrival  here, 
and  your  Lordship's  letter  to  me  after  perusing  that  conversa- 
tion— the  whole  to  prove  I  was  innovating  nothing.  Whilst  a 
surgeon  was  in  daily  attendance  upon  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  and 
there  were  English  servants  in  the  same  house  with  him,  there 
could  be  no  doubt  of  his  actual  presence  on  the  spot  When 
he  refused  medical  aid  and  dismissed  his  English  attendants 
he  placed  himself  in  a  new  situation,  and  against  tiie  difficulties 
which  were  thus  opposed  to  the  orderly  officer  in  the  execution 
of  his  duties  it  was  my  particular  du^  to  provide.  The  con- 
versation was  in  a  perfectiy  amicable  strain,  and  led  to  another 
on  the  next  day,  the  details  of  both  of  which  are  transmitted. 

Although  I  had  no  reason  to  jnistrust  tiie  sincerity  of  Count 
Montholon  in  the  conciliatory  language  and  propositions  held 
by  him  on  tiie  two  last  days'  meetings,  yet  I  still  persisted  on 
the  orderly  officer  having  the  opportunity  afforded  him  of  seeing 
Napoleon  Bonaparte,  and  I  am  happy  to  add  that  Count  Mon- 
tholon did  not  withdraw  from  any  part  of  the  assurance  he  had 
given  on  this  head,  the  orderly  officer  reporting  to  me  to  have 
seen  Napoleon  Bonaparte  at  his  window  the  following  day,  but 
having  his  head  bandaged  with  a  silk  handkerchief,  and  looking 
very  pale. 


No.  147.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  423 

I  haye  this  day  had  another  conversation  with  Count  Mon^ 
tholon,  the  details  of  which  I  also  transmit.  Some  fresh  points 
were  brought  forward,  but  not  of  a  nature  to  create  any  great 
difficulty — points  of  imaginary  difference  to  have  an  air  of 
negotiation  before  arriving  at  any  change,  raUier  than  forming 
any  real  question  of  dispute,  unless,  through  the  pretensions 
of  Count  Bertrand,  it  may  be  eventually  endeavoured  to  work 
them  into  such. 

The  only  point  on  which  I  feel  anxious  for  a  determination, 
and  that  which  principally  urged  my  visit  of  this  day,  is  in 
respect  to  the  selection  of  the  medical  attendant ;  for  should  it 
fall  on  any  other  person  than  Dr.  Verling  or  Mr  Baxter,  em- 
barrassment might  still  arise.  I  have  conceived  the  best  way, 
however,  to  fix  the  choice  on  the  present  one  was  to  manifest 
no  objections  against  others  who  had  been  adverted  to,  though 
I  went  prepared  to  do  so  if  their  names  had  been  mentioned. 
Dr.  Verling  had  been  told  Napoleon  Bonaparte's  only  objection 
against  him  was  that  he  had  been  placed  at  Longwood  by  me. 
The  less  solidtude,  therefore,  I  showed  on  this  point  I  thought 
the  better. 

Your  Lordship  will  not  fail  to  observe  the  contempt  with 
which  Count  Montholon  appears  to  have  regarded  the  diffi- 
culties that '  have  stood  in  the  way  of  former  arrangements 
where  the  intervention  of  Count  Bertrand  has  been  used,  par- 
ticularly as  to  the  point  of  a  correspondence  by  sealed  notes 
within  the  island,  in  which  that  pretending  person  was  attempt- 
ing to  obtain  from  die  Govenlor  of  the  island  an  authorised 
cover  for  carrying  on  a  clandestine  correspondence,  as  well 
within  as  without  it ;  or,  if  this  was  not  his  view,  sacrificing  the 
health  and  comfort  of  the  person  whose  cause  he  was  so  hypo- 
critically advocating  to  a  vain  endeavour  for  an  object  of  no 
importance ;  for,  as  Count  MonUiolon  very  justly  observed,  if 
they  were  obliged  to  send  letters  open  to  their  own  nearest 
friends  and  relations,  it  was  a  niaiserie  to  insist  on  writing  to 
others  under  seal. 

Thus  Napoleon  Bonaparte^s  confinement  during  upwards  of 
a  year  past,  and  all  the  inconveniences  that  have  sprung  to 
him  and  oUiers  from  it,  result  firom  this  cause — the  pertmadty 
of  Count  Bertrand  in  a  point  acknowledged  to  be  altogether 
Mvolous,  and  the  conspiration  of  Mr.  O'Meara  in  his  views ; 
for  it  will  be  recollected  Mr.  O'Meara  asserted  a  sealed  cor- 


424  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  No.  147. 

respondence  was  permitted  by  Sir  George  Cockbum  (which  has 
not  as  yet  been  controverted),  and  thus  excited  them  to  persist 
on  this  point,  whilst  with  characteristic  duplidty  he  at  the  same 
time  insidiously  suggested  to  me  the  opening  any  sealed  letters 
they  might  send,  as  it  was  only  the  air  of  liberty  Napoleon 
Bonaparte  wanted,  thus  paving  the  way,  had  I  listened  to  his 
unprincipled  proposition,  for  complaint  and  remonstrance  of  a 
more  violent  and  better  founded  nature  than  any  I  had  been 
oefore  exposed  to  (as  he  spoke  without  authority  from  Napo- 
leon Bonaparte  himself)  on  another  ground. 

Such  matter,  with  the  "  etat  de  choses "  so  frequently 
brought  forward  in  Count  Bertrand's  correspondence  and  con- 
versations, formed  the  only  subject  of  dispute ;  yet,  analyzing 
in  every  possible  way  what  the  "etat  de  choses"  meant,  I 
could  never  discover  that  it  referred  to  anything  else  than  to 
the  freedom  which  Count  Bertrand  and  his  fsunily  enjoyed  when 
they  lived  without  the  limits  of  Longwood  at  Hutt's  Gate, 
where  their  house  was  literally  an  open  one  to  almost  every 
person  living  on  the  island  or  passing  by  it,  and  a  sealed  cor- 
respondence, under  cover  of  what  might  have  perhaps  passed 
unnoticed  in  regard  to  others,  already  commenced  with  the 
foreign  Commissioners. 

This  "  etat  de  choses,"  it  is  true,  I  found  here  on  my  first 
arrival,  but  Sir  George  Cockbum  himself  acknowledged  the 
manifest  inconvenience  of  it  to  me,  and  counselled  my  imposing 
some  restraint  upon  the  intercourse  with  Count  Bertrand ;  yet 
where  one  of  my  first  acts  must  be  to  undo  indulgences  whidi, 
whether  authorised  or  not,  had  existed  under  my  predecessor, 
it  was  obviously  no  easy  task  to  reconcile  the  change  to  persons 
whom  it  so  very  materially  afifected ;  for  through  Count  Ber- 
trand the  persons  who  were  so  unceremoniously  admitted  to  his 
house — his  passes,  which  were  to  be  as  valid  as  mine — his  sealed 
notes,  and  a  pretension  he  afterwards  set  forth  to  be  relieved 
from  the  observation  of  the  orderly  officer  when  he  paid  his 
visits  to  the  town — Napoleon  Bonaparte  would  have  had,  almost 
under  sanction,  all  the  means  he  could  desire,  as  well  for  in- 
fluencing public  opinion  as  for  seeing  or  communicating  with 
whom  and  for  what  purposes  he  might  please ;  and,  although 
the  regulations  in  force  may  not  have  fully  succeeded  in  pre- 
venting improper  communications  taking  place,  yet  the  clan- 


Ko.  148.       LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.         425 

destine  means  resorted  to,  and  the  character  of  the  individuals 
employed,  against  whose  treachery  it  was  impossible  to  guard 
by  any  other  means  than  removal,  must,  I  should  conceive, 
diminish  very  mainly  of  [sic]  their  effect 

I  may  still  have  difficulties  under  any  arrangement  which 
may  eventually  take  place  in  consequence  of  my  communica- 
tions with  Count  Montholon,  but  I  shall  be  cautious  in  not 
admitting  any  indulgence  which  is  not  in  perfect  conformity  to 
your  Lordsldp's  instructions,  whilst  my  ciiief  care  will  be  to 
watch  that  such  as  are  permitted  lead  not  to  abuse. 

Count  Bertrand,  I  understand,  shows  an  undisguised  mor- 
tification at  the  communication  which  has  been  had  with  Count 
Montholon  in  preference  to  him,  but  since  his  letters  respecting 
Lieut-Colonel  Lyster,  I  have  had  no  intercourse  whatever  with 
him.  I  had  occasion,  however,  to  direct  Sir  Thomas  Reade  to 
address  two  letters  to  him,  and  these  have  not  (like  that  on 
which  the  "  apostille  "  was  written)  been  returned  to  me. 

I  have  the  honour,  &c. 

H,  Lowe. 

No.  148. 
To  Eabl  Bathurst,  K.G. 
My  Lord,  St.  Helena,  October  25, 1818. 

In  continuance  of  the  subject  of  my  letter  of  tiie  12th 
instant,  I  do  myself  the  honour  to  inform  your  Lordship  that, 
having  made  some  of  the  arrangements  which  Count  Montholon 
had  suggested  in  respect  to  the  mode  of  examining  the  articles 
which  were  sent  to  Longwood,  I  called  upon  him  on  the  15th 
to  make  tiiem  known  to  him,  and  was  not  a  littie  surprised  to 
find  the  old  subject  again  attempted  to  be  introduced  of  a  cor- 
respondence by  sealed  notes  witiiin  the  island,  although  stated 
to  be  limited  only  to  one  person,  viz.  the  officer  of  the  com- 
missariat charged  with  the  provisioning  of  tiie  Longwood  esta- 
blishment, and  that  with  respect  to  the  transaction  of  their 
pecuniary  affairs. 

Admitting  it  in  tiiis  instance,  under  any  colour  or  form  what- 
ever, was  giving  up  the  principle  witii  respect  to  the  thing  in 
general,  and  beginning  with  the  sectioning  of  a  correspondence 
upon  a  point  of  greater  delicacy  than  any  other,  notwithstand- 


426  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  No.  148. 

ing  all  the  arguments  brought  to  prove  to  me  it  was  a  matter 
of  mere  form  that  was  contested  for,  and  that  there  was  no  in- 
tention to  interfere  with  any  guarantee  I  might  wish  to  establish 
against  abuse.  It  was  obvious  all  this  question  arose  from  the 
note  I  directed  Sir  Thomas  Reade  to  address  to  Count  Ber- 
trand  when  I  returned  him  his  letter  to  Mr.  Ibbetson,  and  I 
treated  the  arguments  of  Count  Montholon  accordingly. 

A  further  point  was  brought  forward  in  discussion,  as  to 
Counts  Bertrand  and  Montholon  not  being  so  closely  attended 
by  the  orderly  officer  when  they  might  proceed  to  the  town. 
This  point,  it  was  also  obvious,  was  of  Count  Bertrand's  moving, 
for  before  that  Count  Montholon  had  expressed  to  me  indif- 
ference about  it,  and  I  rejected  it,  therefore,  in  the  same  manner 
as  the  other.  A  memorandum  of  my  conversation  is  annexed. 
As  Count  Montholon,  however,  seemed  to  think  ihat  I  con- 
sidered the  subject  too  much  with  regard  to  Count  Bertrand 
alone  and  personally,  I  determined  to  make  an  extract  of  the 
correspondence  that  had  passed  on  the  subject  and  to  show  it  to 
him.  I  called  upon  him  the  following  day,  taking  the  paper 
with  me,  every  line  of  which  was  a  proof  how  pertinaciously 
Count  Bertrand  had  been  always  combating  for  the  same  point, 
and  how  repeatedly  he  had  been  answered  upon  it.  I  found  no 
necessity,  however,  for  entering  upon  any  other  argument  with 
Count  Montholon  on  the  subject,  so  complete  a  diange  of  tone 
in  every  reelect  had  ensued,  in  consequence,  as  I  presume,  of 
my  having  made  so  very  distinct  a  reference  to  Count  Bertrand 
as  the  cause  of  the  new  discussion  and  disagreement  that  was 
now  again  likely  to  arise. 

Count  Mon^olon's  conversation  was  a  mixture  of  compli- 
ment, and  might  appear  even  cajolery,  more  than  sufficient  to 
put  me  on  my  guard  against  any  change  of  system  which  his 
very  fiattering  language  might  cover.  There  was  notMng  said 
for  me  to  oppose,  and  I  left  him  consequently  under  tiie  im- 
pression all  points  were  adjusted,  except  in  regard  to  the 
nomination  of  the  surgeon,  whom  I  naturally  conceived,  how- 
ever, from  Count  Montholon's  conversation,  would  be  Dr.  Ver- 
ling.    A  note  of  my  conversation  is  annexed. 

It  was  my  intention  to  refrain  from  calling  again  until  Count 
Montholon  might  communicate  to  me  Napoleon  Bonaparte's 
final  decision  in  respect  to  this  point,  but,  a  circumstance  occur- 


No.  148.        LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.         427 

ring  not  perfectly  in  concurrence  with  the  language  he  last 
held  to  me,  I  resolved  on  making  it  immediately  known  to  him. 
Lieutenant  Reardon  of  the  66th  regiment  had  receiyed  a  vimt 
whilst  on  duty  at  an  outpost  of  the  cordon  of  sentries,  from  die 
G>unt  and  the  Countess  Bertrand,  which  did  not  come  to  my 
knowledge  until  nearly  a  week  after  it  had  taken  place.  Having 
caused  an  inquiry  to  be  made  as  to  the  conversation  which 
passed,  I  found  it  related  entirely  to  Lieutenant  Beardon's 
fnend  Mr.  O'Meara,  and  that  Count  Bertrand  had  been  busy 
in  insinuating  on  Mr.  Reardon's  mind  that  Mr.  0*Meara 
was  an  innocent  man,  that  he  would  have  justice  done  him  in 
England,  that  he  would  be  supported  by  Ministers  at  home ; 
and  I  called  upon  Count  Montholon  and  communicated  to  him 
the  whole  that  passed.  He  expressed  an  unfeigned  surprise, 
and  even  concern,  at  Count  Bertrand's  conduct,  intimating  tiiat 
what  he  did  could  neither  have  been  known  nor  approved  by 
Napoleon  Bonaparte.  Memorandum  of  this  conversation  ac- 
companies this  letter. 

Being  really  under  the  impression  Count  Bertrand  had  acted 
witiiout  Napoleon  Bonaparte's  knowledge,  and  willing  to  afford 
a  proof  that  a  circumstance  of  this  nature  should  not  be  taken 
up  as  a  handle  by  me  to  break  off  that  better  kind  of  under- 
standing which  had  begun  to  spring  up  firom  my  conversations 
with  Count  Montholon — knowing  at  the  same  time  Napoleon 
Bonaparte  would  attempt  to  make  it  matter  of  reproach  against 
me,  as  he  had  done  upon  a  former  occasion,  that  I  was  insin- 
cere in  any  endeavour  to  render  his  situation  more  comfortable, 
and  ready  to  profit  by  any  pretext  which  presented  itself  for 
breaking  off  any  kind  of  negotiation  which  might  be  on  foot 
with  such  view — I  determined  to  again  wait  on  Count  Mon- 
tholon, and  to  make  a  full  and  explicit  statement  to  him  of 
what  I  had  finally  determined  to  do  in  every  point  upon  which 
he  had  spoken  to  me,  to  point  out  to  him  the  full  extent  of 
every  indulgence  I  could  grant,  and  at  the  same  time  to 
explain  to  him  the  real  obstacle  which  existed  against  a  right 
understanding,  and  against  that  species  of  ^  confidence"  which 
Napoleon  Bonaparte  seemed  so  desirous  to  possess  in  respect  to 
my  mode  of  acting  towards  him,  plainly  showing  it  sprang 
alone  firom  the  line  of  conduct  pursued  and  persevered  in  by 
Count  Bertrand,  over  which  I  could  have  no  possible  control. 


428  CAPTIVITY  OP  KAPOLEON.  No.  149. 

Haying  had  a  full  explanation  on  aU  these  pcnnts,  as  will 
appear  by  the  annexed  notes  of  conversation  I  had  with  Count 
Montholon,  I  am  best  content  to  leave  matters  as  they  are, 
satisfied  in  having  shown  to  Napoleon  Bonaparte  himself^  and 
to  the  world  at  large,  if  required,  that,  if  he  is  not  or  cannot 
be  made  more  comfortable  in  his  present  situation,  the  cause 
springs  solely  from  himself  and  his  most  intimate  followers. 

Count  Montholon  spd^e  this  day  with  an  uncertainty  which 
he  had  not  done  on  the  preceding  occaaon  of  seeing  him, 
respecting  Napoleon  Bonaparte's  choice  not  being  entirely  fixed 
on  the  medical  person  to  attend  him.  If  he  should  not  select 
Dr.  Verling,  the  persons  who  have  been  next  adverted  to  as 
likely  to  attract  his  choice  are,  Mr.  Stokoe,  surgeon  of  H.M.S. 
Conqueror,  and  Mr.  Henry,  assistant-burgeon  of  the  66th 
Regiment 

Your  Lordship  will  find  the  names  of  both  these  persons 
referred  to  in  an  annexed  correspondence,  as  partidpating  moK 
or  less  in  the  acquaintance  and  society  of  Mr.  O'Meara ;  and 
if  eitiier  of  Uiem  is  applied  for,  I  have  no  doubt  whatever  in  my 
own  mind  it  will  be  entirely  at  die  Suggestion  of  Count  Ber- 
trand,  through  whom  and  his  family  alone  Napoleon  Bonaparte 
can  have  become  acquainted  wiUi  the  latter  person,  who  has 
been  occasionally  called  in  to  attend  upon  Count  Bertrand's 
children,  and  to  whom,  it  is  to  be  observed,  by  the  conversatioD 
of  Count  MonUiolon,  a  present,  of  which  Mr.  CMeara  was  to 
have  been  the  medium,  was  once  thought  of  to  be  delivered. 

I  have  the  honour,  &c. 
H.  LowR 

No.  149. 

To  Earl  Bathubst,  K.G. 
My  Lord,  St.  Helena,  October  28, 1818. 

I  do  myself  the  honour  to  transmit  to  your  Lordship  a 
plan  of  the  house  which  is  at  present  buildii^  for  Napoleon 
Bonaparte,  the  design  corresponding  to  that  of  which  a  sketch 
was  given  to  Count  Montholon  for  Napoleon  Bonaparte's 
selection,  as  referred  to  in  my  letter  of  the  19tfi  of  August, 
1818,  and  marked  No.  2,  wiUi  the  sole  variation  of  a  portion  of 
the  centre  part  of  the  building,  which  had  been  laid  out  in 


Na  149.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  429 

passages,  being  added  to  and  thrown  into  the  size  of  the  rooms. 
This  alteration  was  suggested  by  Count  MonUiolon,  and  there- 
fore indicates  the  satisfaction  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte  himself  at 
the  general  plan  delivered  to  him.  The  house  is  of  one  story ; 
die  whole  of  the  foundation  has  been  completed,  and  the  left 
wing  nearly  built  up.  The  kitchen  and  offices  have  not  been 
yet  laid  out,  but  they  will  form  a  low  range  of  buildings 
immediately  at  the  back  of  the  house,  at  one  extremity  of  which 
will  be  rooms  for  the  orderly  officer  and  surgeon. 

I  am  preparing  a  list  of  diflFerent  articles  of  furniture  and 
other  matters  necessary  for  the  complete  outfit  of  the  building, 
great  part  of  the  furniture  which  originally  came  out,  particu- 
larly such  articles  as  window-curtains,  couch  and  chair  covers, 
paper-hangings,  &c.,  having  been  used  for  the  service  of  the 
present  building  at  Longwood,  and  the  families  of  Counts  Ber- 
trand  and  Montholon.  One  article  not  originally  sent  out  it 
will  perhaps  appear  to  your  Lordship  expedient  to  have  pro- 
vided, particularly  if  Napoleon  Bonaparte  should  put  into  exe- 
cution his  present  intention  of  taking  more  exerdse.  This 
article  is  a  carriage  of  the  barouche  kind,  with  crane  neck,  the 
body  hanging  low,  the  wheels  not  inclining  too  much  inwards, 
and  the  whole  of  the  lightest  construction  possible.  Harness 
for  six  horses  or  mules  would  also  be  requisite,  as  no  four- 
wheel  carriage  whatever  can  be  drawn  up  the  hills  on  this 
island  with  a  less  number  of  animals.  The  carriage  he  has  had 
hitherto  in  use  was  one  purchased  from  Colonel  Wilkes ;  it  is 
now  however  in  such  a  complete  state  of  degradation  as  to 
furnish  only  matter  for  sarcastic  remarks  when  pointed  to, 
either  by  Um  or  the  persons  of  his  family,  and  a  proposal  to 
put  it  in  somewhat  better  order,  which  can  be  done,  even  meets 
with  a  certain  opposition,  probably  as  depriving  [him]  of  a 
motive  for  observations  of  this  nature. 

I  had  the  honour  to  inform  your  Lordship,  in  a  former  letter, 
that  the  sale  of  the  extra  timber  and  materials  ori^nally  sent 
out  for  the  use  of  General  Bonaparte's  house  had  produced  a 
large  sum  of  money,  which  had  been  deposited  in  the  hands  of 
Mr.  Ibbetson,  Assistant  Commissary-General.  The  amount 
now  in  his  hands  on  this  account  is  4970/^  and  is  of  course 
disposable  for  any  expense  attending  the  outfit  and  completion 
of  the  building  in  hand.  I  have  the  honour,  &c. 

H.  Lowe. 


430  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  No.  160. 

No.  150. 

To  John  Wilson  Crokeb,  Esq. 

Sir,  28,  Ca»ater  Place,  Kennington,  Oct.  28,  1818. 

The  letter,  dated  the  19th  of  September  last,  which 
Mr.  Barrow  did  me  the  honom*  to  write  to  me,  in  answer  to 
my  official  Report,  bearing  date  the  17th  of  September,  of  my 
retm'n  to  England,  having  expressed  their  Lordships'  approval 
of  my  recall  from  St.  Helena,  which  would  seem  to  imply  that 
some  culpable  conduct  on  my  part  had  induced  their  Lordships 
to  come  to  such  a  decision,  under  this  painful  impression  it 
is  a  duty  which  I  owe  to  myself  and  the  British  Navy  to  en- 
close to  you  the  following  statement,  accompanied  with  as 
much  of  the  history  of  my  appointment,  and  also  with  the 
documents  [1]  already  known,  and  as  many  others  as  may  be 
necessary  for  the  elucidation  of  the  whole  of  the  transactions 
which  relate  to  my  conduct,  and  which  I  beg  you  will  be 
pleased  to  submit  for  their  Lordships'  consideration. 

When  it  was  decided  in  1815  to  send  Napoleon  Boniq)arte 
to  St.  Helena,  His  Majesty's  Government  ordered  that  he 
should  have  the  privilege  of  taking  with  him  his  surgeon, 
three  of  his  officers,  and  twelve  domestics,  as  appears  by  die 
official  document  given  by  Admiral  the  Right  Honourable 
Lord  Keith  to  Count  Bertrand,  marked  No.  1. 

The  French  surgeon  who  had  followed  Napoleon  Bonaparte 
on  board  the  Bellerophon  was  an  inferior  officer  who  had 
desired  to  return  back  again  to  France.  Lord  Keith  proposed 
to  Count  Bertrand  to  send  a  ship  on  purpose  to  seek  and. 
bring  over  the  surgeon  who  had  missed  the  opportunity  of 
embarking  with  Napoleon  Bonaparte;  but  Count  Bertrand 
(whose  first  acquaintance  with  me  commenced  on  board  the 
Bellerophon),  having  done  me  the  honour  to  consider  me  as 
qualified  for  the  appointment,  proposed  that  I  should  accom- 
pany him,  which  proposal  was  approved  of  and  authorised  by 
Admiral  Lord  Keith  and  Captain  Maitland,  both  of  whom 
strongly  advised  me  to  accept  of  the  employment,  as  being  one 

Notes  by  Sib  Hudson  Lowe. 
[1.]  "  Moti  of  those  documents  were  obtained  by  Dr.  O'Meara  in  direct 
violation  of  the  trust  reposed  in  him  as  a  British  officer/' 


No.  150.       LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  431 

perfectly  consistent  with  my  duty  and  my  honour ;  to  which  I 
consented,  stipulating,  however,  that  I  should  be  always  con- 
sidered as  a  British  officer,  and  upon  the  list  of  surgeons  on 
fiill  pay,  paid  by  the  British  Government  [2];  and  thai  I 
should  be  at  liberty  to  quit  so  peculiar  a  service,  should  I  find 
it  not  to  be  consonant  to  my  wishes,— as  appears  from  the 
letter  marked  2.  These  conditions  were  approved  of  by  the 
Government  and  by  their  Lordships,  who  ordered  me  to  be 
borne  on  the  books  of  the  difierent  flag-ships  at  St  Helena"  as 
Supernumerary  Sui^eon,  in  order  to  give  me  my  time ;  and 
ordered  also  specifically  a  certsdn  allowance  of  pay  to  me,  with 
the  title  of  Surgeon  to  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  which  was  paid 
by  bills  drawn  upon  the  principal  officers  and  commanders  of 
Hjs  Majesty's  navy,  approved  by  the  Admiral  commanding  the 
station. 

This  nomination  did  not  confer  on  the  officers  of  His 
Majesty's  land  forces  any  right  or  power  over  me,  and  I 
was  not  subject  to  General  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  otherwise  [3] 
than  because  he  was  spedally  charged  by  His  Majesty's 
Government,  under  orders  dated  the  12th  of  April,  1816, 
with  the  execution  of  the  measures  authorised  by  the  Act  of 
Parliament  passed  on  the  11th  of  April,  1816,  and  I  con- 
sequently was  not  subject  to  ordinary  military  discipline  [4]. 

During  the  administration  of  Admiral  Sir  George  Cockbum 
I  executed  my  functions  of  Surgeon  to  Napoleon  Bonaparte 
without  any  opposition  or  difficulties  having  been  thrown  in  my 
way  [5]  ;  and  I  was  also  frequently  employed  by  that  Admiral 
as  an  organ  of  communication  between  the  prisoners  and 
himself,  and  also  as  interpreter  between  the  inhabitants  and 


[2.]  "  Dr.  O'Meara  omitted  to  add  that  by  the  instructions  which  he 
quotes  he  was  '  not  to  be  in  anywise  dependent  upon^  or  subservient  to,  or 
paid  by.  Napoleon  Bonaparte.'' ^^ 

[3.]  "  This  ^ otherwise^  comprehends  all  that  I  ever  required  of  Dr. 
O'Meara." 

[4.]  '*  Whilst  serving  on  shore  as  an  officer  of  the  royal  navy,  he  was 
subject  to  military  discipline,  in  the  same  manner  as  an  officer  of  troops  of 
the  line  serving  in  a  fleet  is  subject  to  naval  discipline.  The  whole  of 
this  paragraph  contains  a  false  inuendo.*' 

[5.  J  "  This  also  contains  a  false  inuendo,  if  it  is  meant  to  be  inferred 
that  any  opposition  was  thrown  by  me  in  his  way." 


432  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  No.  150. 

them  in  the  many  communications  which  the  formation  of  that 
establishment  rendered  indispensable.  No  reports  of  espiannage 
were  ever  expected  or  required  from  me  by  Sir  George 
Cockbum,  who  was  possessed  of  too  much  honour  himself  to 
require  such  degrading  offices  from  any  one,  more  espedally  a 
British  officer  [6]. 

In  the  third  intendew  which  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  had  with 
Napoleon  Bonaparte,  in  the  month  of  May,  1816,  he  proposed 
to  the  latter  to  send  me  away  [7],  and  to  replace  me  by  Mr. 
Baxter,  who  had  been  several  years  surgeon  with  him  in  the 
Corsican  Rangers.  This  proposition  was  rejected  with  indig- 
nation by  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  upon  the  ground  of  the  in- 
delicacy of  a  proposal  to  substitute  an  army  surgeon  for  the 
private  surgeon  of  his  own  choice  [8]. 

Failing  in  this  attempt.  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  adopted  the  reso- 
lution of  manifesting  great  confidence  in  me,  by  loading  me 
with  civilities,  inviting  me  constantly  to  dinner  with  him, 
conversing  for  hours  together  with  me  alone,  both  at  his  own 
home  and  grounds,  and  at  Longwood,  either  in  my  own  room, 
or  under  the  trees,  and  elsewhere  [9].     On  some  of  these 

[6.  J  **  This  is  another  false  inuendo.  He  has  not  dared  to  say  that  I 
ever  did  employ  him,  or  sought  to  employ  him,  in  such  a  manner.  His  com- 
munications to  Sir  George  Cockbum  were,  it  is  believed,  much  more  ample 
and  more  minute,  as  to  objects  of  mere  personal  slander  or  private  reve- 
lations, with  respect  to  what  passed  in  the  interior  of  Bonaparte's  own 
family,  than  they  ever  were  to  me ;  but  they  were,  it  is  presumed,  wholly 
voluntary." 

[7.]  "  This  is  a  pure  falsehood." 

[8,]  "  This  is  also  a  pure  falsehood,  so  far  as  relates  to  any  indignation 
ever  expressed  to  me  by  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  or  to  the  grounds  of  that 
indignation."  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  never  projiosed  to  substitute  Mr.  Baxter 
for  O'Meara,  though  he  frequently  offered  to  Bonaparte  that  gentleman's 
professional  assistance  (he  being  the  principal  medical  officer  en  the  island), 
in  addition  to  that  of  O^Meara, — W.  F. 

[9.]  "  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  never  manifested  any  greater  civilities  to  Mr. 
O'Meara  than  to  every  other  officer  of  the  same  rank  and  situation  on  the 
island.  When  he  went  to  Longwood  the  orderly  officer  and  surgeon  always 
came  out  to  meet  him,  and  on  these  occasions  he  naturally  conversed  with 
them  about  those  matters  which  it  most  behoved  him  to  know ;  but  Sir 
Hudson  Lowe  always  went  to  the  room  of  the  orderly  officer,  and  not  to 
that  of  Mr.  O'Meara,  if  he  had  anything  particular  to  say  or  any  business 
to  do." 


No.  160.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  433 

occasions  he  made  to  me  observations  upon  the  benefit  which 
would  result  to  Europe  from  the  death  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte, 
of  which  eyent  he  spoke  in  a  manner  whidi,  considering  his 
situation  and  mine,  was  peculiarly  distressing  to  me  [10]. 

On  the  9th  of  October,  1816,  and  subsequently,  be  ordered 
that  I  should  make  him  a  report  of  all  and  every  conversation 
which  I  might  have,  not  only  with  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  but 
with  all  the  principal  persons  of  his  suite  [11],  as  well  as  of 
every  circumstance  I  might  observe,  requiring  of  me  even  to 
report  any  warm  or  injurious  expression  which  might  escape 
from  Napoleon's  lips  in  a  moment  of  suffering,  observing  that 
^'  defamation  and  blackening  of  his  character  were  some  of  the 
means  by  which  Napoleon  Bonaparte  would  endeavour  to  effect 
his  escape  from  St.  Helena,  and  tiierefore  that  it  was  essentially 
necessary  for  him  to  be  made  acquainted  with  language  of  such 
a  tendency."  This  declaration  he  made  subsequently  to  the 
22nd  of  August,  1816,  on  which  day  he  avowed  to  me,  at 
Plantation  House  grounds,  intentions  of  being  revenged  upon 
Napoleon  Bonaparte,  and  declared  ^^  that  he  would  make  him 
feel  that  he  was  a  prisoner ;"  that  ^^  he  would  build  him  up"  [12]  ; 
assigning  for  this  severity  some  injurious  expressions  said  to 
have  been  used  by  Napoleon  Bonaparte  against  him,  in  the 
presence  of  Admiral  Sir  Pulteney  Malcolm ;  and  shortly  after- 
wards he  observed  '^  that  he  considered  Ali  Padia  as  a  much 
more  respectable  scoundrel  than  Napoleon  Bonaparte "  [13] ; 


[to.]  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  said  that  he  did  not  deign  to  make  any  reply 
to  the  foul  insinuation  conveyed  in  this  passage,  which  caused  the 
Lords  of  the  Admiralty  immediately  to  dismiss  O'Meara  from  the  King's 
service. — W.  F. 

[11.  j  "  False.'*  Abundant  proof  has  been  given  in  these  volumes  that 
O'Meara  voluntarily  acted  as  a  spy,  and  voluntarily  communicated  Bona- 
parte's conversations,  as  well  as  the  conversations  and  proceedings  not  only 
of  the  officers  of  his  suite,  but  also  of  their  wives. — W.  P. 

[12.]  "  A  calumnious  falsehood,  scarcely  less  atrocious  than  the  other. 
It  is  not  only  false  that  I  ever  announced  any  intention  of  being  revenged 
upon  Bonaparte,  but  that  1  ever  used  any  expression  which  could,  by  the 
most  strained  implication,  be  supposed  to  have  conveyed  such  an  inten- 
tion, or  that  I  ever  harboured  such  intention,  or  that  I  ever  entertained 
any  personal  vindictive  feeling  whatever  towards  him." 

[13.]  **  These  are  infamous  falsehoods.  No  such  expressions  were  ever 
used  by  Sir  Hudson  Lowe.    If  language  of  such  a  tendency  were  used  by 

VOL.  III.  2   F 


434  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  No.  150. 

and  language  of  a  Bumlar  tendency  was  also  frequently  made 
use  oS  by  him  upon  other  occasionB. 

I  replied  to  Sb  Hudson  Lowe,  on  this  and  Tarious  other 
occasions,  that  if,  in  the  course  of  conTersation  with  Napcdeoo 
Bonaparte,  or  any  of  his  suite  or  otherwise,  I  should  become 
acquunted  with  any  plot  or  attempt  to  escape,  or  with  any- 
thing else  which  I  coulJ  not  conceal  witiiout  yiolating  my 
allegiance  to  my  Soyereign  and  country,  I  would  conceii«  it 
my  duty  to  report  die  same  forthwith  to  him ;  that  should  I,  in 
the  course  of  conversation,  hear  anything  which,  in  my  opimon, 
was  of  political  importance  to  my  own  Govemment,  eidiar  in 
the  shape  of  anecdote  or  otherwise,  or  of  any  imprc^r  corre- 
spondence, the  desire  which  every  Englishman  naturally  felt  to 
render  himself  useful  to  his  own  country  would  induce  me  to 
communicate  the  same  to  him,  and  everything  of  that  de- 
scription which  might  not  prejudice  the  personal  interest  of  the 
patient  I  confidentiaUy  approached  in  tiie  exercise  of  my  pro- 
fession, or  anything  which  might  tend  to  benefit  him.  In  doing 
so,  perhaps,  I  engaged  to  do  too  much,  and  certainly  no  more 
could  be  expected  from  a  man  of  honour.  Sir  Hudson  Lowe, 
however,  did  not  long  rest  contented  with  this  declaration. 
He  inmsted  upon  my  reporting  to  him  everything  I  saw,  heard, 
and  said,  giving  as  a  reason  ^^that  I  had  no  bu^ess  to 
presume  to  set  up  my  own  opinion  or  judgment  upon  the  im- 
portance or  otherwise  of  any  conversation  I  might  have ;  that 
he  was  the  sole  judge,  and  that  he  might  think  many  matters 
of  great  importance  which  would  appear  trifling  and  un- 
important to  me,  as  he  would  draw  inferences  and  conclusions 
from  them  which  I  would  not ;"  adding,  ^^  that,  as  I  was  piud  by 
the  British  Government,  surgeon  to  a  prisoner  of  war  and  of 
state,  it  was  my  duty  to  report  to  him  everything  which  came 
under  my  observation ;  and  that  he  would  not  allow  the  first 
characters  living  in  the  island  to  hold  any  communication 
wiUi  Napoleon  Bonaparte,   unless  they  subsequently  made  a 

him,  it  must  have  been  heard  by  other  persons  than  Dr.  O'Meara,  especially 
by  the  offioera  of  his  staff,  by  the  naval  Commander-hi-Ghief,  the  foreign 
Commissioners,  or  by  Brigadier-General  Sir  George  Bingham.  Now  let 
any  one  or  all  of  these  persons  be  referred  to  to  say  if  any  sach  expres- 
sions, or  words  conceived  in  such  a  spirit,  ever  fell  from  his  lips,  or  if  sndi 
sentiments  appeared  to  be  harboured  in  his  mind.** 


No.  150.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  435 

report  to  him  of  the  conversation  which  took  place  with  the 
former"  [14]. 

I  replied  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  that  it  was  true  I  was  paid  by 
the  British  Government,  but  that  I  was  paid  as  a  surgeon,  and 
not  as  a  spy ;  that  medicine  had  nothing  to  do  with  politics ; 
and  that  I  did  not  consider  Napoleon  Bonaparte  in  his  past 
character  as  a  Sovereign,  but  as  what  he  was  at  that  moment — 
an  individual  placed  under  my  professional  care ;  and  that,  as 
his  private  surgeon,  I  would  act  with  him  as  if  I  were  in  a 
similar  capacity  with  Earl  St.  Vincent  or  Lord  Keith  (saving 
and  excepting  what  I  have  already  stated  touching  my  alle- 
giance). These  refusals  embroiled  me  with  him,  and  I  was  not 
long  without  feeling  the  effects  of  his  resentment. 

Shortly  after  his  arrival  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  overturned  [15] 
altogether  the  moderate  but  efficient  system  which  had  been 
established  by  his  predecessor,  Sir  George  Cockbum,  and  in 
lieu  thereof  introduced  a  system  of  unprecedented  restrictions, 
vexations,  and  inquisitorial  proceedings,  which  produced  a 
rupture  [16]  between  him  and  the  inhaUtants  of  Longwood. 

Sir  Hudson  Lowe  then  thought  proper  to  appoint  me  [17]  to 
be  an  organ  of  communication  between  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  the 
other  prisoners  at  Longwood,  and  himself,  and  vice  versdy  and  also 
between  them  and  the  different  tradesmen,  purveyors,  &c,  em- 
ployed in  the  service  of  the  establishment.  This  arrangement 
met  with  the  approbation  of  the  French,  and  for  a  considerable 
time  few  days  passed  without  my  being  charged  wiUi  some  com- 
munication firom  one  side  or  the  other.  On  the  16th  of  October, 
1816,  a  proposal  was  made  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  by  Napoleon 
Bonaparte,  through  me,  to  drop  the  title  of  Emperor,  and  to 
assume  the  name  of  a  private  individual  (Baron  Duroc,  or 
Colonel  Meuron),  as  will  be  seen  by  dociunent  No.  3,  which 

[14.]  **  This  is  wholly  and  absolutely  false,  as  applying,  in  such  sense, 
to  anything  I  ever  said  to  Dr.  CMeara." 

[15.]  "  This  is  false.  Dr.  0*Meara  has  not  attempted  to  support  it  by 
any  proof  whatever." 

[16.]  '*  The  *  rupture '  produced  the  regulations  of  the  10th  of  October, 
181B,  and  not  the  regulations  the  rupture." 

[17.]  "  Dr.  0*Meara  was  never  charged  by  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  with  any 
oonununication  to  Napoleon  Bonaparte  until  Bonaparte  had  charged  him 
with  a  message  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe." 

2  F  2 


436       CAPrrvmr  of  napoleon.     no.  iso. 

has  not  been  acceded  to ;  and  on  the  27tfa  of  December,  1816, 
a  proposal  was  also  made  by  N^ioleon  Bonaparte  to  Sr  Hudsoa 
Lowe  for  the  latter  to  authorise  Admiral  Sir  Pulteney  Mal- 
colm to  act  as  an  intermediator,  in  order  to  effect  an  amicable 
arrangement,  of  which  I  was  also  the  bearer,  and  which  was 
first  accepted  of  and  agreed  to  by  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  but  subse- 
quently eyaded  and  rejected  by  him,  m  contempt  of  hb  word 
pledged  in  writing  to  that  purport,  marked  No.  4,  which  I  was 
directed  to  show  to  N^ioleon  Bonaparte.  Finding  that  my 
endeavours  and  attempts  to  effect  a  reconciliation  had  fedledy 
and  timt  the  communications  I  was  charged  with  produced  dis- 
cusnons  with  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  which  invariably  drew  down 
upon  me  reproach  and  abuse  whenever  I  differed  with  him  in 
opinion,  and  also  that  he  perasted  in  wanting  to  render  me  a 
blind,  a  passive  instrument  of  espionage,  and  timt  he  (Sir 
Hudson  Lowe)  had  repeatedly  broken  Jiis  wordy  and  evaded 
promises  he  had  made  through  me  to  Napoleon  Bonaparte, 
which  caused  the  latter  to  direct  me  to  no  longer  bring  him  any 
communications  or  proposals  firom  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  I  deter- 
mined to  abstain  from  meddling  longer  with  any  subjects 
foreign  to  medicine,  and  to  confine  myself  altogether  to  the 
natural  duties  of  my  profesrion,  of  which  intention  I  gave  Sir 
Hudson  Lowe  notice.  Conceiving  [sic]  that  he  could  not  conquer 
my  sentiments  and  the  obligations  which  I  conceive  are  due  by 
every  private  surgeon  to  his  patient,  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  again 
changed  his  plan,  and  endeavoured  to  get  rid  of  me  by  subject- 
ing me  to  the  worst  treatment  He  no  longer  invited  me  to 
dine,  or,  indeed,  behaved  to  me  in  public  with  common  decency ; 
ordered  me,  on  the  18th  of  July,  1817,  to  come  twice  a  week 
to  his  own  house  to  report,  where,  because  I  would  not  comply 
with  hb  verbal  instructions,  he,  availing  himself  of  his  situation 
of  superior  officer,  and  of  the  extraordinary  power  vested  in  him 
by  peculiar  circumstances,  treated  me  in  the  most  shameful 
manner,  loaded  me  with  abuse,  menaced  me  by  words  and 
looks,  and,  on  the  18th  of  December,  1817,  carried  his  violence 
so  far  as  to  shake  his  clenched  fist  m  my  hce,  [18]  and  made 
me  sufier  every  indignity  short  of  blows,  because  I  infonned 
him  that  I  had  promised  Napoleon  Bonaparte  not  to  reveal  his 

[18.]  "  Fal«e." 


No.  150.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  '       437 

conversations,  unless  they  related  to  his  escape,  or  were  other- 
wise contrary  to  my  allegiance ;  verbally  prohibited  me  firom 
conversing  with  my  patients  at  Longwood  upon  any  subject  not 
medical,  unless  I  diose  to  relieve  myself  from  the  responsibility, 
which  he  said  I  should  otherwise  incur,  by  being  guilty  of  an 
infraction  [19]  of  the  declaration  marked  A  (to  which  he  referred), 
by  immediately  making  a  report  to  him  of  the  whole  of  such 
conversation  not  medical,  upon  which  condition  alone  I  had  his 
permission  to  hold  converse  with  Napoleon  Bonaparte  and  his 
suite.  After  having  repeatedly  demanded  instructions  in  writing, 
which  were  as  often  refused,  and  finding  that  Sir  Hudson  Lowe 
restricted  his  communications  to  verbal  instructions,  which  he 
subsequently  denied  or  acknowledged,  according  as  the  one  or 
the  other  suited  his  views,  and  after  having  patiently  suffered 
his  unjustifiable  treatment  for  some  months,  I  was  at  last  com- 
pelled, by  the  proceedings  of  the  18th  of  December,  1817,  to 
send  him  the  letter  marked  No.  5.  [20]  About  this  time  also 
Sir  Hudson  Lowe  renewed  his  pressing  application  to  introduce 
Mr.  Baxter,  as  will  appear  from  the  extracts  marked  No.  6. 

Since  1816  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  ordered  me  from  time  to  time 
to  make  bulletins  of  the  state  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte's  health, 
from  whose  knowledge  he  desired  that  they  should  be  concealed, 
and  which  he  sometimes  caused  to  be  sdtered.  [21]  In  Sep- 
tember, 1817,  however.  Napoleon  Bonaparte  having  fallen 
seriously  ill,  bulletins  were  written  daily,  and  Napoleon  Bona- 
parte became  acquainted  with  them  through  (mthorised  persons. 
He  observed  that  he  thought  it  very  extraordinary  and  improper 
that  his  own  surgeon  should  be  obliged  to  make  bulletins  of  the 
state  of  his  illness  without  his  knowledge,  and  declared  that  he 
would  not  see  me  again  until  I  gave  my  word  of  honour  that  I 

[19.]  "  False." 

[20.]  "  A  wilful  and  deliberate  falsehood,  and  received  a  direct  contra- 
diction in  the  reply  which  was  sent  to  this  letter,  and  which  Dr.  Olfeara 
has  iuppretsed^  not  only  on  this  occasion,  but  when  he  printed  the  corre- 
spondence in  the  '  Morning  Chronicle.'  •'    Vide  vol.  ii.  pp.  472-485. 

[21.]  ''This  is  also  a  deliberate  falsehood,  as  regards  the  imputation  in- 
tended to  be  conveyed.  Dr.  O'Meara  was  desired,  on  one  or  two  occasions, 
to  compress  the  substance  of  some  of  his  daily  reports  into  one ;  but  not 
an  expression  was  ever  altered  in  any  bulletin,  nor  was  any  report  of 
Napoleon  Bonaparte's  health  ever  received  from  him  of  which  an  exact 
copy  was  not  transmitted  to  the  British  Government.*' 


438  CAPnviTT  OP  napoleon.  No.  isa. 

would  write  no  more  without  first  obtaining  biB  consent,  and 
leaving  the  original  in  the  posaesBion  of  Count  Bertrand.  I 
did  not  like  to  make  this  engagement  without  first  acquainting 
Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  who  returned  an  eva^ve  answer,  and  made 
Napoleon  Bonaparte  wait  several  days  for  a  decisive  reply.  At 
last,  however,  after  Napoleon  Bonaparte  had  been  several  days 
without  seeing  me,  Sr  Hudson  Lowe  authorised  me  to  say  that 
no  more  bulletins  should  be  asked  without  his  (Napoleon's) 
being  acquainted  with  the  demand.  A  difficulty  presaited 
itself  in  the  comjHlation  of  the  bulletins.  Sir  Hudson  Lowe 
required  that  he  should  be  styled  ^^  General  Bonaparte."  [22] 
Finally,  however.  Count  Bertrand,  after  some  discusmon,  autho- 
rised me  to  drop  all  titles,  and  to  make  use  of  the  word  ^^  pa- 
tient" This  was  communicated  by  me  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe 
on  the  15th  of  October,  1817.  Nothing  now  appeared  to  be 
wanting  to  allow  bulletins  to  be  regularly  made,  and,  as  the 
originals  must  have  been  left  in  Count  B^rtrand's  hands,  th^^ 
could  have  been  no  possibility  of  any  falsification  being  made  of 
them.  This,  however,  was  not  what  Sr  Hudson  Lowe  wanted, 
and  he  had  recourse  to  an  expedient  which  will  be  reprobated 
by  every  principle  of  probity.  He  caused  fake  buUetinM  to  be 
made,  and  employed  for  that  purpose  a  surgeon  (Mr.  Baxter) 
who  never  saw  the  patient,  and  who  consequently  could  not  be 
a  judge  of  his  complaint ;  [23]  and  since  November,  1817,  such 

[22.]  *'  This  is  false.  I  did  not  require  that  he  should  be  styled  '  Qeneral 
Bonaparte,'  but  '  Napoleon  Bonaparte,'  the  designation  by  whidi  his  fol- 
lowers, with  his  own  acquiescence,  had  agreed  that  he  should  be  called.** 

[23.]  The  following  extract  is  taken  from  Mr.  Baxter's  observations  on 
this  part  of  O'Meara's  letter,  dated  St.  Helena,  March  20, 1819 :— "  Some 
time  ago  I  delivered  to  the  Governor  a  paper  containing  my  remarks  on 
the  assertion  of  Count  Bertrand,  that  the  bulletins,  as  he  chose  to  style 
them,  relative  to  Napoleon  Bonaparte's  health  were  false ;  and  I  again 
repeat  that,  upon  my  honour,  the  reports  on  that  subject,  as  far  as  I  could 
recollect  from  Mr.  O'Meara's  verbal  statements  to  me,  are  most  strictly 
correct.  Mr.  O'Meara  says  I  could  form  no  judgment  of  his  complaint, 
having  never  seen  him.  Neither  the  one  nor  other  was  necessary,  where 
I  was  merely  required  to  forward  a  report  framed  by  him." 
ExTBAOTS  from  a  Statement  addressed  to  the  Lords  of  the  Admiraltt 
by  O'Meaba,  sent  with  a  Letteb  to  the  Foreign  Covmissiokiers  by 
Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  dated  September  7, 1819. 

Extrad.^*^  In  September,  1817,  Napoleon  Bonaparte  having  fallen  seri- 
ously ill,  bulletins  were  written  daily,  and  Napoleon  Bonaparte  became 


No.  150.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  439 

bulletins  hare  been  sent  to  England  and  to  the  different  Courts 
of  Europe  by  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  and  by  the  CJommissioners  of 
the  Allied  Powers,  to  whom  they  were  furnished  by  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe. 

Having  failed  in  the  applications  which  he  made  in  London 
to  effect  my  removal.  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  adopted  a  plan  which 
he  was  aware  must  succeed.  He  had,  on  the  9th  of  October, 
1816 ;  28tii  of  May,  2nd  of  June,  28tii  of  October,  1817 ; 

acquunted  with  them  through  auihcrised  persons.  He  observed  that  he 
thought  it  very  extraordinary  and  improper  that  his  own  surgeon  should 
be  obliged  to  make  bulletins  of  the  state  of  his  illness  without  his  know- 
ledge,  and  declared  that  he  would  not  see  me  again  until  I  gave  my  word 
of  honour  that  I  would  write  no  more  without  first  obtaining  his  consent, 
and  leaving  the  original  in  the  possession  of  Count  Bertrand.  I  did  not 
like  to  make  this  engagement  without  first  acquainting  Sir  Hudson  Lowe, 
who  returned  an  evasive  answer,  and  made  Napoleon  Bonaparte  wait  several 
days  for  a  decisive  reply.** 

Chvemar*$  Bemarka, — **  The  answer  given  on  the  day  Mr.  O'Meara  made 
his  report,  viz.  October  15, 1817,  was,  that  the  Governor  was  not  aware  of 
any  objection  to  Napoleon  Bonaparte  seeing  the  bulletins,  but  that  he 
would  take  another  day  to  consider  the  matter.  On  the  next  day  Mr. 
O'Meara  was  informed  the  Governor  would  require  no  written  reports 
without  authorising  him  to  acquaint  Napoleon  Bonaparte  of  it ;  but  as 
Napoleon  Bonaparte  would  admit  the  visit  of  no  other  medical  person 
than  Mr.  O'Meara,  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  on  this  account,  as  well  as  that  of 
the  use  of  the  imperial  title,  would  not  require  any,  although  it  was 
frequently  afterwards  attempted  to  force  upon  him  copies  of  bulletins 
addressed  to  and  in  the  form  'authorised*  (as  Mr.  O'Meara  says)  by 
Count  Bertrand^  who  then  attempted  to  clandestinely  circulate  that  the 
Governor  had  bulletins  sent  to  him,  and  reused  to  receive  themJ^ 

Extract. — **  At  last,  however,  after  Napoleon  Bonaparte  had  been  several 
days  without  seeing  me.  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  authorised  me  to  say  that  no 
more  bulletins  should  be  asked  without  his  (Napoleon's)  being  acquainted 
with  the  demand.  A  difficulty  presented  itself  in  the  compilation  of  the 
bulletins.  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  required  that  he  should  be  styled  General 
Bonaparte.  Finally,  however.  Count  Bertrand,  after  some  discussion, 
authorised  me  to  ^p  all  titles,  and  to  make  use  of  the  word  *  patient.' 
This  was  communicated  by  me  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  on  the  15th  October, 
1817." 

Govemor^s  Remarks, — "  This  is  false.  The  name  required  to  be  used 
was  *  Napoleon  Bonaparte,'  being  that  by  which  Napoleon  Bonaparte  him- 
self had  requested  the  Governor  would  call  him.— Vide  extract  of  Mr. 
O'Meara's  letter  to  Sir  H.  Lowe  on  the  same  day,  viz.  IM  October,  1817, 
by  which  it  will  appear  Count  Bertrand  insisted  the  word  *  I'Empereur* 
should  be  used."— W.  P. 


440  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  No.  150. 

17th  of  Febnary,  1818;  and  sereral  other  days,  dedared 
intentions  of  subjecting  me  to  the  same  restrictions  as  those 
whidi  he  had  inflicted  on  the  French  jMisono^  to  whidi  I  had 
invariably  replied  I  would  resign  sooner  than  submit.  On  ^ 
10th  of  April,  1818,  he  caused  a  letter  (No.  7)  to  be  written 
by  St  Thomas  Beade,  in  which  he  signified  to  me  (without 
assigning  any  reason  for  such  an  act)  that  he  had  imposed  upon 
me  restrictions  even  more  arbitrary  and  capricious  than  those 
he  had  inflicted  upon  the  French,  as,  by  coining  me  to  Long- 
wood,  within  the  precincts  of  which  he  allowed  no  person  to 
enter  without  a  pass,  he  deprired  me  of  English  sodety,  while, 
at  the  same  time,  he  prohibited  me  firom  holding  any  other 
intercourse  than  medical  with  the  French,  granting  at  the  same 
moment  to  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  a  prisoner,  the  power  and  pn- 
▼ilege  of  passing  an  English  officer  at  pleasure  out  of  the  bounds 
within  which  he  had  confined  the  latter.  To  this  letter  I  replied 
by  the  one  marked  8,  and  at  the  same  time  wrote  the  letter 
marked  9  to  Count  Bertrand,  who  sent  directly  for  Major  Grw- 
requer,  aide-de-camp  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  who  had  latterly 
been  frequently  employed  as  an  intermediator,  desiring  to  make 
him  fully  comprehend  the  consequences  of  such  a  step ;  and  the 
following  morning,  the  13th  of  April,  Count  Bertrand  wrote 
the  letter  No.  10  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  haying,  in  die  confer- 
ence which  he  had  with  Major  Gorrequer,  communicated  to  the 
latter  the  letter  which  he  had  received  in  the  morning,  a  copy 
of  which  the  Governor  sent  for  by  the  letter  No.  11,  to  which  a 
reply  was  made  by  the  letter  No.  12,  which  did  not  satisfy  Sir 
Hudson  Lowe,  as  will  appear  frx)m  letter  No.  13,  and  on  the 
19th  of  April  it  was  forwarded  to  him,  accompanied  by  the 
letter  No.  14.  On  the  21st  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  answered  Count 
Bertrand  by  the  letter  No.  15,  which  did  not  arrive  at  Long- 
wood  until  the  24th,  at  six  o'clock  in  the  evening,  having 
crossed  in  its  passage  the  letter  No.  16.  On  the  14th  of  April 
Napoleon  Bonaparte  sent  for  me.  In  order  to  give  me  an 
audience  prior  to  my  departure,  during  which  he  declined 
receiving  any  more  m^cal  advice  frx)m  me  in  the  ^tuation  in 
which  I  was  placed  by  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  and  addressed  me 
nearly  in  the  following  words : — "  Eh  bien  1  Docteur,  vous  allez 
nous  quitter.  Le  monde  concevra-t-il  qu'on  a  eu  la  lachete  d'at- 
tenter  k  mon  mededn  ?    Puisque  vous  etes  un  simple  lieutenant 


No.  150.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  441 

soumis  a  tout  Tarbitraire  et  a  la  discipline  militaire,  voos 
n'avez  plus  I'independance  necessaire  pour  que  vos  secours 
puissent  m'etre  utiles.  Je  vous  remerde  de  vos  soins.  Quittez 
le  plutot  que  vous  pourrez  ce  sejour  de  tenebres  et  de  crimes ; 
je  mourrai  sur  un  grabat,  ronge  de  maladie  et  sans  secours  I 
Mais  votre  nation  en  sera  deshonoree  a  jamais."  He  then 
bade  me  adieu,  and  refused  to  see  me  until  the  10th  of  May, 
being  the  day  after  I  was  informed,  by  order  of  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe,  that  he  had  taken  off  the  restrictions  which  he  had 
imposed  on  me  on  the  10th  of  April.  On  the  19th  of  April 
the  letter  marked  17  was  written  to  me  by  Sir  Thomas  Reade, 
but  did  not  reach  Longwood  until  late  in  the  evening  of  the 
24th,  on  which  day  also  the  letter  No.  18  was  sent  to  me  by 
Major  Gorrequer ;  and  the  following  day  the  letter  No.  19,  to 
which  I  returned  the  answer  No.  20. 

1^  Thomas  Reade,  on  the  25th  of  April,  wrote  the  letter  21 
to  Count  Bertrand,  who  sent  it  back  again  to  Plantation  House, 
because  it  was  not  written  according  to  the  forms  which  had 
been  in  use  for  nearly  three  years,  and  joined  to  it  the  letter 
No.  22.  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  sent  it  back  again  at  midnight. 
The  morning  after  (the  27th)  Count  Bertrand  brought  it  to 
Napoleon  Bonaparte,  who  wrote  on  it  the  apostiUe  marked  23, 
to  which  Count  Bertrand  added  the  letter  24,  all  of  which  he 
sent  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  before  midday,  who  again  sent  back 
his  letters,  and  did  not  retain  any  except  the  one  upon  which 
the  apostille  was  written. 

On  the  Ist  of  May  the  letter  25  was  written  to  me  by  Major 
Gorrequer,  to  which  the  answer  26  was  returned ;  and  on  the 
3rd  of  May  Lieut-Colonel  Wynyard  attacked  me  by  the  letter 
27,  which  I  answered  by  the  one  marked  28.  On  the  5th  of 
May  I  wrote  the  letter  29  to  Sir  Thomas  Beade. 

Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  however,  finding  that  he  could  not  succeed 
in  his  favourite  plan  of  establishing  a  surgeon  wholly  devoted  to 
himself  with  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  and  that  the  latter  was  deter- 
mined never  to  receive  him,  and  having,  moreover,  been  made 
to  comjHrehend  by  authorised  persons  [23a]  that,  if  Napoleon 
died,  either  during  the  time  he  kept  me  in  confinement,  without 

[23a.]  The  "  authorised  persons  **  here  meant  were  the  foreign  Com- 
missioners, who  positively  denied  that  they  had  ever  made  any  communi* 
cation  of  the  kind.— W.  F. 


442  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Na  150. 

brining  me  to  a  trial  or  even  preferring  any  chargea  against 
me,  or  under  the  hands  of  any  surgeon  forced  upon  him,  strange 
surmises  respecting  his  death  would  arise  in  England  and 
Europe,  and  of  which  they  themselves  would  be  unable  to  give 
a  satisfactory  explanation,  he  decided  upon  removing  the  restric- 
tions he  had  inflicted  upon  me,  and  caused  the  letter  No.  80  to 
be  written  to  me,  after  having  kept  me  in  confinement  for 
twenty-seven  days,  during  which  he  caused  me  to  be  succes- 
sively assailed  by  all  his  staff,  and,  in  order  to  ensnare  me, 
reqidred  [me]  to  return,  by  a  dragoon  who  waited,  answers  to 
letters  composed  by  the  united  talents  of  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  and 
his  staff  after  seven  days'  reflection. 

Previously,  however,  to  permitting  me  to  resume  my  medical 
functions  at  Longwood,  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  in  order  to  put  a 
stop  to  the  fabrication  of  any  more  bulletins,  required  that  I 
should  make  out  a  report  of  the  state  of  his  health  once  a  week, 
or  oftener  if  necessary,  a  copy  of  which  should  be  given  to  the 
Governor  if  he  required  it,  as  will  ^pear  from  the  letter  marked 
31,  a  copy  of  whidi  and  my  answer  I  immediately  submitted  to 
Sir  Hudson  Lowe  by  the  letters  32,  33,  and  34.  But  Sir 
Hudson  Lowe  not  only  did  not  require  it,  but  absolutely  jnto- 
hibited  me  from  making  him  (Sir  Hudson)  any  written  report 
by  the  letter  No.  35,  and  contented  himself  with  compelling  me 
to  come  to  Plantation  House  whenever  he  diought  proper,  in 
order  to  make  him  verbal  reports,  whidi  could  be  perverted  at 
pleasure,  not  failing,  according  to  his  general  custom,  to  abuse 
me  whenever  the  caprice  or  malice  of  the  moment  incited  him. 
The  bulletins  marked  letter  E  were  regularly  made,  and  a  copy 
of  each  reserved  for  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  should  he  ever  desire 
them. 

Being  aware  of  the  general  indignation  caused  by  his  con- 
duct, and  by  attempts  which  he  had  made  to  remove  medical 
aid  from  Napoleon  Boni^parte  wlule  lying  upon  a  bed  of  sick- 
ness, he  found  that  it  was  necessary  for  him  to  give  a  turn  to 
the  affair  by  insinuating  that  measures  had  been  taken  to  cor- 
rupt the  inhabitants  by  presents,  and  that  I  had  been  the  agent 
in  the  plot,  [24]  which,  if  once  established,  would  have  diverted 

[24.]  Tliis  part  of  O'Meara's  letter  haying  been  referred  to  the  Rev. 
6.  J.  Vernon,  that  gentleman  wrote  the  following  note  npon  it : — "  From 


No.  150.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  443 

the  public  opinion  from  the  real  nature  of  his  views,  and  would 
have  justified  his  conduct  as  Governor,  which  then  could  no 
longer  be  attributed  to  the  desire  which  he  had  to  establish  a 
person  wholly  devoted  to  himself  about  Napoleon  Bonaparte. 
For  this  purpose,  and  in  order  to  evade  some  ameliorations, 
ostensibly  directed,  in  Napoleon  Bonaparte's  condition  (as  con- 
tained in  a  letter  firom  Earl  Bathurst  dated  the  1st  of  January, 
1818),  he  framed  the  proclamation  marked  B,  the  object  of 
which  was  to  frighten  and  deceive,  and  which  was  ostentatiously 
handed  about  and  placarded  in  the  most  conspicuous  parts  of 
the  street :  and,  although  in  a  letter  written  under  his  cUctation 
(as  appears  from  the  extracts  marked  36)  he  officially  and  spe- 
cifically denied  that  the  order  of  the  10th  of  April,  1818,  was 
intended  as  a  punishment,  he  at  the  same  moment  asserted  to 
some  of  the  principal  persons  in  the  island  (whose  names  I  will, 
if  necessary,  mention),  to  whom  he  thought  himself  obliged  to 
render  some  explanation,  that  it  had  been  inflicted  as  a  punish- 
ment on  me  for  having  been  supposed  to  have  ^ven  a  snuff-box 
to  the  Reverend  Mr.  Boys,  the  senior  chaplain  at  St  Helena ; 
a  business  in  itself  of  so  simple  a  nature  as  scarcely  to  merit 
observation,  but  which  I  shall  relate  in  order  to  show  the  cha- 
racter of  Sir  Hudson  Lowe's  proceedings.  M.  Cipriani,  the 
maitre-d'h6tel  at  Longwood,  having  died  of  inflammation  of  the 
bowels  on  the  23rd  of  February,  1818,  the  English  clergymen 
buried  him  on  the  24th,  with  great  ceremony ;  and,  although  it 
had  been  signified  to  them  that  he  died  in  the  bosom  of  the 
Roman  Catholic  church,  they  admitted  his  corpse  into  the  Pro- 
testant church,  and  read  the  funeral  service  over  it  according 
to  our  ritual.  General  Montholon,  having  inquired  what  the 
custom  was,  was  informed  that  the  clergymen  would  accept  of 
a  small  sum  of  money  for  the  poor,  but  any  fees  of  interment 
for  themselves  were  refused,  lliis  induced  General  Montholon 
to  testify  Napoleon  Bonaparte's  satisfaction  at  such  generous 

the  manner  in  which  Mr.  O'Meara  here  expresses  himself,  as  well  as 
from  his  account  to  Colonel  Wynyard,  it  may  he  supposed  that  the  chap- 
lains aolicUed  a  donation  for  the  poor,  which  was  hy  no  means  the  case. 
General  Montholon,  finding  that  we  declined  receiving  fee»,  desired  Mr. 
O'Meara  to  ask  whether  he  might  he  permitted  to  give  something  to  the 
poor,  such  being  the  custom  in  Boman  Cathciw  countries,** 


444  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  No.  150. 

and  honourable  conduct,  which  reflected  so  much  credit  upon 
the  tolerance  of  die  Protestant  reli^on,  and  he  accordingly 
purchased  two  Chinese  snuff-boxes,  value  6L  or  7L  each,  in 
order  to  make  a  present  to  both  of  them.  Mr.  Boys,  being 
about  to  depart  for  England,  breakfasted  with  General  Mon- 
tholon,  and  received  the  sum  of  251.  for  the  poor,  and  subse- 
quently the  snuff-box  intended  for  himself,  an  opportunity  being 
wdted  for  in  order  to  consign  the  other  box  to  the  junior  cler- 
gyman. Shortly  afterwards  Mr.  Boys  sailed  for  England,  and, 
being  desirous  to  receive  the  box  with  a  complimentary  letter 
through  the  channel  of  the  Governor,  he  addressed  himself  to 
me  for  that  purpose,  and  I  returned  the  box,  which  I  did  not 
receive  until  the  24th  of  March,  on  which  day  I  returned  it  to 
General  Montholon,  not  having  received  it  until  the  clergyman 
had  left  the  island.  [25]  This  is  the  important  afiair  which 
gave  rise  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe's  proclamation.  Two  days  sub- 
sequently to  its  publication  he  commanded  the  orderly  officer 

[25.]  "  Here  Mr.  0*Meara  distinctly  says  that  two  boaces,  value  67.  or  71, 
each,  were  purcJiosed,  one  of  which  was  given  to  Mr,  Boys^  and  an  oppor^ 
tunity  waited  for  to  effect  the  difficult  task  qf  consigning  the  other  to  me. 
The  story  told  by  him  in  the  'Exposition'  is  somewliat  different.  He 
there  says,  *  I  bought  one  which  I  thought  would  answer  at  the  shop  of  Mr. 
Saul  Solomon ;  and  as  Mr.  Boys  was  upon  the  point  of  sailing  for  England, 
it  was  delivered  by  mo  to  him,  with  General  Montholon's  compliments, 
explaining  at  the  same  time  that,  when  a  similar  one  could  be  pbooubbd^ 
it  would  be  sent  to  Mr.  Vernon*  1  Now  it  can  be  proved  that  this  box, 
purchased  from  Mr.  Saul  Solomon,  was  bought  on  the  2Sth  March^  and  cost 
151.  In  his  letter  to  Colonel  Wynyard  Mr.  O'Meara  states  that  Mr.  Boys 
received  the  box  when  he  breakfasted  with  General  Montholon^  viz.  on  the 
7lh  March^  at  the  christening  of  one  of  General  Montholon*s  children — 
twenty-one  days  only  before  the  box  had  been  purchased  1  Writing  to 
Colonel  Wynyard  he  expresses  himself  differently : — '  Mr.  Boys,  having 
breakfasted  with  General  Montholon,  received  257.  and  the  box.*  Here, 
however,  the  very  indefinite  word  *  subsequently*  is  introduced,  which  can 
be  made  to  signify  an  hour^  a  doy^  week^  or  month  after,  as  may  best  suit 
his  purpose.  Mr.  Boys  returned  the  box  on  the  3rd  April ;  the  conversation 
between  Mr.  0*Meara  and  myself  took  place  on  the  6th.  It  is  not  likely 
that  he  would  have  trusted  the  box  and  letter  to  remain  in  Mr.  Lewis 
Solomon*s  shop  long  after  that.  Indeed  the  impression  on  my  mind  was, 
that  Mr.  O'Meara  had  received  them  before  the  conversation  occurred.  Be 
that  as  it  nmy,  Mr.  L.  Solomon  can  testify  that  they  did  not  remain  in 
his  shop  until  the  24th,  as  asserted  by  Mr.  O'Meara." 


No.  160.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  445 

at  Longwood  to  assemble  all  the  English  servants  there,  and 
read  it  to  them,  without  giving  notice  to  their  masters.  Napo- 
leon Bonaparte,  when  informed  of  this  circumstance,  imme- 
diately sent  away  the  English  servants  employed  at  Longwood 
House  (as  appears  from  letter  37),  and  who  had  been  hired  in 
place  of  Santini  and  two  others,  sent  away  by  Sir  Hudson  Lowe 
in  1816. 

Indefatigable  in  his  exertions  to  get  rid  of  me.  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe  (who  on  the  17th  of  February,  1818,  had  threatened  to 
give  an  order  prohibiting  my  being  received  into  society  in  the 
island,  if  I  did  not  comply  with  his  verbal  insinuations)  [26] 
endeavoured  to  disgust  and  annoy  me  by  every  kind  of  ill- 
treatment.  The  officers  of  the  53rd  Begiment  had  done  me 
the  honour  of  selecting  me  an  honorary  member  of  their  mess, 
and,  on  their  departure  from  the  island,  the  officers  of  the  66th 
Regiment,  at  the  proposal  of  Lieut-Colonel  Nichol,  their  com- 
manding officer,  were  pleased  to  confer  a  similar  honour  upon 
me.  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  employed  Sir  Thomas  Reade  to  en- 
deavour to  fill  Lieut-Colonel  Lascelles'  mind  (the  then  com- 
manding officer)  with  the  most  insidious  calumnies  against  me, 
in  consequence  of  which  lieut-Colonel  Lascelles  called  on 
Lieutenant  Reardon  of  the  regiment  (a  friend  of  mine),  to 
whom  he  related  that  it  had  been  insinuated  to  him  by  Sir 
Thomas  Reade  that  I  had  become  displeaang  to  the  sight  of 
the  Governor ;  that  the  officers  ought  to  expel  me  from  their 
mess,  as  having  been  dishonoured,  and  a  person  who  had 
sufiered  insults  frt>m  the  Governor,  who  had  turned  me  out  of 
his  house  ;  and  consequently  that  I  was  unfit  for  their  society ; 
insinuating  that  my  expulsion  would  be  very  agreeable  to  Sir 
Hudson  Lowe,  who,  he  observed,  had  said  that  he  would  con- 
sider any  person  who  was  seen  to  associate  with  me  as  his 
personal  enemy ;  as  will  appear  from  the  extracts  of  Lieutenant 
Reardon's  letter,  marked  38.  Lieut-Colonel  Lascelles  con- 
cluded with  begging  of  Lieutenant  Reardon  to  persuade  me  to 
withdraw  privately  from  the  mess,  as  my  presence  there  was 
displeasing  to  the  Governor,  protesting  that,  notwithstanding,  he 
personally  had  a  great  esteem  for  me,  and  that  all  he  desired 

[26.]  **  False.    No  such  order  was  ever  given,  or  intention  manifested.*' 


446  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  No.  150. 

was  that  I  should  withdraw  privately  firom  the  mess ;  and  that, 
if  I  did  so,  he  himself  would  be  one  of  the  first  to  invite  me  to 
dine  there  as  a  guest. 

Penetrating,  however,  Sir  Hudson  Lowe's  views,  and  re- 
flecting upon  the  opportimity  he  would  then  have  of  painting 
me  in  the  blackest  colours,  and  of  representing  that  mj  con- 
duct had  been  so  bad  as  to  compel  the  officers  of  the  66th 
Regiment  to  turn  me  out  of  the  mess,  if  I  slunk  away  seCTetly, 
and  moreover  being  conscious  of  upright  intentions  and  honour- 
able conduct,  I  immediately  wrote  to  Lieut.-Colonel  Lascelles 
the  letter  marked  39,  and  die  same  evening  met  him  coming  to 
see  me.  He  made  me  a  great  many  professions  of  friendship, 
protested  that  personally  he  had  a  great  esteem  for  my  charac- 
ter, but,  as  the  Governor  was  displeased  with  me,  he  begged  I 
would  withdraw  from  the  mess  as  an  honorary  member  until 
the  affiur  between  the  Governor  and  myself  was  settled ;  that 
Sir  Hudson  Lowe  desired  that  I  should  no  longer  mess  with 
the  re^ment,  and  that  he  was  afraid  of  his  resentment  being 
exercised  upon  himself  and  the  officers  of  the  66th  Regiment  if 
he  did  not  comply  with  his  wishes ;  adding  that  he  would  be 
one  of  the  first  to  come  forward  and  ask  me  to  dine  with  him 
at  the  mess,  and  that  he  knew  there  was  not  an  officer  in  the 
regiment  who  would  not  *'  feel  a  pleasure  and  pride  in  doing 
the  same ;"  moreover,  that  he  would  be  always  ready  to  step 
forward  and  testify  "  to  the  strict  propriety  and  honour  of  my 
conduct"  He  also  smd  that  he  had  been  shown  by  Sir 
Thomas  Reade,  not  the  whole  or  greater  part  of  the  corre- 
spondence, but  some  secret  document  which  had  never  been 
communicated  to  me  (and  the  contents  of  which  probably  were 
false).  He  concluded  by  repeating  the  professions  he  had 
before  made,  in  which  sentiments  of  esteem  for  me  he  declared 
he  knew  every  officer  in-  the  regiment  participated.  I  replied 
to  Lieut-Colonel  Lascelles,  that  clandestine  misrepresentations, 
from  their  being  unknown  to  me,  might  remain,  unrefuted; 
that  no  person  was  secure  fitim  the  breath  of  calumny ;  that, 
however,  I  was  ready  to  submit  tiie  whole  of  tiie  corre- 
spondence between  the  Governor  and  myself  to  the  judgment 
of  the  regiment,  or  to  submit  to  any  other  SCTutiny  which  he  or 
they  might  devise,  and  to  abide  by  their  decision ;  but  thd.t  I 


No.  150.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  447 

never  would  renounce  the  honour  whidi  the  officers  of  the  66th 
Regiment  had  done  me  in  granting  me  a  seat  at  their  table^ 
unless  (according  to  the  custom  of  the  army)  by  a  vote  of  the 
mess,  or  by  an  order  from  the  Governor. 

This  answer  was  communicated  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  who, 
foreseeing  that  the  consequence  of  his  conduct  was  submitted 
to  the  inspection  and  judgment  of  a  liberal  and  discerning 
corps  of  officers,  sent  an  order  by  Brigadier-General  Sir 
George  Hngham,  to  Lieut.-Colonel  Lascelles,  to  exclude  me 
from  the  mess,  which  was  communicated  to  me  by  the  letter 
marked  No.  40  (written  by  Lieut-Colonel  Lascelles),  without 
assigning  any  motive  for  an  act  until  then  unprecedented  in  the 
army. 

Being  desirous  of  obtaining  every  authentic  information  to 
establish  the  fact  tiiat  this  new  outrage  had  been  effected  by 
order  of  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  I  waited  the  next  day  upon  General 
Sir  George  Bingham,  by  whom  I  was  received  in  a  very 
firiendly  manner,  invited  to  breakfast,  and  informed  that  he  had 
been  commanded  to  carry  into  execution  tiie  order  tiiat  I 
should  no  longer  be  permitted  to  be  an  honorary  member  of 
the  66th  mess.  Having  obtained  the  information  desired,  I 
returned  to  Longwood  and  wrote  the  farewell  letter  marked  41 
to  the  officers  of  the  66th  Regiment,  to  which  the  answer 
marked  42  was  returned  on  the  following  morning. 

The  offik^rs  of  the  66th  Regiment  manifested  thus  honourably 
to  themselves,  upon  this  occasion,  the  indignation  which  they 
felt  at  such  arbitrary  and  unprecedented  conduct,  and  the 
business,  instead  of  leaving  any  ambiguity  with  respect  to  the 
sentiments  entertmned  by  the  regiment,  has  proclaimed  the 
rancour  and  tyranny  of  the  Governor,  and  the  opinion  which  a 
highly  distingiushed  corps  of  officers  entertained  of  tiie  victim 
of  his  oppression.  [27] 

Some  days  subsequent  to  this,  the  increasing  malady  of 
Napoleon  Bonaparte  rendered  the  employment  of  mercurial 
preparations  indispensable,  and  tiiey  were  accordingly  com- 
menced on  the  11th  of  June,  1818 ;  but  an  interruption  of  the 
treatment  was  produced,  in  consequence  of  a  severe  catarrh 

[27.]  The  true  history  of  these  transactions  has  been  given  previously 
in  the  narrative,  pp.  25-31,  ante, — W.  F. 


448  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  No.  150. 

caused  by  the  humidity  and  ruinous  state  of  the  wretched 
apartments  in  which  he  resides,  and  iiie  bleak  and  damp  situa- 
tion of  the  building.  This  I  communicated  officially  to  Sr 
Hudson  Lowe  in  writing,  by  the  letter  marked  43,  indisposition 
having  prevented  me  firom  proceeding  personally  to  Plantation 
House. 

On  the  10th  of  July,  very  alarming  symptoms  having 
appeared  in  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  partly  produced  by  the  use 
of  the  merciuy,  and  being  in  considerable  alarm  about  my 
patient  and  my  own  reputation, — the  insinuation  which  had  been 
made  to  me,  and  the  great  responsibility  attached  to  me, 
having  rendered  me  most  scrupulously  cautious  about  my 
patient, — I  insisted  upon  obtaining  what  I  had  frequently  before 
most  forcibly  urged  the  necessity  of,  viz.  the  advice  and  assist- 
ance of  other  professional  men,  and  for  that  piu*pose  proposed 
to  call  in  any  of  the  following  medical  gentlemen : — Messrs. 
Baxter,  Stokoe,  Livingstone,  Henry,  and  Verling,  recommend- 
ing Messrs.  Baxter  and  Stokoe  as  the  two  first  on  the  island. 
Napoleon  Bonaparte,  however,  manifested  great  repugnance  to 
Mr.  Baxter,  whom  he  designated  as  having  been  "  Chirurgien 
Major  d'un  repment  de  deserteurs  Corses,  dont  Sir  H.  Lowe 
avait  ^te  le  Colonel,  et  parcequ'il  a  assiste  a  la  redaction  de 
faux  bulletins  sans  avoir  vu  le  malade,"  and  for  other  reasons, 
but  consented  to  see  Mr.  Stokoe,  who  was  sent  for  about  half- 
past  six  in  the  morning.  At  about  three  p.m.  Mr.  Stokoe 
arrived  and  examined  the  medical  journal  of  Napoleon  Bona- 
parte's case,  but,  being  apprehensive  of  the  resentment  which 
would  be  wreaked  upon  him  if  his  opinion  should  not  be  in 
unison  with  secret  views,  and  being  a  man  possessed  of  too 
much  honour  to  reconcile  his  consdence  to  adapt  his  testimony 
to  such  views  in  order  to  pay  his  court,  he  begged  to  decline 
the  honour  of  seeing  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  unless  in  the  pre- 
sence of  some  surgeon  specifically  chosen  by  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe.  [28]     After  having  read  the  journal,  however,  he  gave 

[28.]  Upon  this  statement  Bear- Admiral  Plampin  wrote,  "An  impudent 
falsehood.  Mr.  Stokoe  informed  me,  on  his  return  from  Longwood,  that 
he  desired  O'Meara  to  name  to  Bonaparte,  Verling,  Baxter,  and  others,  and 
requested  him  to  name  one  to  be  present."  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  observes, 
**  Vide  Mr.  O'Meara's  letter  of  July  10, 1818,  and  that  of  Mr.  Stokoe  of  July 
13,  1818,  as  to  the  causes  of  the  latter  at  that  time  not  seeing  Napoleon 


No.  150.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  449 

me  his  opinion  that  the  disease  was  hepatitisy  and  strongly 
recommended  a  continuance  of  the  mercurial  treatment  The 
same  day  I  was  sent  for  by  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  in  order  to  make 
verbal  reports ;  but  not  conceiving  myself  justified  in  leaving 
Napoleon  Bonaparte  in  die  alarming  state  he  was,  I  wrote  to 
Major  Grorrequer  the  letter  marked  44,  for  the  information  of 
Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  who  was  then  recovering  himself  from  a 
severe  fit  of  illness. 

Some  days  subsequent  to  this.  Captain  Blakeney,  the  orderly 
officer  at  Longwood  (who  had  long  been  weary  of  a  situation 
in  which  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  obliges  British  officers  to  degrade 
themselves  by  performing  the  duties  of  a  gendarme,  and 
whose  honourable  feelings  and  sentiments  were  wounded  by  Sir 
Hudson  Lowe's  having  required  him  to  make  a  report  of  the 
conversation  and  actions  of  the  persons  with  whom  he  daily 
sat  down  to  table  in  that  confidence  always  existing  amongst 
brother  officers),  [29]  obtained  his  release,  and  was  replaced 
by^  Lieut.-Colonel  Lyster,  who  formerly  belonged  to  the  same 
regiment  with  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  and  now  holds  the  temporary 
and  local  rank  of  Lieut.-O>lonel,  in  virtue  of  his  situation  as 
Inspector  of  Militia.  He  was  accompanied  by  Lieutenant 
Jackson  of  the  staff  corps,  who  had  been  before  Observer  upon 
General  Gourgaud,  from  the  time  of  the  latter's  having  quitted 
Longwood  imtil  his  final  departure  fix)m  the  island.  Lieut- 
Colonel  Lyster  was  sent  by  direction  of  the  Adjutant-General, 
Sir  Thomas  Reade,  to  Longwood,  in  my  absence,  with  orders, 
as  he  smd,  to  take  possession  of  the  quarters  which  had  been 
allotted  to  the  orderly  officer  and  surgeon,  which  he  executed 
by  seizing  upon  (in  my  absence  and  without  any  previous  inti- 

Bonaparte,  in  neither  of  which  a  word  is  said  ahout  a  iurgeon  chosen  hy 
Sir  Hudson  Ixnce, .  The  more  natural  inference  is,  that  Mc  Stokoe,  when 
called  npon  to  attend  Napoleon  Bonaparte  in  July,  1818,  in  company 
with  Mr.  0*Meara,  wished  another  medical  man  to  divide  with  him  the 
responsibility  of  adopting  Mr.  0*Meara'8  opinions  as  to  the  malady,  and  did 
not  then  choose  to  trust  himself  with  Mr.  0*Meara  alone  (vide  p.  32,  ante). 
What  became,  however,  of  all  Mr.  Stokoe*s  apprehensions  of  responsibility 
(vide  his  letter  of  July  13)  when  he  did  consent  to  see  Napoleon  Bonaparte 
alone  in  January,  1819  ?*' 

[29.]  Captain  Blakeney  declared  a  similar  statement  by  Count  Bertrand 
to  be  '*/a28e,'*  and  "  an  ii^amous  calumny.*^    He  says  he  resigned  because 
his  situation  deprived  him  of  the  society  of  his  brother  officers. — ^W.  F. 
VOL.  III.  2   G 


450  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  No.  150. 

nuttion  to  me)  the  common  mess  and  .store  rooms,  mess  aitides, 
&c.,  furnished  by  Govamment  for  the  joint  mess  of  the  orderly 
officer  and  surgeon ;  and  on  my  arriyal  I  found  his  servants 
busied  in  turning  my  effects  out  of  doors.  He  concluded  his 
proceedings  upon  that  day  by  avowing  most  unequiyocaUy  the 
nature  of  his  own  and  of  Lieutenant  Jackson's  employment 
to  General  Montholon,  to  whom  he  signified,  when  asked  if 
there  were  two  orderly  officers,  and  for  what  purpose  Lieutenant 
Jackson  was  sent  to  Longwood,  ^^  parceque  quatre  yeux  sont 
mieux  que  deux."  His  outrageous  conduct  obliged  me  to  send 
him  the  letter  marked  45,  and  the  letters  46,  47,  48,  followed. 
He  also  gave  the  Governor's  orders  that  the  officer  of  the  guard 
should  examine  minutely  every  bundle,  packet,  or  parcel  enter- 
ing or  going  out  of  Longwood,  not  excepting  even  the  foul 
linen  of  the  French  ladies,  giving  as  a  reason  that,  if  this  were 
not  done,  peradventure  Bonaparte  (whom  at  the  same  time  he 
fervently  wished  in  the  possession  of  the  devil)  "  might  be  able 
to  procure  some  books."  [29a]  On  the  22nd  of  July  a  potest 
against  the  further  continuance  of  Lieut.-Colonel  Lyster  at 
Longwood  was  (by  order  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte)  written  by 
Count  Bertrand,  and  grounded  upon  reasons  stated  in  49. 

The  protest  was  shown  by  Sir  H.  Lowe  to  Lieut-Colonel 
Lyster,  who,  on  the  24th  of  July,  sent  a  written  challenge  to 
fight  a  duel  to  Count  Bertrand,  marked  No.  50,  whidi  was 
delivered  by  the  hands  of  Lieutenant  Jackson  to  Count  Ber- 
trand. In  it  he  stigmatized  the  Count  as  a  base  and  infamous 
sycophant  of  the  far-famed  Corsican,  and  concluded  by  offering 
to  provide  him  with  pistols  for  the  rencontre,  which  he  proposed 
should  take  place  on  the  following  morning.  Count  Bertrand^ 
conddering  him  as  a  second,  enclosed  a  copy  of  his  letter  to 
Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  with  the  letter  marked  51.  The  next 
morning  another  defiance  was  written  by  Lieutenant  Jackson, 
on  the  part  of  Lieut.-Colonel  Lyster,  to  Count  Bertrand, 
demanding  that  the  time  and  place  should  be  named  forthwith, 
and  was  soon  followed  by  a  second  from  Lieut.-Colonel  Lyster 
himself  written  in  some  more  opprobrious  terms  than  the  first ; 
and  on  the  25th  of  July  Lieut.-Colonel  Lyster  was  removed 
from  Longwood,  as  will  be  seen  by  the  letter  52. 

[29a.]  The  utter  falsehood  of  this  statement  has  been  shown  in  the  note 
at  p.  82  of  this  vohime.— W.  F. 


No,  160.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  451 

I  must  take  die  liberty,.  Sir,  of  calling  your  attention  to  com- 
pare Sir  Hudson  Lowe's  conduct  in  this  instance  with  that  pur- 
sued by  him  in  April  last,  on  the  occasion  of  my  having  simply 
written  a  letter  to  Count  Bertrand  announcing  my  resignation 
and  motives  for  so  doing.  The  latter  action  was  pronounced 
by  Sur  Hudson  Lowe,  in  his  judicial  capacity  as  Governor, 
highly  criminal  and  punishable ;  but  in  the  former  a  most  in- 
decent provocation  to  commit  murder,  because  given  by  two  of 
his  own  agents,  was  not  only  tolerated,  but  attempt^  to  be 
extenuated,  and  one  of  tiie  parties  concerned  still  retained  in 
oflSce  in  the  place  where  the  offence  was  committed.  The  cir- 
cumstance of  Sir  Hudson  Lowe's  having  shown  Count  Ber- 
trand's  letter  to  Lieut-Colonel  Lyster,  I  presume,  Sir,  needs 
no  comment 

On  the  25tii  July  last,  at  about  half-past  four  p.if.,  Captdn 
Blakeney,  who  had  been  sent  to  Longwood  again  to  supersede 
Lieut.-Colonel  Lyster,  delivered  to  me  the  letter  marked  53, 
which  he  had  been  specially  ordered  by  Lieut-Colonel  Wyn- 
yard  (Sir  Hudson  Lowe's  military  secretary)  to  give  into  my 
own  hands.  This  letter  contained  a  command,  without  any 
previous  intimation  or  warning  having  been  given  either  to  the 
inhabitants  of  Longwood  or  myself,  [30]  for  me  to  quit  Long- 
wood  forthwith  without  seeing  any  of  my  patients.  Humanity, 
the  duties  of  the  profession,  and  the  situation  of  my  principal 
patient,  then  very  ill  and  requiring  a  daily  administration  of 
medicine,  alike  forbade  a  compliance  with  this  unfeeling  com- 
mand, and  I  proceeded  to  Napoleon  Bonaparte's  apartment,  to 
whom  I  communicated  the  orders  I  had  received,  gave  my 
advice  for  the  continuance  of  the  remedies  he  was  taking  and 
the  practice  I  thought  he  should  follow,  recommended  him  to 
choose  a  surgeon  amongst  some  gentiemen  whom  I  named, 
until  the  arrival  of  the  physician  expected  from  France  or  Italy, 
received  his  farewell,  and  departed,  after  having  furnished  his 
valet-de-chambre  with  a  supply  of  the  medicines  he  had  been 
taking  for  six  weeks.  At  tiiis  time  also  a  letter  was  received 
by  General  Montholon  from  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  in  which  he 
announced  my  removal  and  again  proposed  Mr.  Baxter  (whom 
a  few  days  before  he  had  endeavoured  to  introduce)  as  a  sub- 

[30.]  "  Lieut.-Colonel  Wynyard  was  instructed  to  allow  Dr.  O'Meara  to 
see  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  but  in  the  presence  of  a  second  person.** 

2  G  2 


452  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  No.  150. 

statute  for  me,  as  will  be  seen  from  letter  54.  This  proposal 
Napoleon  Bonaparte  answered  by  declaring,  "  Je  ne  prendrai 
des  remedes,  je  ne  recevrai  des  soins,  que  de  mon  propre  mede- 
cin ;  et  si  j'en  suis  prive,  je  n'en  recevrai  de  personne,  et  je  me 
tiendrai  pour  assassin^  par  lui :"  and  the  reply  No.  55  was  sent 
by  Greneral  Montholon  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe. 

During  my  absence  from  my  apartment  Lieut.-Colonel  Wyn- 
yard  had,  without  my  knowledge,  taken  upon  himself  to  order 
my  servants  to  pack  up  "my  effects,  which  they  were  obliged  to  do 
with  great  precipitation  and  in  open  trunks.  [31]  On  my  re- 
turn I  put  what  money  I  had  in  gold  in  my  pockets,  and  con- 
signed 600  or  700  dollars  to  Captain  Blakeney  in  order  to  be 
sent  to  me  on  the  following  morning,  put  some  presents  I  had 
received  into  my  pockets,  and  several  articles  of  jewellery  (some 
of  them  very  vaJuable)  into  my  writing-desk,  in  the  presence  of 
three  witnesses,  and  left  Longwood,  after  having  received  a 
specific  promise  from  Lieut-Colonel  Wynyard  (to  whom  I  ex- 
plained the  open  and  insecure  state  of  my  things)  that  one  of 
my  servants  should  be  permitted  to  remain  with  my  baggage  at 
Hutt's  Gate,  where  he  informed  me  that  it  must  be  deposited 
for  that  night.  Instead  of  fulfilling  this  promise,  however,  the 
moment  it  arrived  at  Hutt's  Gate  it  was  received  by  Lieut- 
Colonel  Wynyard,  who  had  galloped  on  for  that  purpose,  and 
who,  acting  no  doubt  according  to  orders  from  the  Governor, 
compelled  my  servants  to  abandon  it  to  persons  in  the  Govern- 
ment employ,  and  proceed  themselves  to  Brigade-Major  Har- 
rison, who  had  orders  to  send  them  off  to  town  forthwith,  direct- 
ing one  of  them  to  return  on  the  following  morning  in  order 
to  have  the  remainder  of  my  baggage  and  his  own  delivered 
up  to  him.  Instead  of  fulfilling  this,  however,  Jones,  the  man 
who  went  up  in  obedience  to  these  directions  and  to  a  signal 
made  from  Plantation  House,  was  upon  his  arrival  seized, 
thrown  into  the  guard-room,  detained  there  as  a  prisoner,  and 

[31.]  O'Meara  repeated  this  story  in  his  *  Exposition ;'  and  Lieut.- 
Colonel  Wynyard  drew  up  a  refutation  of  the  statement,  accompanied  by 
authentic  documents,  to  prove  the  misrepresentations  of  that  work, 
"  though  he  considered  it,**  he  said,  "  almost  a  reflection  on  the  cha- 
racter of  a  British  oflScer  to  be  obliged  to  vindicate  himself  from  aspersions 
invented  by  a  man  of  Mr.  O'Meara's  principles,  and  published  in  a  work 
notorious  for  its  falsehood." — W.  P. 


No.  150.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  453 

refused  permisnon  to  see  my  effects.  The  following  day  1 
reported  myself  to  Admiral  Plampio,  by  whose  secretary,  Mr. 
Elliott,  I  was  informed,  by  the  Admiral's  directions,  that  I  was 
to  proceed  to  England  in  the  Griffon,  and  from  whom  I  ob- 
tained permission  to  remain  on  shore  until  the  Griffon  was 
ready  to  sail.  On  my  return  to  town,  at  two  p.m.,  feeling  the 
necessity  there  was  of  promptly  affording  medical  assistance  to 
Napoleon  Bonaparte,  and  conceiving  that  humanity  would  have 
suggested  to  any  one  possessing  the  feelings  of  a  man  the  pro- 
priety of  sending  to  me  whatever  surgeon  might  be  chosen  to 
replace  me,  in  order  that  he  might  be  able  to  make  himself 
fully  acquainted  with  the  case,  and  consult  with  me  touching 
the  practice  necessary  to  be  followed,  [32]  I  wrote  to  Major 
Gorrequer,  for  the  Governor's  information,  the  letter  marked  56, 
which  was  returned  to  me  unopened  with  letter  57. 

About  half-past  four  Mr.  Baxter  (whom  the  Governor  had 
been  lately  so  often  informed  Napoleon  Bonaparte  would  never 
receive  either  as  a  private  or  consulting  surgeon)  came  to  me 
and  read  some  extracts  of  a  letter  said  by  him  to  have  been 
written  by  directions  of  the  Governor,  and  which  contained  a 
demand  for  my  medical  journal  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte's  com- 
plaint, and  for  copies  of  all  the  bulletins,  which  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe  had  before  refused  to  receive,  and  had  returned  when 
sent  to  him.  I  replied  to  Mr.  Baxter,  first,  that  I  had  not  yet 
received  my  baggage,  which  had  been  detained  at  Hutt's  Gate ; 
secondly,  that  the  journal  in  question  was  not  amongst  the 
papers  contained  in  my  baggage ;  thirdly,  that,  even  if  it  were, 
I  would  not  think  it  consistent  with  propriety,  with  the  respect 
due  to  the  patient,  or  with  the  rules  of  the  profession,  to  deliver 
it  up  into  tlie  hands  of  a  strange  surgeon,  not  called  in  by  him, 

[32.]  "  Vide  Mr.  Baxter's  letter  to  Sir  Hudaon  Lowe,  of  July  26,  1818, 
proving  that  he  was  sent  to  Mr.  O'Meara,  and  that  Mr.  O'Meara  had  re- 
fused to  show  his  Journal,  or  make  him  acquainted  with  the  case.  Vide 
also  Major  Gorrequer's  letter  to  Mr.  O'Meara,  of  July  26,  1818,  returning 
Mr.  O'Meara's  letter,  proving  that  Mr.  Baxter  had  been  sent  to  Mr.  O'Meara, 
and  had  brought  the  Governor  his  answer,  before  Mr.  O'Meara's  letter  was 
received  by  Major  Gorrequer.  Why  did  Mr.  O'Meara  refuse  to  exhibit  the 
Journal  ?  Did  not  even  humanity  require  it  ?  At  the  island  of  Ascension 
Mr.  O'Meara  told  Mr.  Hall,  surgeon  of  H.M.S.  Favourite,  he  was  taking 
the  Journal  home  to  lay  it  before  Ministers." 


454  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  No.  150. 

without  having  first  obtained  his  consent ;  that,  prorided  it  was 
granted,  I  had  no  objection  to  the  journal's  being  giyen  to  him, 
but  that  common  ddicacy  and  the  rules  of  the  profession  re- 
quired that,  prior  to  my  making  known  my  patient's  case  to  a 
strange  surgeon,  his  consent  should  be  first  obtuned,  and  that 
acting  otherwise  would  be  a  breach  of  that  confidence  which 
the  mck  repose  in  their  medical  attendants ;  fouHhly,  that  the 
journal  had  been  left  at  Longwood  in  the  possession  of  the 
person  appointed  by  Napoleon  Bonaparte  to  receire  it,  viz. 
Count  Bertrand ;  fifthly,  that  I  was  r^dy  to  give  him  cofnes 
of  the  bulletins  as  soon  as  my  papers  arrived,  as  the  Governor 
was  entitled  to  a  copy  of  them,  and  I  had  firequently  before 
ofiered  them,  and  even  sent  him  one,  which  had  been  returned, 
with  a  prohibition  to  send  any  more,  and  an  accusation  of  un- 
lawful conduct 

Mr.  Baxter  replied  that  this  would  tiot  answer,  and  that  he 
must  either  have  the  journal  itself  or  a  copy  of  it,  and  added, 
after  a  good  deal  of  hesitation,  that  he  would  give  up  any 
patient's  case  to  a  strange  surgeon  without  ever  consisting  the 
sick  person,  or  indeed  caring  about  his  feelings.  I  replied  to 
Mr.  Baxter  that  he  might  do  so,  but  I  certainly  would  not ;  he 
then  observed  that  Dr.  Verling  had  been  sent  to  Longwood  by 
the  Grovemor's  orders,  and  that  the  French  might  consult  him 
(Dr.  Verling)  or  let  it  alone,  insinuating  that,  if  they  did  not 
choose  to  do  so,  they  would  get  nobody  else. 

Directly  after  this  Mr.  Weston,  the  gaoler  of  the  common 
prison  [33]  of  the  island,  who  had  been  waiting  at  Sir  Thomas 
Reade's  house,  came  and  informed  me  that  he  had  received 
orders  from  the  Grovemor  to  see  me  off  the  island ;  that  I  must 
depart  within  an  hour,  and  not  proceed  farther  up  in  the  town 
than  the  church,  near  to  which  I  was  then  standing.  I  de- 
manded his  authority  ;  he  showed  me  a  written  order  to  that 
efiect,  of  which  the  letter  marked  58  is  a  true  copy  attested  by 
himself.  I  then  wrote  to  Mr.  Secretary  Brooke  ttie  letter  59, 
and,  signal  having  been  made  for  a  lieutenant  of  the  Griffon,  I 
proceeded  down  to  the  beach  to  embark,  guarded  by  tfie  gaoler 
and  dogged  by  two  police  sergeants. 

The  following  morning  I  received  a  letter  by  which  I  was 

[33.]  «  Mr.  Weston  was  Marshal  of  the  Civil  Court.*' 


No.  150.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  455 

informed  that  my  baggage  had  been  secretly  rummaged  and 
my  papers  examined  at  Hutt's  Gate.     No.  60. 

None  <rf  my  creditors  or  debtors  were  allowed  access  to  me, 
nor  was  I  permitted  to  proceed  on  shore  to  them  to  settle  my 
accounts ;  and  Lieutenant  Reardon,  of  the  66th  regiment,  who, 
by  application  of  Brigadier-General  Sir  George  Bingham  to 
the  Governor,  was  allowed  to  transact  my  afiairs,  was  not  per- 
mitted to  come  on  board  in  order  to  obtain  the  necessary  in- 
formation for  that  purpose  from  me,  as  will  a]^)ear  from  ex- 
tracts No.  61.  Several  officers  and  some  of  the  most  respectable 
inhabitants  [34]  who  asked  permission  to  go  on  board  of  the 
Griffi:)n  to  see  me  were  refused  with  asperity  and  menaces; 
but  as  it  was  not  in  Sir  Hudson  Lowe's  power  to  prevent  naval 
officers  from  visiting  me,  he  was  obliged  to  content  himself  with 
placing  a  spy  on  Ladder  Hill,  with  orders  to  watch  the  Griffon 
and  report  the  names  of  all  persons  who  visited  her,  [35] 
amongst  whom  were  nearly  the  whole  of  the  officers  of  the 
squadron,  of  all  ranks. 

On  Thursday  the  28th  (after  having  been  kept  for  three 
days  destitute  of  clothes)  part  of  my  baggage  was  sent  to  me. 
Upon  opening  my  writing-desk  I  found  that  advantage  had 
been  taken  of  the  time  it  was  in  the  custody  of  the  Governor's 
agents  (in  whose  possession  it  had  remained  from  the  time  that 
Lieut-Colonel  Wynyard  took  charge  of  it  until  it  was  delivered 
to  my  servant  on  the  27th)  to  take  out  all  the  jewellery  (with 
the  exception  of  a  cornelian  necklace),  some  of  which  were 
inestimable  to  me,  in  consequence  of  having  received  them  as 
presents. 

The  firm  of  Cole  and  Co.  having  applied  to  the  Governor  for 
permission  to  go  on  board  the  Griffon,  in  order  to  settle  their 
accounts  with  me,  it  was  refused  to  any  of  the  principals  of  the 
house,  but  Sir  U.  Lowe  selected  out  one  of  the  clerks,  whom  he 
named  and  sent  on  board  the  Griffon,  with  directions  to  report 
on  his  return  everything  I  had  said,  and  to  bring  any  letters  he 
might  receive  from  me  to  Sir  Thomas  Reade  ;  he  was  accord- 
ingly followed  to  the  beach  by  two  police  sergeants,  who  lay  in 
wait  for  him  at  his  return,  in  order  to  conduct  him  to  the  place 
*of  interrogation.     Letter  62. 

[34.]  "  As  no  iudividual  is  here  named,  it  becomes  impossible  to  reply  ; 
but  the  whole  is  a  fabrication.** 
[35.]  "  This  is  a  deliberate  falsehood;' 


456  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  No.  150. 

In  consequence  of  Sir  Hudson  Lowe's  having  refused  to  per- 
mit any  personal  explanation  between  my  creditors,  debtors, 
and  myse^,  I  have  sdfered  a  loss  of  about  200/.  sterling,  which 
I  was  myself  obliged  to  pay  rather  than  run  the  risk  of  making 
an  improper  charge  upon  others.  After  having  well  examined 
my  trunks,  in  order  to  ascertain  correctly  the  number  of  things 
taken  out  while  my  baggage  was  in  the  hands  of  the  Governor's 
agents,  I  conceived  it  necessary,  as  the  Governor  had  refused  to 
receive  any  communication  from  me,  to  apply  to  the  chief  of  my 
own  department  for  redress,  and,  accordingly,  upon  the  30th 
July,  wrote  to  Admiral  Plampin  the  letter  marked  63,  which, 
with  his  reply  64,  and  my  letter  of  explanation  marked  65, 1 
have  the  honour  to  annex. 

The  next  morning  I  was  summoned  on  shore  by  the  civil 
ma^trate  by  letter  66,  in  order  to  make  my  deposition.  I 
had,  however,  scarcely  proceeded  fifty  paces  along  the  Marine 
ere  I  was  arrested  by  a  sentinel  in  consequence  of  orders  from 
Sir  Hudson  Lowe  (although  accompanied  at  the  moment  by 
Mr.  Heale,  the  civil  o£Scer,  sent  off  by  Mr.  Brooke  to  summon 
me  on  shore),  and  detained  until  released  by  Town-Major 
Cole.  Upon  my  arrival  at  the  Castle,  after  having  sworn,  to 
the  best  of  my  belief  and  knowledge,  to  the  truth  of  the  state- 
ment of  the  losses  as  detailed  in  the  letter  63, 1  was  interrogated 
on  oath  by  the  magistrate,  but  a  copy  of  my  depoution,  by 
order  of  Sir  H.  Lowe,  [36]  was  refused  to  my  application,  and 
I  have  never  been  informed  that  any  recovery  of  my  property 

[30.]  "  The  magistrate  (Sir  George  Bingham)  refnaed  it  of  his  own 
authority.  No  application  was  made  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  on  the  subject." 
Sir  George  Bingham  said,  "  As  acting  Member  of  Council,  it  was  my  turn 
to  attend  to  the  police  duty  of  the  island  for  the  quarter  during  which  the 
complaint  was  made.  I  therefore  received  Mr.  O'Meara's  deposition  on 
oath,  in  form  of  a  letter  addressed  to  Bear-Admiral  Plampin ;  and  I  put 
such  interrogatories  as  I  thought  would  best  tend  to  elucidate  the  aflair  in 
question.  Nothing  beyond  a  light  suspicion  could  attach  to  any  of  those 
examined.  The  persons  who  had  at  any  time  Mr.  O'Meara's  baggage  under 
their  charge  were  searched,  but  no  tr^ce  appeared  the  least  likely  to  lead 
to  a  discovery  of  where  the  articles  were  said  to  have  been  lost,  or  by 
whom  they  had  been  taken.  I  refused  Mr.  CMeara  a  copy  of  his  examina- 
tion, and  I  grounded  my  refusal  not  on  any  reference  to  the  Governor,  but 
having  been  informed  by  R.  Leall,  Esq.,  the  Clerk  of  the  Peace,  that  it 
Was  not  customary." 


No.  160.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  457 

has  been  effected,  or  of  what  measures  may  have  been  had 
recourse  to  in  order  to  discover  and  bring  to  justice  the  per- 
petrators. 

Tlie  deposition  of  my  servant  I  have  also  the  honour  to  en- 
close. 

In  closing  my  professional  connection  with  Napoleon  Bona- 
parte,  I  think  it  my  duty  to  lay  before  their  Lordships  a  short 
statement  of  the  manner  in  which  his  health  has  been  and  may 
be  further  affected  by  the  climate  in  which  he  now  resides,  and 
by  the  treatment  which  he,  his  companions  and  followers,  have 
habitually  experienced. 

Almost  immediately  after  Sir  Hudson  Lowe's  arrival  in  St 
Helena,  he  endeavoured  to  prevent  all  intercourse  between  the 
prisoners  at  Longwood  and  the  officers,  inhabitants,  and  others. 
His  desire  to  accomplish  this  induced  him  to  inform  Count 
Bertrand  that  the  French  were  not  permitted  to  make  purchases 
in  the  shops,  and  that,  if  they  had  done  so  previously  to  his 
arrival,  it  was  only  an  abuse  and  not  in  consequence  of  a 
right.  In  furtherance  of  this  he  also  sent  hb  aide-de-camp. 
Major  Gorrequer,  round  to  the  different  shopkeepers  to  forbid 
them  selling  the  French  any  goods  unless  for  ready  money, 
menacing  them  with  the  severest  punishments  if  guilty  of  any 
infraction  of  this  order.  [37]  Some  were  even  prohibited 
from  selling  them  articles  for  ready  money.  He  also  prevented 
the  officers  of  the  53rd  regiment,  the  inhabitants,  and  others 
who  had  been  in  the  habit  of  visiting  Madame  Bertrand  and 
Longwood,  from  any  further  continuance  of  their  visits,  either 
by  direct  prohibitions,  insinuations,  or  by  obliging  them  to  go 
through  degrading  formalities  and  interrogations  [38].  On  tibe 
30th  September,  1816,  he  reduced  the  allowance  of  provisions, 
wines,  <&c,  to  the  amount  described  in  the  scale  marked  C,  the 
quantities  fixed  in  which  were  designated  by  himself,  although  his 
aide-de-camp  Major  Grorrequer  [39]  was  informed  by  General 
Montholon,  in  my  presence,  of  the  total  insufficiency  of  the 

[37.]  This  was  denied  by  Major  Qorrequer  on  oath,  in  February,  1823, 
at  the  time  of  the  application  for  a  criminal  information  against  O'Meara 
for  libel.— W.  F. 

[38.]  This  was  denied  on  oath  by  several  witnesses  in  1823. — W.  F. 

[39.]  Major  Gorroquer's  answer  to  the  statement  about  provisions  has 
been  given  in  the  text.     Vide  pp.  121-146,  aw<f.— W.  F. 


458  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  No.  160. 

quantities  fixed  by  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  which  was  confirmed  to 
Idm  and  his  aide-de-camp  both  by  the  orderly  officer  and  myself, 
and  he  was  also  warned  by  us  that  the  maitre-d'hotel  had  (»^ered 
a  quantity  of  plate  to  be  broken  up  in  order  to  proride  mon^ 
for  the  purchase  of  the  necessaries  of  life,  [40]  a  sufficirat 
quantity  o!  which  was  not  allowed  by  him.  No  further  steps, 
however,  were  adopted  by  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  than  ordering  Ihit 
the  money  derived  from  the  sale  of  the  plate,  amounting  in  the 
first  instance  to  about  2387.,  should  not  be  received  by  them, 
but  should  be  deposited  in  the  hands  of  the  purveyor,  to  be 
drawn  from  time  to  time  in  small  sums.  An  explanation  given 
to  him  by  the  maitre-d'hotel  on  the  30th  December,  1816,  in 
whidi  the  defidendes  were  specifically  and  individually  enume- 
rated, and  an  account  given  to  him  of  each  and  every  article 
purchased,  produced  no  otiier  amelioration  or  au^entation 
than  a  countermand  of  an  order  he  had  just  given  for  a  further 
reduction  in  the  quantity  of  bread  on  the  departure  of  Count 
Las  Cases.  A  similar  explanation  had  been  also  frequently  given 
to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  by  myself,  more  particularly  on  the  4th 
December,  1816,  on  which  day  I  enumerated  to  bim  indivi- 
dually the  deficiencies  and  the  artides  purchased  by  them.  Sir 
Thomas  Reade,  however,  was  directed  to  assist  the  maltre- 
d'hotel  in  preserving  the  provisions  which  he  purchased  witii 
the  plate  money  (whidi  plate  was  bought  by  tiie  Governor 
himself,  [41]  who  paid  the  price  of  it  at  5«.  the  ounce) ;  and  an 
order  was  given  in  writing  by  the  Governor,  directing  Mr. 
Breame,  the  Company's  farmer,  to  supply  the  Frendi  monthly 
with  a  stipulated  quantity  of  veal  at  their  own  expense  (a  cchb- 
pliance  with  which  caused  him  subsequentiy  to  be  turned  out 
of  his  situation  by  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  [42]  which  act  was  dis- 
approved by  the  Court  of  Directors  of  the  East  India  Com- 
pany, and  Mr.  Breame  was  reinstated).  Mr.  Balcombe,  the 
purveyor,  having  been  rigidly  restricted  by  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  to 

[40.]  See  0*Meara*8  statement,  that  Bonaparte  admitted  to  him  that 

the  plate  was  broken  up  for  the  purpose  of  creating  an  effect,  vol.  i.  p. 

289.— W.  F. 
[41.]  "  The  Governor  has  never  even  seen  the  plate  in  question." 
[42.]  **  Mr.  Breame  was  removed  from  the  superintendence  of  the 

CJompany's  farms  on  grounds  which  were  fully  detailed  to  the  Court  of 

Pirectors," 


No.  160.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  459 

a  certain  price  in  the  purchase  of  sheep,  tiie  mutton  was  fre- 
quently of  a  very  bad  quality,  as  no  good  sheep  were  to  be 
obtained  from  the  farmers  at  ihe  price  fixed  by  him,  aldiough 
good  ones  were  to  be  purchased  at  a  considerable  increase. 

Similar  restrictions  in  the  price  of  the  poultry  also  fr^uently 
prevented  any  of  good  quality  from  arriving  at  Longwood.  The 
beef,  until  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  thought  proper,  in  October  1817, 
to  order  that  island  bullocks  should  be  slaughtered,  was  almost 
invariably  of  a  bad  quality,  and,  notwithstanding  the]  frequent 
representations  to  that  effect  made  both  by  the  orderly  officer 
and  myself,  no  amelioration  of  consequence  took  place  until 
that  period,  and  the  meat,  originally  bad  in  quality,  from  being 
carted  up  in  the  sun  was  often  on  its  arrival  stinking  and  unfit 
for  human  use.  The  same  took  place  also  with  many  other 
edibles,  and  several  articles  indispenzMible  to  the  table  were  fre- 
quendy  of  bad  quality,  in  consequence  of  Sir  Hudson  Lowe's 
having  compelled  the  purveyor  to  purchase  damaged  and  musty 
provisions  out  of  tiie  Company's  stores,  because  they  were  to  be 
obtained  much  cheaper  there  than  good  and  merchantable 
articles  of  the  same  kind  could  be  purchased  in  the  shops.  In 
doing  this  he  acted  directiy  contrary  to  the  system  established 
by  Sir  George  Cockbum,  who  had  ordered  the  purveyor  to  pro- 
vide invariably  the  best  articles  for  the  French  at  any  price  by 
which  they  might  be  obtained.  The  bread  also  was  in  general 
extremely  bad,  and  the  water  invariably  so  during  the  summer 
months. 

Soon  after  Sir  Hudson  Lowe's  arrival  fresh  butter  was  no 
longer  sent  to  Napoleon  Bonaparte ;  and  I  have  been  credibly 
informed  that  the  milk  of  the  cows  specifically  destined  for  that 
purpose  by  Sir  George  Cockbum  was  ordered  by  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe  to  be  sent  to  his  own  house  [43]. 

Any  savings  made  by  the  French  in  articles  allowed  by  the 
Governor,  and  not  consumed  by  them  (the  English  confec- 
tionery, for  example),  [44]  were  ordered  by  Sir  Hudson  Lowe 


[43.]  All  these  charges  respeoting  the  want  or  badness  of  provisions  were 
answered  by  Major  Gorrequer.     Vide  pp.  121-146,  ante. — W.  F. 

[44.]  "  Half  of  the  sum  appropriated  in  the  schedule  for  confectionery 
having  been  represented  by  the  mattre-d'hdtel,  through  the  purveyor,  as 
sufficient  for  the  use  of  the  establishment,  and  a  request  made  that  the 


460  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  No.  150. 

to  be  credited  to  the  account  of  Government,  instead  of  allowing 
the  French  to  balance  by  means  of  them  (as  they  desired)  any 
increased  consmnption  in  other  articles  beyond  the  amount 
indicated  in  the  scale  C. 

On  the  9th  of  October,  1816,  he  issued  the  code  of  re- 
strictions marked  D,  by  which  he  reduced  the  limits  from  the 
large  space  established  by  Sir  George  Cockbum,  to  a  road  of 
twelve  feet  wide,  prohibiting  the  French  from  stirring  off  it  and 
speaking  to  any  person  they  might  meet  unless  in  the  presence 
of  a  British  officer,  from  entering  into  any  houses ;  and  Sir 
Thomas  Reade  suggested  that  it  would  be  right  to  deprive 
Napoleon  Bonaparte  of  his  books  if  he  did  not  comply  with 
whatever  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  desired  [45]. 

Sir  Hudson  Lowe  also  ri^dly  prohibited  that  any  person 
should  lend  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  or  any  of  the  French,  books, 
pamphlets,  and,  above  all,  newspapers.  Even  the  newspapers  sent 
by  His  Majesty's  Government  were  first  examined  by  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe  at  his  own  house,  and  only  such  as  he  pleased  sent  to  the 
French  prisoners.  This  fact  I  personally  ascertained  at  Planta- 
tion House  and  Lo^jgwood.  In  order  to  prevent  the  possibility 
of  newspapers  reaching  Longwood,  he  caused  Sir  Thomas  Reade 
to  attend  at  the  post-office  at  the  opening  of  the  mails,  by  whom 
newspapers  arriving  for  other  British  subjects  were  seized  and 
sent  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe ;  and  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  himself 
required  and  endeavoured  to  compel  Mr.  Cole,  the  postmaster, 
to  frirnish  him  with  all  such  letters,  addressed  to  British  subjects 
residing  in  St.  Helena  as  he  thought  proper,  in  order  that  he 
might  secretly  open  them  and  examine  their  contents  [46]. 
He  even  required  of  me  to  render  him  an  account  of  what 
books  I  received  or  purchased ;  and  on  the  12th  of  September, 
1817,  he  reproached  me,  in  a  manner  unusual  amongst  gende- 
men,   for  having  in   my  possession   the  following  pamphlets 

surplus  might  be  applied  to  an  inorease  of  vegetables,  tbe  following  memo- 
randum was  sent  by  Major  Gorrequer  to  the  purveyor,  and  from  that  date 
acted  upon : — '  Nov.  21,  1816.  If  the  whole  sum  for  confectionery  is  not 
used,  the  saving  under  that  head  may  be  laid  out  in  v^etables,  if  so 
required.' " 
[46.]  "  This  is  an  infamous  falsehood."  ■ 

[46.]  See  Mr.  Ck)le's  letter  at  page  119  for  a  refutation  of  these  asser- 
tions.—W.  F. 


No.  150.       LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.         461 

without  acquainting  him  [47]  : — *  The  British  Ladies'  Ma- 
gazine/ January,  1817 ;  *  New  Monthly  Magazine,'  ditto ; 
*  European  Magazine,'  for  December,  1816 ;  *  Eclectic  Review,' 
January,  1817 ;  *  Gentleman's  Magazine,'  December,  1816  ; 
•Monthly  Review,'  December,  1816 ;  *  Ackerman's Repository,' 
January,  1817 ;  all  of  which  he  obliged  me  to  send  forthwith  to 
his  house,  where  they  have  been  ever  since  detained.  He  also 
interdicted  me  most  positively,  on  that  day  and  many  others, 
from  either  lending  books,  newspapers,  or  even  communicating 
information  derived  by  me  from  books  or  papers,  either  to 
Napoleon  Bonaparte  himself,  or  to  any  of  his  suite,  under  pain 
of  being  considered  a  bearer  of  unauthorised  communications, 
and  punished  accordingly  for  a  breach  of  the  proclamation 
marked  A,  to  which  he  referred,  and  in  which  he  had  de- 
nounced such  communications  as  felonious. 

Verbal  communications  with  the  inhabitants  or  others  were 
in  a  similar  manner  prohibited  by  him ;  and  everything  entering 
or  leaving  Longwood  for  the  French,  not  even  excepting  the 
foul  linen,  ordered  to  be  submitted .  to  an  examination  of 
men  [48]. 

The  officers,  inhabitants,  and  others  who  obtained  an  inter- 
view with  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  were  obliged  by  Sir  Hudson  Lowe 
to  make  a  report  to  him  (fi^uently  in  writing)  of  what  had 
been  said  to  them  by  Napoleon  in  conversation.  This  he  even 
required  from  the  officers  of  the  highest  rank,  both  of  the  army 
and  navy,  and  several  officers  were  required  to  report  what 
conversation  passed  at  the  private  tables  of  British  officers  of 
the  most  superior  rank  and  station  [49]. 

The  French  are  not  permitted  to  dispose  of  their  own  money 
without  having  first  rendered  to  him  an  account  for  what  pur- 
pose it  is  intended;  and  all  accounts,  bills,  &c.,  are  obliged 
to  be  submitted  to  the  inspection  of  the  orderly  officer,  who  is 
required  to  affix  his  signature  thereon;  and  on  the  8th  of 

[47.]  "  All  these  magazinefl  were  received  at  the  same  time,  and  con- 
tained reviews  cf  Mr.  Warden*8  book,  which  he  sent  to  Dr.  O'Meara  to  be 
communicated  to  Napoleon  Bonaparte  and  his  followers.  They  were  given 
to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  by  Dr.  O'Meara  himself." 

[48.]  This  was  indignantly  denied  by  Captain  Blakeney.  See  page  82 
of  this  volume. — W.  F. 

[49.]  This  was  denied  upon  oath  by  several  deponents  in  1823. — ^W.  F. 


462  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  No.  150. 

April,  1818,  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  required  that  the  French  should 
not  draw  more  than  1001.  per  month  for  the  extra  expenses  of 
the  establishment  and  of  their  private  families,  but  that,  when 
Madame  Bertrand  or  the  others  wanted  to  make  purchases,  she 
or  they  should  apply  through  the  orderly  officer  to  Major 
Gorrequer,  specifying  then  and  there  that  payment  should  be 
made  to  the  vendors  by  "  bons  "  drawn  upon  Miyor  Gorrequer, 
and  countersigned  by  the  orderly  officer  at  Longwood. 

On  the  7th  of  February,  1817,  a  proposal  was  sent  by 
Napoleon  Bonaparte  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  (in  answer  to  one 
from  the  latter),  that  he  should  send  to  Count  Bertrand  a  list, 
framed  by  himself,  of  such  houses  within  the  limits  as  he  did 
not  wish  Napoleon  or  the  French  to  enter,  which  he  was  in- 
formed would  be  complied  with  by  them.  This  proposal  was 
first  accepted  and  then  rejected  by  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  who 
desired  me  to  ^*  tell  Napoleon  Bonaparte  that  he  might  con- 
sider himself  extremely  fortunate  in  having  so  good  a  man  as 
himself  (Sir  Hudson  Lowe)  to  deal  with,  as  a  great  many  odier 
general  officers  would  have  put  him  in  chains"  [50];  and 
another  proposal  made  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  that  he  him- 
self [51]  should  make  out  a  list  of  such  individuals  as  he  would 
permit  to  visit  Longwood,  and  either  leave  their  names  at  the 
guard-room,  or  allow  them  to  enter  Longwood  upon  Count 
Bertrand's  invitation,  was  evaded  in  a  similar  manner. 

In  the  latter  end  of  October,  1817,  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  wrote 
to  Count  Bertrand  that  he  had  granted  permission  that  any 
persons  invited  by  him  might  enter  Longwood,  provided  that 
such  invitation  was  sent  through  the  orderly  officer.  This, 
however,  he  never  communicated  to  the  latter,  who,  when  asked 
by  me  some  weeks  subsequently  whether  Count  Bertrand's 
invitation,  through  him,  would  admit  visitors  to  Longwood, 
replied  "Most  certainly  not,  and  that  he  would  not  allow  any 
to  enter  in  virtue  of  them  "  [52].    The  first,  and  I  believe  thie 

[50.]  "  The  word  *  chains '  was  never  used." 

[51.]  "  It  was  Count  Bertrand  who  was  requested  to  make  out  the  list, 
but  which  he  never  would  do." 

[52.]  Captain  Blakeney,  the  orderly  officer  alluded  to,  said  on  this  state- 
ment, "  I  have  not  the  least  recollection  whatever  of  Mr.  O'Meara's  ever 
putting  such  a  question  to  me,  or  of  my  having  ever  replied  to  him  as  is 
here  stated,  or  having  any  conversation  with  him  upon  the  subject.    How- 


No.  150.  LETTERS  AND  D0C5UMENTS.  463 

only  time,  that  Count  Bertrand  attempted  to  avail  himself  of 
this  offer  of  Sir  Hudson  Lowe's  some  weeks  after  it  had  been 
made,  his  invitation  was  not  communicated  to  the  individual 
demanded,  Mr.  Cole  (one  of  the  most  respectable  gentlemen 
residing  on  the  island),  until  eight  days  after  it  had  been 
made,  when,  finding  that  Count  Bertrand  had  several  times 
required  to  know  the  cause  of  his  absence.  Sir  Hudson  Lowe 
sent  to  Mr.  Cole,  interrogated  and  menaced  him,  insinuating 
to  him  that  it  would  be  advisable  not  to  speak  to  Count 
Bertrand  unless  in  the  presence  of  the  orderly  officer,  and  con- 
cluded by  ordering  him  to  make  a  report  to  him  of  the  con- 
versation which  might  pass. 

Mr.  Hobhouse  sent,  in  July,  1816,  a  copy  of  his  work  upon 
France  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  with  a  request  that  it  might  be 
presented  to  Napoleon  Bonaparte.  It  was,  however,  withheld 
and  concealed  by  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  until  a  discovery  was 
made  by  an  officer  of  rank,  who  had  seen  it  accidentally  at 
Plantation  House,  and  who  mentioned  the  circumstance  at 
Longwood.  finding  concealment  no  longer  possible.  Sir 
Hudson  Lowe  then  said  he  had  detsuned  it  because  it  had  not 
passed  through  the  Secretary  of  State's  office  [53]. 

On  the  30th  of  May,  1817,  the  captwi  of  the  Baring  store- 
ship  reported  to  Sir  Thomas  Reade  that  the  gunner  of  his 
vessel  had  brought  on  board  a  white  marble  bust  of  young 
Napoleon,  and  asked  information  of  him  as  to  the  best  mode  of 
sending  it  to  the  father.  Sir  Thomas  Reade  answered,  that 
there  was  a  positive  order  against  sending  any  object  to  Long- 


ever,  had  I  been  asked  whether,  if  a  person  presented  himself  at  the  barrier 
with  an  invitation  from  Count  Bertrand,  without  its  having  gone  in  the 
regular  form  through  me,  I  would  not  have  admitted  him ;  but  if  an  in- 
vitation had  been  delivered  to  me  open,  to  be  forwarded,  I  should  have 
forwarded  it,  reporting  the  circumstance  at  the  same  time  to  the  Governor, 
in  conformity  to  a  particular  instruction  I  had  received  from  him  to  ac- 
quaint him  of  the  first  instance  that  it  occurred ;  but  no  invitations  were 
ever  sent  to  me,  except  for  tradespeople  to  come  upon  business,  and  those 
were  always  forwarded  by  me  ;  and  they  were  invariably  admitted,  with- 
out any  reference  whatever  to  the  Governor." 

[53.]  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  said  nothing  of  the  kind.     This  affair  has  been 
related  at  pp.  192-3  of  vol.  i.— W.  F. 


4G4  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  No.  15a 

wood  that  had  not  previously  passed  through  the  Secretary  of 
State's  o£Sce,  and  adidsed  him  to  cause  it  to  be  broken  in 
pieces  and  thrown  overboard.  The  drcumstance,  however, 
was  made  public,  and  on  the  10th  of  June  the  bust  was  sent  to 
Count  Bertrand  [54]. 

On  the  3rd  of  February,  1818,  Mr.  Barber,  supercargo  of  the 
Cambridge  store-ship,  arrived  at  St.  Helena,  where  he  opened  a 
shop.  He  brought  with  hun  two  beautiful  portraits  of  young 
Napoleon,  which  he  had  bought  in  some  of  the  print-shops  in 
London,  for  the  purpose  of  selling  them  to  some  of  the  in- 
habitants of  Longwood.  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  informed  of  this, 
caused  them  both  to  be  delivered  to  him,  pretending  that  it 
was  for  the  purpose  of  sending  them  directly  to  the  father,  but 
in  reality  to  deprive  him  of  them,  as  neither  of  them  have  ever 
been  sent  to  Longwood  since  [55].  When  merchant-diips  arrive 
at  St.  Helena  from  England,  the  captains  are  obliged  to  submit  a 
list  of  all  their  books,  pamphlets,  &c.,  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe ;  and 
all  books  of  a  political  nature  are  specially  required  to  be  sent  to 
him  before  they  are  permitted  to  expose  them  for  sale,  and  he 
whole  of  the  copies  of  interesting  works  are  bought  up  by  Sir 
Hudson  Lowe  and  Sir  Thomas  Reade,  pretending  frequently 

[54.]  See  the  true  account  of  the  bust  in  vol.  ii.  pp.  145-153. — W.  F. 

[55.]  '*  It  is  false  that  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  ever  caused  these  prints  to  he 
brought  to  him,  or  pretended  to  offer  them  to  the  father.  They  had  been 
sent  up  to  him  as  common  prints  to  look  at,  without  his  having  had  any 
previous  communication  either  with  the  captain  of  the  vessel  or  the  purser, 
and  he  was  never  informed  or  ever  understood  that  they  were  destined  to 
be  sold  at  Longwood.  As  Governor  of  St.  Helena  it  was  not  for  him  to  he 
sending  up  prints  of  Napoleon  II.,  with  tricolor  decorations  on  them. 
Napoleon  Bonaparte  had  besides  already  several  portraits  of  his  son.  To 
any  feelings  Napoleon  Bonaparte  might  possess  as  a  father,  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe  had  not  shown  himself  insensible,  having  mlide  it  an  invariable  rule 
to  send  to  him  immediately  any  newspaper  which  spoke  of  his  son's  health 
or  situation,  or  of  any  fortune  or  honours  which  the  Court  of  Austria  had 
conferred  upon  him.  When,  in  regard  to  these  feelings,  Sir  Hudson  Lowe 
sent  to  Napoleon  Bonaparte  a  marble  bust  of  his  son,  brought  to  St.  Helena 
by  a  foreign  sailor,  it  drew  upon  him  only  a  torrent  of  abuse  and  caliminy, 
because  he*  did  not  send  it  up  instantly  it  arrived,  before  it  was  possible  for 
him  to  speak  to  the  man  who  brought  it,  or  to  know  by  whom  it  was  sent. 
This  has  been  a  common  return  for  most  acts  of  attention  attempted  to  be 
shown." 


No.  150.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  465 

that  they  are  purchased  for  the  use  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  but 
in  reality  to  prevent  the  possibility  of  his  obtaining  them,  as 
occurred  on  the  arrival  of  the  Phoenix  and  Mangles  store-ships 
from  England,  on  the  6th  and  7th  of  June  1818,  [56]. 

Articles  of  dress,  &c.,  for  the  use  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte  and 
suite,  and  ordered  in  Liondon  through  the  diannel  of  Sir 
Hudson  Lowe,  are  not  sent  up  to  Longwood  until  several 
weeks  have  elapsed  after  their  arrival  at  St  Helena,  as  oo- 
curred  in  the  instances  of  the  Mangles  and  Lady  Carrington 
store-ships,  when  cases  brought  out  by  the  former  vessel  on  the 
7th  of  June  were  not  sent  to  Longwood  until  late  in  July 
following ;  and  some  brought  by  the  latter,  which  arrived  on 
the  26th  of  June  (all  of  them  containing  articles  of  which  the 
French  were  in  much  want),  not  until  the  30th  of  July,  not- 
withstanding that  frequent  applications  had  been  made  by  the 
French  to  have  them  sent  up  [57]. 

On  the  9th  of  May,  1818,  a  letter  was  received  by  Count 
Bertrand  from  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  containing  extracts  from  a 
letter  of  Earl  Bathurst,  dated  the  1st  of  January,  1818,  and 
offering  to  grant  permission  for  fifty  persons,  the  choice  of  Na- 
poleon Bonaparte  himself  (subject  to  the  approbation  of  the 
Governor),  to  visit  Longwood  without  any  other  pass  than 
his  invitation  being  required ;  also  directing  that  in  summer 
the  sentinels  should  not  be  placed  round  the  house  until  nine 
o'clock.  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  about  the  same  time  that  he  sent 
tiiis  letter,  marked  68,  published  the  proclamation  marked  B, 
prohibiting  any  communication  whatsoever  with  the  French; 
continued  to  post  the  sentinels  as  usual  at  six  o'clock ;  gave 
written  orders  at  the  guard-room  to  allow  the  French  to  pass 
till  nine  o'clock,  while  verbal  ones  were  daily  given  to  the  sen- 
tinels not  to  allow  them  to  go  out  after  six ;  and  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe  caused  Lieut-Colonel  Lascelles  to  prohibit  the  officers  of 
the  66th  regiment  from  speaking  to  the  Frendi,  threatening  to 
report  them  to  the  Governor  in  case  of  non-compliance.  [58] 

The  workmen  sent  out  by  his  Majesty's  Government  for 
Longwood  are  studiously  taken  away  before  they  have  half 
finished  their  work,  for  the  accommodation  of  Sir  Hudson  Lowe, 

[56.]  "  Falsely  related."  [57.]  "  Falsely  rtlaUd." 

[58.]  "  False.** 

VOL.  HI.  2  n 


466  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  No.  160, 

Sir  Thomas  Reade,  and  others,  in  a  manner  that  jobs  which 
would  only  require  a  few  days  to  execute  them  are  not  finished 
for  many  months,  as  occurred  in  the  instance  of  a  ^^  fauteuil  de 
malade"  demanded  for  Napoleon  Bonaparte  on  the  23rd  of 
October,  1816,  and  only  finished  in  May  1818,  and  in  seyeral 
other  instances.  The  moveables  and  other  articles  sent  out  by 
his  Majesty's  Government  for  the  use  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte 
and  suite  are  appropriated  in  part  by  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  for  his 
own  private  accommodation,  that  of  his  relations.  Sir  Thomas 
Reade  and  others,  to  furnishing  Plantation  House  and  the 
Castle,  Sir  Thomas  Reade's  town  and  country  houses ;  and  a 
dozen  of  the  shirts  sent  out  for  Napoleon  were  given,  in  1816, 
to  an  Ensign  Morgan  (late  of  the  53rd  regiment),  a  relation  of 
Sir  Hudson  Lowe.  Articles  of  prime  necessity  are  refused  to 
the  inhabitants  of  Longwood,  for  whom  they  were  destined  in 
England,  at  the  moment  that  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  i^ppropriated 
the  very  objects  demanded  by  them  to  his  own  use,  that  of  Sir 
Thomas  Reade,  and  others,  as  occurred  on  the  9th  of  Decem- 
ber, 1817.  [59] 

[59.]  "  Shortly  after  Sir  Hudson  Lowe's  arrival  at  St.  Helena  an  appli- 
cation was  made  to  him,  by  Rear- Admiral  Sir  Pulteney  Malcolm,  to  obtain 
furniture  for  the  house  allotted  to  the  naval  Commander-in-Chief.  This 
application  was  accompanied  by  a  letter  suggesting  the  appropriation  of 
some  of  the  articles  which  had  arrived  fi>r  the  use  of  General  Bonaparte 
and  his  followers,  as  being  at  that  time  imemployed.  Sir  Hudson  Lowe 
objected  on  the  ground  that  he  had  been  directed  by  Earl  Bathurst  to  dis- 
pose by  sale  of  such  articles  as  were  not  wanted,  and  that  a  jealousy  might 
arise  if  they  were  employed  in  any  other  way  than  as  originally  intended ; 
but  finding  a  great  difficulty  in  procuring  furniture  at  St.  Helena,  and  as 
the  expense  would  ultimately  fall  on  Government,  Sir  Hudson  Lowe 
authorised  a  certain  proportion  of  the  stores  which  were  not  immediately 
wanted  foi  the  use  of  the  officers  in  attendance  upon  General  Bonaparte 
to  be  supplied  to  the  Admiral,  according  to  the  list  in  the  margin.  Other 
articles  were  drawn  afterwards  from  the  same  stores  for  two  bedrooms  at 
Plantation  House.  The  liberality  of  the  East  India  Company  rendered  it 
perfectly  unnecessary  to  have  recourse  to  the  stores  sent  out  for  General 
Bonaparte's  use,  or  that  of  the  officers  in  attendance  upon  him ;  but  as 
these  articles  happened  to  be  on  the  spot,  and  were  not  wanted  at  the 
time,  they  have  been  employed  in  the  mean  while  as  above  mentioned. 
The  principal  articles  are  equally  fit  for  use  as  when  first  sent  out.  Not  a 
single  article  of  the  furniture  sent  for  Longwood  has  been  supplied  for  the 
Castle.  Sir  Thomas  Reade  has  received  no  furniture  for  the  house  ho 
occupies  in  town,  both  rent  and  furniture  being  at  his  own  expense.    On 


No.  150.       LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.         467 

Mr.  Balcombe's,  the  only  family  which  visited  LoDgwood, 
was  preyented  from  a  continuance  of  it  by  prohibitions,  insinu- 
ations, menaces,  and  ill-treatment,  and  by  Sir  Hudson  Lowe's 
requiring  that  the  members  of  it  (not  excepting  even  the  young 
ladies)  should  give  him  verbal  and  written  reports  of  the  con- 
versations which  passed  at  Longwood  in  their  presence.  [60] 

At  my  departure  from  St.  Helena,  communication  between 
the  French  at  Longwood  and  the  officers,  inhabitants,  and 
others,  was  effectually  prevented,  either  by  direct  prohibitions, 
as  issued  to  the  officers  of  the  66th  regiment,  by  the  proclama- 
tions, by  insinuations  and  threats  made  to  individuals,  and  by 
their  fear  of  rendering  themselves  suspected,  or  by  their  being 
expected  and  required  to  make  a  report  of  their  conversations 
to  the  Governor;  and  especially  since  the  last  proclamation, 
marked  B,  the  officers,  their  wives,  and  the  inhabitants  actually 
flee  the  French  as  if  they  were  infected  with  the  plague. 

I  have  mentioned  these  facts  as  instances  of  a  system  of  vex- 
ation materially  affecting  the  bodily  health  of  Napoleon  Bona- 
parte, which  was  confided  to  my  charge.  I  have  now  to  add 
that,  in  order  to  prevent  the  possibility  of  his  being  stopped 
and  detained  by  sentinels,  as  had  happened  to  all  the  members 

bis  residing  at  a  house  called  the  Alarm  House,  he  applied  to  purchase 
some  articles  of  furniture  which  had  been  in  use  for  two  years  by  Qeneral 
Gourgaud,  and  which  on  his  departure  remained  unappropriated.  These 
articles  were  as  expressed  in  the  margin. 

**  The  circumstance  of  the  twelve  shirts  is  as  follows : — Ensign  Morgan 
of  the  5drd  regiment  had  been  recommended  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe's  atten- 
tion by  an  ofiScer  of  rank  in  the  service,  and  also  by  Mr.  Morgan's  mother. 
8ir  Hudson  Lowe  had  no  previous  acquaintance  with  his  family.  This 
young  man  had  committed  some  imprudences  in  his  regiment,  and  made 
application  to  exchange  on  half-pay.  When  on  the  point  of  departure 
from  St.  Helena,  he  was  found  to  be  without  common  necessaries  for  the 
voyage,  or  the  means  of  procuring  them.  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  recollected 
that  amongst  the  articles  which  had  been  sent  out  for  the  use  of  General 
Bonaparte  and  his  officers  there  were  several  dozens  of  ready-made  shirts 
for  which  no  application  had  been  made.  The  vessel  in  which  Mr.  Morgan 
had  taken  his  passage  was  on  the  very  point  of  sailing,  a  motive  was 
urged  for  delay,  and,  there  being  no  ready-made  linen  warehouses  at  St. 
Helena,  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  did  not  hesitate  to  direct  that  a  dozen  of  the 
above-mentioned  shirts  should  be  sent  to  Mr.  Morgan,  holding  himself,  ef 
course,  responsible  for  their  appropriation." 

[60.    "False." 

^    H    2 


468         .  CAPnVlTT  OF  napoleon.  No.  150. 

of  his  suite  who  yentured,  either  from  the  blunders  of  prirate 
soldiers  and  the  ambiguity  and  obscurity  of  the  orders  given  to 
them,  or  otherwise,  and  for  other  reasons,  he  adopted  the  reso- 
lution of  shutting  himself  up  in  his  apartment,  and  for  two 
years  has  been  nearly  totally  deprived  of  exercise,  which,  added 
to  the  vexations  and  restrictions  above  mentioned,  has  aided 
the  operation  of  the  climate  in  producing  the  complaint  under 
which  he  now  labours,  and  which,  as  long  as  they  are  continued, 
must  aggravate  his  sufferings  under  it,  and  render  his  recovery 
more  improbable.  I  think  it  my  duty  to  state,  as  his  late 
medical  attendant,  that,  considering  the  disease  of  the  liver 
with  which  he  is  afflicted,  the  progress  it  has  made  in  him,  and 
reflecting  upon  the  great  mortality  produced  by  that  complabt 
in  the  island  of  St.  Helena,  so  strongly  exemplified  in  the 
number  of  deaths  in  the  66th  regiment,  the  St  Helena  regi- 
ment, the  squadron,  and  EAu*opeans  in  general,  and  particularly 
in  H.MJS.  Conqueror,  which  ship  has  lost  about  one-sixth  of 
her  complement,  nearly  the  whole  of  whom  died  within  the  last 
eight  months,  it  is  my  opinion  that  the  life  of  Napoleon  Bona- 
parte will  be  endangered  by  a  longer  residence  in  such  a  cUmate 
as  that  of  St  Helena,  especiaUy  if  that  residence  be  aggravated 
by  a  continuance  of  those  disturbances  and  irritations  to  which 
he  has  been  hitherto  subjected,  and  of  which  it  is  the  nature  of 
his  distemper  to  render  him  peculiarly  susceptible. 

Anxious  as  I  am  to  be  re-established  in  their  Lordships' 
good  opinion,  I  humbly  hope  that  they  will  be  pleased  to  com- 
municate to  me,  as  soon  as  their  important  duties  will  allow, 
their  judgment  of  my  conduct  in  one  of  the  most  difficult  and 
painful  situations  in  which  a  medical  man  and  an  officer  can  be 
placed.  Should  they  be  pleased  to  ask  for  an  explanation  of 
any  part  of  the  above  statement,  or  to  place  me  in  circumstances 
where  I  might  with  propriety  offer  evidence  in  its  support,  I 
shall  be  ready  to  obey  their  commands. 
I  have  the  honour,  &c, 

Barry  E.  O'Meara,  Surgeon  R.N. 


No.  161.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  4G9 

No.  15]. 

To  Lieut.-Gbnbbal  Sib  Hudson  Lowe,  K.C.B. 

My  dear  Sir,  Downing  Street,  October  31,  1818. 

You  will  receive  by  the  present  opportunity  two  instruc- 
tions from  Lord  Bathurst  insisting  upon  the  necessity  of  General 
Buonaparte's  being  seen  daily  by  the  orderly  officer  at  Long- 
wood.  Although  Lord  Bathurst  has  attached  to  a  willing  com- 
pliance with  these  instructions  a  relaxation  of  almost  every  other 
restriction  to  which  General  Buonaparte  has  been  subjected,  yet 
I  have  little  doubt  but  that  he  will  refuse  admitting  the  orderly 
officer,  and  that  both  he  and  the  officers  of  his  suite  will  threaten 
the  most  determined  resistance  to  any  attempts  which  may  be 
made  to  enforce  his  personal  access  to  the  General.  You  will, 
however,  I  am  sure,  not  pay  so  much  deference  to  threats  of  this 
nature  as  to  abandon  the  substantial  execution  of  the  instruc- 
tions, for  you  will  remember  that  there  have  been  many  occa- 
sions on  which  the  threats  made  by  General  Buonaparte  of  most 
determined  resistance  have  ended  in  perfect  acquiescence.  I 
need  only  call  to  your  recollection,  in  illustration  of  this,  the 
determination  which  he  himself  expressed  not  to  quit  the  Belle- 
rophon  alive,  and  the  assurances  given  by  his  followers  at  that 
time  that  they  would  sacrifice  their  lives  in  resisting  his  removal. 
The  only  answer  which  Sir  G.  Cockbum  gave  to  this  attempt  at 
intimidation  was  a  request  to  be  informed  of  the  hour  at  which 
he  wished  the  boat  to  be  in  attendance,  and  on  its  arrival  you 
may  remember  that  he  went  into  it  and  quitted  the  Bellerophon 
with  every  appearance  of  acquiescence  both  on  his  part  and  on 
that  of  his  followers.  It  is  not,  I  think,  improbable  that  the 
same  scene  may  be  again  acted  on  the  present  occasion,  but  I 
have  little  doubt  that  your  firmness  will  bring  it  to  a  similar 
termination ;  and  I  have  only  taken  the  liberty  of  making  these 
remarks  because  I  know  the  disappointment  which  Lord  Bath- 
urst would  feel  if  anytlung  were  to  induce  you  to  forego  having 
that  duly  certiunty  of  General  Buonaparte's  being  in  Longwood 
which  it  is  the  object  of  those  instructions  to  insiu-e. 

Believe  me,  &c. 

Henrt  Goulburn. 


470         ,  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOIuEON.  No.  152. 

No.  152. 

To  Libut.-Genbbal  Sib  Hudbo><  Lowb,  K.C.B. 

(Private.) 

My  dear  Sir,  Downing  Street,  November,  1818. 

I  congratulate  you  on  the  interception  of  the  letters 
carried  out  by  the  ship  Lusitania,  as  it  established  beyond  con- 
tradiction the  clandestine  correspondence  carried  on  by  Mr. 
0*Meara.  The  contents  of  the  letters,  and  the  manner  in 
which  Mr.  Balcombe  endeavours  to  conceal  the  part  which  he 
has  taken  in  this  transaction,  clearly  show  that  the  commissioiB 
transmitted  by  Mr.  O'Meara  were  not  of  the  innocent  nature 
ascribed  to  them,  and  that  they  were  something  more  than 
orders  for  books  for  his  own,  or  even  for  the  amusement  of 
Longwood.  Although  no  judicial  proceedings  can  be  held 
against  any  of  the  parties,  yet  the  papers,  even  should  nothing 
more  be  discovered,  will  be  satisfactory  documents  in  the  event 
of  any  parliamentary  discussions. 

I  cannot  help  entertaining  some  doubts  whether  the  books 
which  Mr.  Holmes  sent  have  not  been  the  channel  of  some 
correspondence  which*  does  not  appear ;  and  these  doubts  are 
rather  increased  by  the  manner  in  which  in  his  letter  to  me  he 
speaks  of  the  letters  which  were  sent,  instead  of  speaking  of 
them  as  his  own.  I  hope  you  have  examined  the  books  very 
carefully ;  and  if  any  of  them  are  bound,  and  they  are  still  in 
your  possession,  let  the  binding  be  opened  so  as  to  ascertain 
beyond  a  doubt  that  there  are  no  letters  contained  in  them.  If 
any  such  correspondence  should  be  found,  and  it  proves  to  be 
of  serious  import,  you  will  be  justified  in  desiring  the  Admiral 
to  send  a  vessel  home  with  them. 

I  am  willing  to  believe  that  neither  Dr.  Stokoe  nor  Mr. 
Fowler  are  parties  in  this  transaction,  and  that  those  who  have 
taken  a  part  on  the  side  of  Mr.  O'Meara  have  been  duped  by 
him,  and  are  sincere  in  the  regret  which  they  express.  At  any 
rate  I  am  sure  you  will  do  right  to  show  no  ill-humour,  and  (if 
you  still  entertain)  to  conceal  any  suspicion  regarding  them. 
It  will  be  a  trial  of  your  temper  to  read  Mr.  O'Meara's  charges 
against  you.    The  answer  which  the  Lords  of  the  Admiralty 


No.  152.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  471 

gave  to  it  must  be  satisfactory  to  you,  more  especially  when 
you  know  that  Sir  George  Cockbum  was  the  first  person  who, 
on  reading  the  charges,  declared  that  Mr.  (^Meara  ought  to 
be  instantly  dismissed  the  service. 

Mr.  Goulbum  will  in  his  letter  point  out  to  you  those  parts 
which,  from  an  absence  of  documents,  will  require  explanation. 
You  will  observe  that  Mr.  O'Meara's  great  object  is  to  involve 
as  many  persons  as  possible  in  the  attack  against  you ;  and  he 
has  therefore  introduced  the  names  of  many  individuals.  In 
applying  to  those  of  the  persons  named  who  happen  to  be  in  the 
island,  you  will,  I  trust,  command  any  displeasure  which  you 
may  feel  at  what  they  may  have  been  induced  to  say  or  do 
adverse  to  your  proceedings.  You  will  recollect  ttiat  the 
authority  which  you  are  called  upon  to  exercise  is  necessarily  of 
an  invidious  nature ;  and  that  inconsiderate  persons,  particularly 
young  men,  are  easily  persuaded  by  such  persons  as  Mr. 
O'Meara  that  what  is  done  is  more  than  is  requisite,  and  that 
there  is  something  creditable  in  disapproving  it,  and  spirited  in 
counteracting  it 

I  expect  you  will  have  some  trouble  at  first  in  executing  the 
instructions  which  direct  the  regular  admission  of  the  orderly 
officer  into  Buonaparte's  presence.  In  answer  to  the  vehement 
representations  which  will  be  made,  you  had  better  content 
yourself  with  simply  saying  that  your  orders  are  peremptory 
and  that  you  must  obey  them.  I  am  in  great  hopes,  however, 
that,  when  you  have  provided  for  a  regular  sight  of  Buonaparte, 
you  will  have  much  less  difficulty  in  other  respects.  Your  mind 
may  then  be  more  at  ease,  and  you  will  no  longer  be  under  the 
necessity  of  obtaining  information  of  whatever  is  passing  at 
Longwood.  His  having  been  seen  in  the  morning,  and  the 
certainty  of  his  presence  or  absence  being  to  be  ascertained  in 
the  evening,  will  leai  9  you  less  solicitous  of  what  may  happen 
in  the  intermediate  time,  and  relieve  the  orderly  officer  from 
much  unpleasant  duty. 

I  trust  that  nothing  will  prevent  my  receiving  before  the 
meedng  of  Parliament  your  reply  to  the  statement  transmitted 
by  Buonaparte  last  year  to  Lord  Liverpool,  as  you  will  see 
that  an  extract  of  my  despatch  requiring  it  has  been  published 
in  the  newspapers.  I  have  the  honour,  &c, 

Bathurst. 


472  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.         Nos.  153, 154. 

No.  153. 

To  Lieut.-Gbneral  Sib  Hudson  Lowb,  K.C.B. 
(Private.) 
My  dear  Sir,  Downing  Street,  November  28,  1818. 

Soon  after  your  departure  for  St.  Helena,  Lord  Baihurst 
addressed  a  private  letter  to  you,  in  which  he  recommended  the 
removal  of  Mr.  O'Meara,  to  which,  as  far  as  I  recollect,  yoa 
replied  by  a  private  letter,  that  he  gave  you  such  useful  inform- 
ation of  what  was  passing  at  Lcmgwood  that  you  thought  it 
advisable  to  retain  him  in  his  situation.  Of  these  letters  no 
trace  can  be  found  in  the  office,  notwithstanding  the  most  dili- 
gent search ;  and  I  should  therefore  be  much  obliged  to  you  if 
you  could  furnish  me  with  copies  of  both  these  private  letters, 
or  of  either  of  them,  as  they  will  be  the  best  possible  refutation 
of  Mr.  O'Meara's  two  assertions,  that  you  were  firom  the  fir^ 
anxious  to  get  rid  of  him,  and  that  he  never  gave  you  informa- 
tion of  what  was  passing  at  Longwood  unconnected  with  the 

health  of  his  patient,  or  his  escape  from  confinement 

Believe  me,  &c. 

Henry  Goulburn. 


No.  154. 
To  Lieut.-Gbnebal  Sib  Hudson  Lowe,  K.C.B. 
Sir,  Downing  Street,  November  30, 1818. 

Adverting  to  the  instruction  which  I  have  already  con- 
veyed to  you  in  my  despatch  of  the  28th  of  September,  respect- 
ing the  necessity  of  Greneral  Buonaparte  being  seen  by  the 
orderly  officer  twice  in  the  course  of  every  day,  it  appears  to  me 
necessary  to  make  some  provision  for  the  occurrence  of  any  real 
indisposition  on  the  part  of  General  Buonaparte,  which  might 
render  the  admission  of  the  orderly  officer  more  particularly 
disagreeable  to  him ;  and  I  have  therefore  to  instruct  you  that^ 
in  the  event  of  General  Buonaparte  being  seen  by  some  British 
medical  officer  at  those  times  of  the  day  which  I  have  pointed 
out  in  my  former  despatdi,  it  will  not  be  necessary  for  you  to 
insist  on  the  admission  of  the  orderly  officer,  provided  that  you 


Kos.  155, 166.         LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  473 

receiye  from  the  medical  officer  each  morning  and  evening  an 
assurance  that  General  Buonaparte  is  indisposed,  and  is  actually 
in  Longwood.  I  have  the  honour,  Ac 

Bathurst. 


No.  165. 
To  Likut.-Genbbal  Sib  Hudson  Lowb,  K.C.B. 
My  dear  Sir,  February  20,  1819. 

Speaking  yesterday  with  the  town  major  about  Mr.  Bal- 
combe,  he  mentioned  to  me  his  having  once  seen  in  Mr.  Bal- 
combe's  possession  an  order  or  a  bill  of  exchange  for  4000?., 
signed  "  Napoleon."  Mr.  Balcombe  showed  it  to  him  (out  of 
bravado)  at  a  time  when  he  was  supposed  not  to  be  very  rich, 
observing,  when  he  took  it  out  of  his  pocket,  **  Here,  look  at 
this ;  you  see  I  do  not  want  money  " — or  words  to  that  effect. 
It  took  place  before  our  arrival  on  this  island.  I  asked  the 
town  major  if  he  had  ever  mentioned  the  circumstance  to  Sir 
Greorge  Cockbum  or  any  other  person.  He  said  he  had  not, 
as  he  naturally  conceived  at  the  time  Mr.  Balcombe  showed  it 
to  him  that  Sir  George  must  have  known  it,  or  that  Mr.  Bal- 
combe could  not  have  received  it  without  Sir  George's  sanction. 
He  does  not  recollect  on  whom  the  bill  was  drawn,  but  he  is 
quite  certain  that  it  was  in  favour  of  Mr.  Balcombe  for  4000?., 
and  he  also  recollects  the  signature  **  Napoleon,"  which  he 
describes  to  have  been  in  very  bad  handwriting. 

Yours  faithfully, 

T.  Rbade. 


No.  156. 
To  Lieut.-Gbnkbal  Sib  Hudson  Lowb,  K.C.B. 
My  dear  Sir,  James  Town,  March  11,  1819. 

I  think  I  ought  to  mention  to  you  that,  in  a  convert- 
tion  I  had  a  few  days  since  with  Captain  Balston,  of  the 
Honourable  Company's  ship  Princess  Amelia,  he  was  speaking 
of  Mr.  Prince,  who  had  just  passed  the  island  as  purser  of  the 
Orwell ;  he  stated  that  Mr.  Prince  had  spoken  publicly  at  the 


474  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  No.  157. 

table  at  Canton  of  a  journey  he  had  had  oocaaon  to  make  to 
Rome  just  before  he  had  left  Euitqpe.  On  his  being  questioned 
as  to  what  could  have  taken  him  Ihere,  he  declared  that  he  had 
been  there  to  negociate  bills  (I  think  Captdn  Balston  said  to 
the  amount  of  50007.)  which  he  had  got  at  St  Helena. 

I  should  have  made  you  acquainted  with  this  conyersation 
sooner  had  I  not  supposed  that,  as  you  were  in  the  habit  of 
seeing  daily  many  of  those  persons  who  must  have  been  at  the 
table  at  Canton,  that  you  could  not  have  remained  ignorant  of 
the  tenor  of  Mr.  Prince's  public  conversation. 

I  remain,  &c. 

6.  R.  Bingham. 


No.  157. 

To  Eabl  Bathubst,  K.G. 


My  Lord,  St.  Helena,  April  3, 1819. 

Mr.  Ricketts,  having  had  a  long  interview  with  General 
Bonaparte,  will  be  enabled  to  give  your  Lordship  more  in- 
formation respecting  him  than  you  can  pos^bly  receive  from 
any  other  channel.  Mr.  Ricketts's  desire  to  be  presented  was 
first  made  known  to  Count  Montholon ;  and,  after  a  lapse  of 
three  days,  he  received  a  note  from  Count  Bertrand,  signifying 
that  General  Bonaparte  would  receive  him.  Count  Bertrand 
requesting  Mr.  Ricketts  would  previously  call  upon  him,  in 
order  to  be  introduced.  Mr.  Ricketts,  being  nearly  related  to 
Lord  Liverpool,  supposed  an  attempt  would  be  made  to  make 
him  the  bearer  of  some  communication  to  his  Lordship.  I  did 
not  object  to  his  hearing  anything  which  General  Bonaparte 
might  say,  but  advised  him  against  his  rendering  himsell  the 
bearer  of  any  papers,  or  charging  himself  with  anything  un- 
known to  me.  General  Bonaparte,  as  was  expected,  enter- 
tained him  fully  on  the  subject  of  all  his  complaints  here,  and 
it  appears  that,  on  his  asking  Mr.  Ricketts  to  make  them  known 
in  England,  and  on  his  saying  he  could  not  distinctiy  charge  his 
memory  with  what  they  precisely  were,  it  was  proposed  to  put 
down  the  heads  in  writing,  which  was  done  in  his  presence,  and 
the  paper  received  by  him  (copy  herewith  sent),  with  the  ex- 
press understanding  it  was  to  be  shown  to  me.     I  regretted 


llo.  157.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  475 

Mr.  Bicketts  ^ould  have  receiyed  this  paper ;  but  as  it  may  be 
said  to  contain  the  summum  of  Greneral  Bonaparte's  grievances, 
and  as  it  can  be  easily  replied  to,  I  hope  no  disagreeable  con- 
sequence will  ensue.  Before  seeing  General  Bonaparte,  Count 
Bertrand  entered  into  a  long  discussion  with  Mr.  Bicketts 
respecting  their  dtuation  here,  and  showed  to  him  some  papers 
of  a  correspondence  that  had  been  passing  betwixt  Count 
Montholon  and  myself  the  same  day  in  regard  to  a  medical 
attendant 

I  had  fully  expected  General  Bonaparte  would  enter  upon 
such  subjects  with  Mr.  Bicketts,  and,  viewing  Mr.  Ricketts's 
near  connexion  with  Lord  Liverpool,  had  no  objection  he  should 
do  so,  so  far  as  to  enable  Mr.  Bicketts  to  make  known  all  the 
grounds  of  complaint  he  might  appear  to  have ;  but  I  did  not 
anticipate  any  communication  on  the  same  matter  with  Count 
Bertrand,  of  whose  general  line  of  conduct  and  of  whose  in- 
solent pretensions  I  had  fully  apprised  Mr.  Bicketts,  and  may 
have  to  regret,  therefore,  the  encouragement  that  has  been  given 
to  him.  The  fulness  and  frankness  of  Mr.  Ricketts^s  conununi- 
cation  on  every  point  that  was  discussed  betwixt  him  and  Ge- 
neral Bonaparte  or  Count  Bertrand  diminish  from  any  incon- 
venience this  may  occasion;  and  on  the  whole,  except  on 
account  of  the  encouragement  given  Count  Bertrand,  I  am 
happy  your  Lordship  may  have  an  opportunity  of  being  so  fully 
informed  as  you  now  can  be  of  all  that  can  be  said  by  General 
Bonaparte  and  his  followers  respecting  his  situation  here.  I 
have  a  large  mass  of  correspondence  of  other  matter  to  transmit 
to  your  Lordship,  but  I  must  unavoidably  postpone  sending  it 
until  the  departure  of  the  Northampton,  a  single  ship  now 
lying  in  the  roads,  which  will  probably  arrive  as  soon,  or  even 
sooner,  than  that  in  which  Mr.  Bicketts  is  proceeding. 

I  have  the  honour,  &c., 

H.  Lowe. 


476  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  No.  168. 


No.  158. 

Pbopositionb  made  on  the  part  of  Gotmr  Montholov,  topedfying  the 
terms  upon  whioh  Napolion  Bokapabtk  was  disposed  to  reoeire  the 
assistance  of  a  British  Medical  Attendant,  and  the  Goysbhob*b  ohserva- 
tions  thereon. 


**  Abtiolbs  imder  which  it  appears,  hy  a  Letter  from  Count  Moktbolox, 
Napolkon  Bonapabtb  is  willing  to  admit  a  British  Medical  Officer  to 
attend  upon  him." 

Longwood,  ce  1  Arril,  1819. 

1.  Qu'il  le  pourrsdt  choisir  panni  tous  les  officiers  de  sant^ 
actuellement  prints  dans  cette  tie,  et  ce  en  cons^uence  de 
la  lettre  de  Lord  Bathurst  du  18*  Mai. 

2.  Que  le  m^ecin  qu'il  choisirait  serait  conader^  comme 
celui  dont  il  est  Cut  mention  dans  le  d^cret  de  yotre  Grouyeme- 
ment  du  15"*  AoAt,  1815. 

3.  Qu'il  recevnut  Tassurance  qu'il  le  garderait  au  moins 
pendant  la  dur^  de  sa  maladie,  que  le  m^ecin  semt  con- 
sid^re  et  traits  comme  le  sien  propre. 

4.  Qu'il  ne  rendrait  compte  de  sa  sante  a  qui  que  ce  f&t 

5.  Qu'il  serait  autoris^  a  rediger  tous  les  huit  jours,  plus 
souyent  si  c'^tait  n^cessaire,  un  bulletin  dont  Tori^nal  resterait 
entre  nos  mains. 

6.  Qu'il  pourrait  communiquer  k  toute  heure,  yerbalement, 
par  ^crit,  le  jour,  la  nuit,  ayec  les  Frangais  de  Longwood. 

7.  Qu'il  donnerait  I'assurance  qu'il  ne  rendrait  compte  k 
qui  que  ce  f&t  des  conyersations  qu'il  entendrait  k  Longwood, 
se  r^ryant  sur  toutes  les  matibres  k  son  serment  d'allegiance 
enyers  sa  patrie  et  son  souyerain. 

Lb  Comtb  de  Montholon. 


QoyBBKOB*8  OBSSayATIONS. 

[These  observations  are  referred  to  in  Remark  No.  8  of  the  Memoran- 
dum written  by  the  Governor  on  Coimt  Montholon*s  letter  of  the  8th  of 
April  on  returning  it.     Vide  p.  481,  poet,] 

St.  Helena,  April  10, 1819. 

1.  Napoleon  Bonaparte  may  select  a  medical  officer  accord- 
ingly,  proyided  the  person  chosen  strictly  confcnms  to  the 


No.  158.       LETTBR8  AND  DOCUMENTS.         477 

regulations  in  force  pursuant  to  Earl  Batburst's  letter  of  16th 
of  May,  1818. 

2.  According  to  the  sense  in  which  the  British  GoTemment 
may  have  i^yen  its  orders  on  the  above  occa^on. 

The  GoTemor  in  the  mean  time  can  only  refer  to  the  con- 
ditions the  surgeon  then  chosen  stipulated  for  himself  in  his 
letter  to  Lord  Keith,  vis.  that  he  should  be  considered  as  a 
British  officer,  employed  and  paid  by  the  British  Owemmenty 
and  not  as  in  any  unse  dependent  upcn^  subservient  to,  or  paid 
by  Napoleon  Bonaparte.^ 

3.  It  cannot  be  expected  that  the  Governor  should  surrender 
his  own  authority  so  far  as  to  give  the  unqualified  assurance 
required  of  him  in  the  first  part  of  this  article.  He  can  only 
pledge  his  own  desire  of  forbearance,  even  should  a  case 
arise  to  demand  removal,  until  a  French  medical  attendant 
may  arrive,  or  until  the  orders  of  his  Government  may  be 
received. 

The  individual  will  be  considered  as  Napoleon  Bonaparte's 
personal  medical  attendant,  and  bound  to  consider  the  health 
of  Napoleon  Bonaparte  as  his  prindpal  charge,  but  he  can  con- 
tract no  personal  tie,  whether  as  a  medical  man  or  otherwise, 
inconsistent  with  his  natural  duty  as  a  British  subject 

4.  If  the  medical  officer  is  considered  as  employed  by  the 
British  Grovemment,  he  must  of  course  be  prepared  to  furnish 
such  information  as  is  required  respecting  the  health  of  Napo- 
leon Bonaparte  whenever  he  may  be  indisposed,  but  only  to 
the  Governor. 

5.  The  Governor  will  not  require  any  bulletins  unless  in 
cases  of  serious  indisposition  which  the  medical  officer  may 
deem  it  his  duty  to  report  in  writing,  when  a  counterpart 
in  original  may  be  left  with  Napoleon  Bonaparte ;  it  being 
understood,  however,  that,  in  all  cases  of  serious  indisposition 
which  require  that  toritten  reports  he  presented^  no  objection 
shall  be  made  to  a  compliance  with  the  regulation  contained 
in  the  last  article  ^  but  one  of  the  instructions  to  Sir  George 
Cockbum. 

*  '^Yide  Memorandam  of  conversation  between  Count  Montholon  and 
Dr.  Yerling  on  the  same  day  these  proposals  were  addressed  to  me.  The 
proposals  were  at  the  same  time  shown  to  Dr.  Yerling  by  Count  Montholon.** 

'  ^  If  the  General  should  be  attacked  with  any  serious  indisposition  the 


478  CAPTIVITT  OF  NAPOLEON.  No.  159. 

6.  ProfessioDal  attendance  may  of  course  be  gmsi  at  all 
hours ;  but  whan,  in  the  execution  of  professional  duty,  any 
written  conununication  may  become  indispensable,  it  is  to  be 
made  known  to  the  Goyemor  if  he  requires  it. 

7.  The  medical  o£Bcer  has  never  been  required,  nor  will  be 
required,  to  make  reports  of  conversations ;  but  whenever  he 
may  be  communicated  with  on  points  that  relate  to  the  Go- 
vernor's duties,  or  connected  in  any  way  with  the  detention  of 
Napoleon  Bonaparte  on  this  island,  and  prevention  of  his 
rescue  or  escape,  or  may  become  informed  of  any  infraction  or 
intended  infraction  of  the  regulations  established  for  his  safe 
custody,^  it  cannot  be  expected  that,  as  a  British  subject,  he 
should  bind  his  honour  or  his  consdence  by  any  tie  whkh  may 
restrain  him  from  making  the  most  immediate  conununicataon 
thereof. 

Matters  touching  his  allegiance  and  lus  duty  towards  his 
sovereign  and  his  country,  it  would  of  course  be  treasonable  in 
him  to  withhold. 

H.  LowB. 

No.  159. 

Letter  addressed  by  Count  Montholon  to  Sib  Hudson  Lowe,  and 
returned  to  him. 

Monsieur  le  Gouvemeur,  Longwood,  ce  8  Avril,  1819. 

«rai  re^u  votre  lettre  du  4,  k  laquelle  etait  jointe  ma 
demiere  lettre,  que  vous  me  renvoyez ;  [1]  trouvez  done  bon 
qui  j'indite  votre  conduite,  et  vous  renvoie  la  votre;  il  est 
impossible  de  pr^tendre  ecrire  a  quelqu'un,  et  en  meme  temps 
se  refuser  k  recevoir  ses  r^ponses.  Depuis  votre  arrivee  le 
Comte  Bertrand  et  moi  vous  avons  ecrit  plus  de  80  lettres; 

Governor  and  the  Admiral  will  each  direct  a  medical  person  in  whom  they 
may  have  confidence  to  he  in  attendance  on  the  General  in  addition  to  his 
own  medical  assistance,  and  direct  them  severally  to  report  daily  on  the 
state  of  his  health." 

'  **  Vide  Act  of  Parliament,  latter  part  of  the  first  and  second  paragraphs, 
and  the  warrant  addressed  to  the  Governor,  which  requires  all  persons  to 
be  assisting  conformably  to  the  Act. 

'*  Vide  also  extract  of  a  letter  from  Mr.  0*Meara,  showing  that  the  medical 
attendant  referred  to  in  these  proposals  is  not  required  to  give  so  mudi  in^ 
formation  as  his  predecessor  had  acknowledged  it  was  his  duty  to  aflford*** 


No.  159.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  479 

toutes  contenaient  la  qualification  de  TEmpereur  Napoleon; 
Yous  nous  avez  repondu  k  toutes,  mais  en  yous  servant,  il  est 
vrai,  de  la  qualification  de  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  ce  que  par  la 
traduction  je  lui  d^guisais ;  c'etait  un  arrangement  passe  en 
usage,  et  dont  je  ne  me  departirai  jamais ;  je  vous  I'ai  fSait 
connaitre  dans  ma  lettre  du  17  Decemfare  dernier,  que,  sH  est 
facile  de  tuer  I'Empereur,  il  est  impomble  de  hd  dter  le  carac- 
tere  sacre  et  inalienable  empr»it  sur  sa  personne. 

Vous  YouB  portez  pour  ofiense  par  le  Comte  Bertrand ;  des 
lors  YOUS  n'aYez  plus  le  droit  de  juger  sa  conduite ;  yous  etes 
partie,  et  ne  pouYez  avoir  le  sang  froid  n^cessaire  pour  etre 
juge.[2]  Je  ne  sais  pas  s'il  a  ^crit  [3]  la  lettre  au  Comte  de 
Las  Cases  imprimee  dans  le  '  Morning  Chronicle,'  mais  je  suis 
charge  de  yous  dire  qu'ayant  ete  traduite  a  TEmpereur,  il  I'a 
trouYee  en  toute  chose  parfaitement  exacte,[4]  quoique  expri- 
mant  fiedblement  la  conduite  que  yous  tenez  k  son  ^;ard ;  ceux 
qui  Font  imprimee  ont  eu  tort ;  en  nommant  des  individus  sous 
Yotre  autorit^  ils  ont  compromis  leur  ^tat ;  aussi  yous  en  etes 
YOUS  prevalu,  et  les  avez  yous  oblige  a  signer  des  lettres  que 
YOUS  avez  dictees.[5]  Dans  Yotre  lettre  du  25  Juillet,  1817, 
relative  au  jeu  d'echec  ofiert  par  Mr.  Elphinstone,  vous  faites 
gloire  de  professer  ces  principes ;  plusieurs  fois  vous  avez  re- 
marque  que  dana  des  paquets  de  linge  sale  on  pouvait  cacher 
des  livres,  des  joumaux ;  eff^tivement,  pend^uit  long  tems 
le  logement  de  Tofficier  d'ordonnance  Blakeney  en  a  ete 
chaque  semaine  encombre  pendant  plusieurs  jours,  ce  qui  exci- 
tait  la  repugnance  de  ce  brave  officier,  et  celle  de  tout  ceux  qui 
entraient  chez  lui.  [6] 

J'ai  place  en  reserve,  et  je  tiens  toujours  k  votre  disposition, 
Yos  paquets  [7]  du  21  et  25  Mars,  oe  dernier,  encore  cachete, 
ainsi  que  les  trois  lettres  que  m'ont  ecrit  vos  officiers,  les  re- 
gardant comme  non  avenues. 

Aujourd'hui  TEmpereur  est  encore  sans  medecin,[8]  ce  que, 
sous  un  pretexte  ou  sous  un  autre,  vous  {sites  durer  depuis  dix 
mois.  Mr.  Bicketts,  Membre  du  Conseil  General  des  Indes  et 
parent  de  Lord  Liverpool,  auquel  ma  lettre  du  1^  Avril  a  ete 
communique  ne  pouvait  pas  comprendre  ce  que  vous  portait  k 
empecher  le  medecin  que  prendrait  TEmpereur  Napoleon  a  lui 
donner  les  garanties  qu'il  en  exige,  que  c'etait  celles  qu'exige 
tout  gentleman ;  non  plus  qu'a  le  oonnd^rer  comme  remplis- 


480  CAPTrVTTY  OF  NAPOLEON.  No.  159. 

sant  une  fonction  dvile,  ce  qui  est  necessaire  pour  qu'il  jouisBe 
de  rindependance  dont  il  a  besoin  pour  remplir  ce  reli^eux 
ministiere,  auquel  on  attente  publiquement  pour  la  premi^ 
foiB  depuis  qu'U  existe  dea  peuples  civilian. 

[9]  Vous  nous  avez  enroye  il  y  a  un  mois  une  collecti<m  de 
*  Morning  Chronide'  des  10  demiers  jours  d' AoAt,  de  Septem- 
bre,  d'Octobre,  de  Novembre,  et  jusqu'au  14  Decembre,  mais 
il  y  manque  sept  numeros. 

n  parait  que  le  ^  Courier,'  qui  est  un  journal  semi-offidel,  a 
dit  que  vous  avez  intercepte,  en  Septembre  1818,  une  corre- 
spondance  de  I'Europe  avec  nous ;  [10]  pourquoi  ne  nous  Tayoir 
pas  communique?  Comme  nous  n'ayons  aucune  connaJssance 
de  ce  taitf  je  suis  egalement  charge  de  le  dedarer  faux  et 
calomnieux. 

n  est  arrive  depuis  quinze  jours  des  joumaux  [11]  des  der- 
niers  jours  de  Decembre^  et  de  tout  Janvier ;  vous  ne  nous  en 
avez  envoye  aucun. 

Vouz  avez  k  nous  des  caisses  [12]  de  livres,  une  ccdlection 
de  *  Morning  Chronide/  et  des  '  Revues  d'Edimbourg'  arrieres ; 
vous  les  retenez  depuis  plusieurs  mois. 

Vous  nous  menaoez  verbalement  et  par  &nrit ;  vous  m^n- 
naissez  notre  caract^re  ;  rien  ne  pourra  jamais  nous  &ire  [18] 
devier  du  chemin  de  I'honneur  et  du  devoir. 

tTai  rhonneur  d'etre,  &c. 
Lb  G^n^bal  CofifTE  de  Montholoh . 


Observations  by  Sib  Hudson  Lowe  annexed  to  the  foregoing  letter  from 
Count  Montholon  on  returning  it  to  him. 

[1]  This  letter  is  returned  for  the  same  reasons  as  preceding 
ones.  Vide  Earl  Bathurst's  Instruction  to  Sir  H.  Lowe  of  the 
17th  of  September,  1817,  communicated  to  Count  Bertrand  on 
the  3rd  of  January,  1818,  and  also  letter  to  Count  Montholon, 
dated  the  2nd  of  April,  1819. 

[2]  The  Governor  has  ah-eady  stated  the  only  motives  which 
had  heretofore  determined  his  forbearance  in  respect  to  Count 
Bertrand.  Vide  his  letter  of  the  4th  of  April,  1819,  to  Count 
Montholon. 

[3]  This  is  not  a  disavowal  of  the  letter,  nor  of  the  false- 
hoods it  contains. 


No.  159.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  481 

[4]  If  Napoleon  Bonaparte  believes  what  is  stated  in  this 
letter  to  be  perfectly  exacts  it  affords  the  strongest  proof  of  the 
illusion  in  which  a  person  who  refuses  to  himself  any  oppor- 
tunity of  seeing  or  knowing  what  passes  can  be  kept  by  those 
around  him.  The  Goyemor  declares  the  letter  to  be  a  shame- 
less libd  throughout,  discolouring  every  fact  or  circumstance, 
torturing  even  acts  of  attention  into  outrages,  sent  forth  to  the 
world  with  the  express  design  to  blacken  and  defame,  and  by 
such  unworthy  means  attempt  to  exdte  the  public  conunisera- 
tion. 

[5]  Captain  Blakeney  delivered  his  own  sentiments  to  Count 
Bertremd  on  this  pcnnt.  It  is  false  that  the  letter  he  wrote  was 
dictated  by  the  Governor,  or  any  other  that  has  been  sent 
There  is  not  a  syllable  in  the  Governor's  letter  of  the  25th  of 
July,  1817,  on  such  subject 

[6]  As  a  proof  how  much  real  delicacy  has  been  hitherto 
practised  on  this  point,  and  how  little  acknowledgment  it  ever 
produces,  a  statement  from  Captain  Blakeney  is  annexed. 
Count  Montholon,  in  a  discussion  on  this  very  matter,  admit- 
ted the  absolute  propriety  of  every  article  which  left  or  was 
sent  to  Longwood  being  exunined,  and  proposed  it  should  be 
done  at  or  outside  the  barrier;  which  was  immediately 
acceded  to. 

[7]  The  Grovemor  considers  these  letters  as  delivered,  and 
will  act  upon  them  accordingly. 

[8]  The  GovOTior's  letter  of  the  25th  of  July,  1818,  and 
note  of  the  25th  of  March,  1819,  the  contents  of  which  have 
been  again  referred  to  or  repeated  in  the  communications  made 
to  Count  Montholon  on  the  2nd  and  3rd  of  April,  point  out  the 
very  simple  and  natural  conditions  upon  which  Napoleon  Bona- 
parte may  have  at  any  time  made  his  selection  of  a  medical 
attendant  The  Governor  has,  notwithstanding,  drawn  out 
some  observations  on  the  proposals  contained  in  Count  Montho- 
lon's  letter,  and  they  are  sent  herewith.^  He  was  rendered 
aware  that  Count  Bertrand  had  taken  upon  hinself  to  show 
Count  Montiiolon's  letter  to  Mr.  Ricketts,  who  will  know  the 


*  See  Observations,  dated  April  10,  1819,  on  Count  Montholon's  letter 
of  the  1st  of  April,  pp.  476-8,  a/nte, 

VOL.  III.  2   I 


482  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  No.  158. 

use  that  has  been  made  of  his  oame,  and  form  his  own  judgment 
upon  it. 

[9]  The  Governor  sent  all  the  newspapers  he  received;  he 
has  never  withdrawn  any  paper  of  a  regidar  series  receivedby 
him,  although  he  shall  not  hesitate  to  do  so  if  he  sees  a  suffideot 
motive  for  it  If  any  numbers  of  the  papers  usually  sent  by  the 
Governor  have  not  been  seen  by  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  they  mud 
have  been  kept  back  from  Mm  by  hie  awn  follotvers. 

[10]  The  information  which  is  here  sought  after  will  not  be 
given.  The  Governor  does  not  intend  to  become  the  channel 
for  the  delivery  of  letters  or  parcels  clandestinely  sent  here,  or 
of  making  known  their  contents. 

[11]  No  series  of  any  papers  have  been  recdved  by  the 
Governor  of  later  date  than  the  12th  of  December.  He  has 
made  it  an  invariable  practice,  when  he  obtained  any  papers 
of  a  late  date  otherwise  than  by  the  regular  channels,  to 
send  them  directly  to  Longwood ;  but  as  an  act  of  regard 
which  he  was  every  way  disposed  to  show,  and  not  of  direct 
obligation. 

[12]  The  Governor  has  not  in  his  possession  any  bookS| 
*  Morning  Chronicles,'  and  *  Edinburgh  Reviews,'  for  the  per- 
sons at  Longwood,  nor  does  he  know  of  any  that  have  been 
sent  expressly  for  them.  The  *  Morning  Chronicle'  has  been 
regularly  forwarded  to  Longwood.  It  is  the  only  paper  re- 
ceived from  England  expressly  for  Napoleon  Bonaparte.  All 
other  papers  sent  have  been  the  Governor's,  or  borrowed  by 
him. 

Some  French  books  were  sent  in  a  separate  boZj  directed  to 
be  delivered  to  a  person  under  a  feigned  name,  and  supposed 
to  be  destined  for  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  which  were  some 
months  since  forwarded  to  Count  Montholon  on  his  application. 
No  others  have  since  arrived. 

[13]  The  officers  who  have  accompanied  Napoleon  Bona- 
parte hither  are  of  course  at  liberty  to  follow  the  path  of 
honour  and  duty  according  to  their  own  feelings.  The 
Governor  does  not  dispute  the  sentiments  or  the  principles  of 
attachment  which  bind  them  to  their  superior,  particularly  in 
his  adversity.  Whether  such  attachment  has  been  shown  in 
the  way  most  honourable  to  themselves,  or  most  for  the  comfort 
of  the  individual  to  whom  they  are  attached,  by  the  course 


Noe.  160, 161.         LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  483 

they  have  pursued,  it  is  not  the  Governor's  business  to  discuss. 
All  that  he  has  to  require  of  them  is  expressed  in  the  annexed 
extracts  from  his  instructions,  which  have  been  before  trans- 
mitted. 

H.  Low£,  Lieut-GeneraL 


No.  160. 

To  Libut.-Genebal  Sib  Hudson  Lowe,  K.C.B. 

Sir,  Downing  Street,  July  5, 1819. 

I  have  had  the  honour  to  receive  and  to  lay  before  the 
Prince  Regent  your  several  despatches  of  the  dates  and  num- 
bers specified  in  the  margin,  and  I  have  his  Royal  Ilighness's 
gracious  commands  to  signify  to  you  his  approbation  of  your 
conduct  on  the  several  points  to  which  these  despatches  have 
referred.  I  have  the  honour  to  be,  &c., 

Bathurst. 

No.  161. 
To  Lieut.-Genebal  Sib  Hudson  Lowe,  K.€.B. 
Sir,  Downing  Street,  July  7,  1819. 

I  have  had  the  honour  of  laying  before  the  Prince 
Regent  your  despatch  No.  218,  in  which  you  state  what  had 
passed  between  you  and  the  Marquis  de  Montchenu,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  despatch  which  he  had  received  from  the  Duke 
de  Richelieu,  dated  the  .     His  Royal  Highness  entirely 

approves  of  your  conduct  in  resisting  the  pretenaons  with  which 
the  French  Commissioner,  in  consequence  of  this  despatch,  endea- 
voured to  maintain  an  unrestricted  intercourse  with  the  followers 
of  General  Buonaparte,  as  well  as  with  the  General  himself. 
The  British  Government  is  alone  responsible  to  Europe  for  the 
safe  custody  of  General  Buonaparte,  and  that  responsibility 
must  cease  if  any  person  not  named  by  the  British  Government, 
nor  acting  under  its  authority  or  control,  has  a  right  to  have 
what  communications  he  may  choose  with  the  inhabitants  of 
Longwood.  Under  the  protocol  signed  at  Aix-la-Chapelle  the 
Commissioners  may  from  time  to  time,  if  they  think  proper, 
ascertain  by  personal  intercourse  the  presence  of  General  Buo- 

2  I  2 


484  CAPTIVITy  OF  napoleon.  No.  102. 

naparte  at  St.  Helena,  and  you  have  accordingly  received 
instructions  under  what  regulations  these  interriews  are  to  take 
place.  The  followers  of  General  Buonaparte  stand  upon  a  very 
different  principle.  There  cannot  exist  the  same  necesdty  of 
seeing  them ;  and  you  will  exercise  your  judgment  with  regard 
to  the  time  and  manner  in  which  tiiey  may  have  occasional 
communications  with  the  Conmiissioners ;  or  you  may  prohibit 
them  altogether  if,  as  may  be  in  the  case  of  Count  Bertrand, 
their  insolence  should  appear  to  be  encouraged,  or  their  false- 
hoods be  countenanced,  by  too  frequent  intercourse  with  the 
Comnussioners.  I  have  no  reason  to  believe  that  the  Frendi 
Court  will  have  any  wish  to  promote  familiarities  with  those 
inhabitants  of  Longwood  who  are  labouring  by  every  means  in 
their  power  to  calumniate  the  conduct  of  the  Britidi  Govern- 
ment in  the  disdiarge  of  the  duty  which  has  been  imposed  upon 
it  But,  whatever  representations  may  be  made  by  the  French 
Government,  they  must  be  made  here ;  and  you  will  not  allow, 
yourself  to  be  moved  from  the  course  you  may  think  propo- 
to  pursue  by  any  pretensions  which  the  French  Commissioner 
may  be  induced  to  advance  in  consequence  of  despatches  which 
he  receives  from  Paris.  I  have  the  honour,  &c, 

Bathurst. 


No.  162. 

To  Liiut.-Genbbal  Sib  Hudson  Lowe,  K.C.B. 

My  dear  Sir,  Downing  Street,  July  12,  ^819. 

I  have  not  thought  it  advisable  to  direct  any  prosecu- 
tions against  the  *  Morning  Chronicle,'  or  Mr.  O'Meara's  pub- 
lications,, not  because  I  felt  any  indifference  on  the  subject,  but 
because  London  juries  are  very  uncertain  in  their  verdicts,  and 
one  ill-disposed  juryman  would  be  able  to  acquit  the  parties, 
which  would  give  occasion  for  triumph,  and  appear  to  justify  the 
complaints  which  have  been  made  against  you.  As  it  is,  you 
will  have  had  the  satisfaction  of  seeing  that,  after  all  dieir  pub- 
lications and  all  their  threats,  not  one  person  has  ever  opened 
his  mouth  in  Parliament  in  favour  of  Buonaparte.  You  are 
acting  with  great  prudence  in  avoiding,  if  possible,  any  scene 
with  Buonaparte;  and  I  trust  that  the  apprehenaon  of  die 


No,  163.  LETTERS  AKD  DOCUMENTS.  485 

orderly  officer  coming  into  his  room  will  induce  him  to  show 
himseU*,  so  as  to  make  a  scene  unnecessary.  You  will  find,  I 
think,  Abbe  Q^ionayita  a  very  harmless  man.  The  surgeon  is 
reckoned  very  intelligent,  but,  I  think,  will  not  be  di^sed  to 
be  troublesome,  as  he  is  apparently  inclined  to  make  advances 
to  the  Government  by  proposing  to  dedicate  the  work  he  is 
completing  to  the  Prince  Regent 

Nothing  could  have  been  more  fortunate  than  Mr.  Ricketts's 
visit  at  St  Helena.  He  has  ^ven  the  most  satisfactory  reports 
concerning  the  real  state  of  the  business,  and  saw  through  all 
the  manoBUvres  which  were  practised  to  impose  upon  him.  I 
have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  seeing  Dr.  Baxter,  but  I 
expect  to  see  him  in  a  day  or  two. 

With  respect  to  Mr.  Balcombe,  you  will  let  it  be  known  that, 
in  the  event  of  his  arriving  at  St  Helena,  you  have  orders  to 
send  him  away.  BQs  partners  must  not  be  allowed  to  continue 
their  contract  if  his  name  is  in  it.  I  imagine  he  cannot  be 
dismissed  from  lus  office  of  Surveyor  of  Sales  but  by  order  of 
the  Court  of  Directors ;  and  I  am  not  sure  what  may  be  the 
result  of  the  representation  which  I  shall  probably  make  to 
them  on  the  subject.  I  say  probably,  for  I  do  not  much  like 
making  representations  of  that  description  unless  there  is  a 
good  chance  of  their  being  attended  ta 

I  am,  &c., 

Bathurst. 

July  13. 
P.S. — ^I  see  by  the  newspapers  that  Mr.  Hutchinson  yesterday 
said  something  about  Buonaparte  in  the  House  of  Commons, 
but  it  produced  no  effect,  and  was  not  attended  to. 


No.  163. 
To  Henry  Goulbubn,  Esq.,  M.P. 


Sir,  St.  Helena,  December  18, 1819. 

I  beg  leave  to  enclose  to  you,  for  Earl  Bathurst's  in- 
formation, a  distribution  of  the  stores  sent  out  for  the  use  of 
General  Bonaparte,  his  officers,  and  attendants,  in  the  year 
1816,  stating  the  manner  in  which  great  part  of  them  have 


486  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Na  163- 

been  diqx)6ed  of,  and  what  articles  are  still  remaining. 
Haying  obsenred  assertions  to  have  been  made  in  some  recent 
publications,  particularly  one  under  the  name  pf  Count  Las 
Cases,  that  a  part  of  those  stores  had  been  appropriated  to  my 
own  use,  and  that  of  other  indiriduals,  I  have  caused  to  be 
marked  in  the  distribution  the  very  few  articles  that  hare  been 
taken,  for  payment  or  otherwise,  from  the  stores  in  question, 
none  of  which,  however,  had  been  particularly  destined  for 
General  Bonaparte's  own  use,  or  were  obtained  by  depriving 
others  of  them. 

By  Sir  Henry  Bunbury's  letter  to  me,  of  the  3rd  of  January, 
1816,  I  was  authorised  to  dispose  by  sale  of  such  articles  as 
might  not  be  wanted,  on  the  ground  that  other  furniture  had 
been  already  provided  for  the  use  of  General  Bonaparte.  On 
my  arrival  here,  however,  I  found  the  furniture  provided  to 
have  been  all  secondhand,  and  of  very  inferior  quality.  It 
became  necessary,  in  consequence,  to  immisdiately  appropriate 
a  part  of  the  new  furniture  to  fit  up  the  old  house  at  Longwood, 
and  I  judged  it  necessary  to  retain  the  remainder  for  the  new 
building,  whenever  it  might  be  undertaken.  A  house  allotted 
to  the  naval  Commander-in-Chief,  viz.  that  before  occupied  by 
the  Lieut.-Govemor,  was  left  wholly  unfurnished.  Rear- 
Admiral  Sir  Pulteney  Malcolm,  on  arriving  here,  applied  to 
have  it  fitted  up.  He  suggested  at  the  same  time  the  ap- 
propriating a  part  of  the  furniture  brought  out  for  General 
Bonaparte's  new  house  to  this  use.  The  reply  I  made  to  his 
letter  explained  my  objections  to  him ;  but  as  there  was  a  real 
difficulty  in  procuring  fmniture  on  this  island,  and  as  I  had 
been  authorised  to  dispose  of  any  superfluous  articles  that  had 
arrived,  I  caused  a  very  small  portion  of  the  new  furniture  to 
be  sent  to  the  Admiral's  house,  having,  in  concurrence  with  the 
Council,  provided  at  the  Company's  expense  such  other  ne- 
cessary and  indispensable  articles  as  were  wanting.  I  after- 
wards took  some  articles  of  furniture  for  two  bedrooms  at 
Plantation  House.  The  liberality  of  the  East  India  Company 
would  have  rendered  it  unnecessary  for  me  to  have  applied  to 
this  source  if  any  furniture  could  have  been  otherwise  procured ; 
but,  as  these  articles  were  not  immediately  wanted,  I  did  not 
hesitate  to  apply  them  for  the  time  being  to  the  use  above- 
mentioned.     The  numerous  guests  my  situation  here  compels 


No.  164.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  487 

me  to  receive  at  Plantation  House,  particularly  persons  of  any 
rank,  such  as  the  Admiral,.  Commissioners,  &c.,  are  almost 
invariably  furnished  with  beds.  It  was  to  fit  up  rooms  for  their 
occasional  accommodation,  and  not  my  own,  these  articles  were 
taken. 

An  account  annexed  will  prove,  however,  that  the  amount  of 
the  articles  which  have  been  furnished  to  Longwood,  either  by 
myself,  or  from  furniture  provided  for  the  Government  Houses 
by  the  Company,  has  exceeded,  both  in  quantity  and  value, 
that  wluch  has  been  taken  from  the  stores  in  question.  In 
other  respects,  the  articles  are  still  quite  fresh,  and  as  dis- 
posable for  the  new  building  at  Longwood  as  when  they  first 
came  out  I  have  added  a  separate  list  of  the  articles  supplied 
for  the  Admiral's  house,  and  of  such  as  I  sufiered  to  be  ob- 
tadned  by  purchase.  I  have  the  honour,  &c., 

H*  Lowe. 


No.  164. 
To  Libut.-Genebal  Sib  Hudson  Lowe,  K.C.B. 
Sir,  Downing  Street,  March  16, 1820. 

Having  understood  that  it  is  the  intention  both  of 
Count  Montholon  and  General  Bertrand  to  apply  for  leave  to 
return  to  Europe,  and  as,  in  consequence  of  their  departure. 
General  Buonaparte^is  society  at  Longwood  will  be  essentially 
straitened,  you  will  take  a  fit  opportunity  of  conveying  to  him 
His  Majesty's  disposition  to  attend  to  any  wish  which  the 
General  may  express  in  favour  of  any  individual  whose  arrival 
at  Longwood  would  be  satisfactory  to  the  General. 

If  General  Buonaparte  should  prefer  leaving  the  selection 
either  to  the  Cardinal  Feseh,  or  to  the  Princess  Pauline  de 
Bbrghese,  I  will  readily  make  a  communication  to  that  efiect. 

It  is  only  necessary  to  add,  that  the  person  who  shall  so  go 
out  must  come  within  the  established  regulations,  viz.,  he  must 
be  subject  to  the  conditions  to  which  the  persons  who  last  went 
out  subscribed,  and  must  not  have  been  already  in  the  island. 

I  have  the  honour,  &c., 

Bathurst. 


488  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  Nob.  165, 166. 

To  Lieut.-Gens&al  Sib  Hudson  Lows,  E.C.B. 
Dear  Sir,  Downing  Street,  Msreh  16, 1820. 

Unless  anything  should  have  occurred  which  should,  in 
your  opinion,  mdce  the  withholding  the  communication  of  the 
enclosed  despatch  advisable,  you  will  transmit  a  copy  of  it,  or 
an  extract,  as  you  may  judge  fit,  to  Buonaparte. 

I  am,  my  dear  Sir,  &c. 

Bathukst. 


No.  165. 

To  Liedt.-Generai*  Sib  Hudson  Lowe,  K.C.B. 

Dear  Sir,  Downing  Street,  March  16,  1820. 

By  one  of  the  earliest  opportunities  Lady  Holland  in- 
tends to  send  a  packet  for  Madame  Bertrand.  Among  other 
things  there  will  be,  as  I  understand,  some  miniature  pictures 
and  other  souvenirs  firom  some  of  Bonaparte^s  family.  I  have 
no  objection  to  any  remembrances  of  this  kind  coming  from 
his  family  to  him ;  but  as  anything  which  comes  firom  that 
quarter  must  be  suspicious,  you  will  do  well  to  examine  care- 
fully that  this  is  not  the  channel  of  some  clandestine  communi- 
cation contained  within  it,  of  which  Lady  Holland  may  not 
herself  be  aware.  I  thought  it  right  just  to  call  your  attention 
to  this  circumstance  before  the  packet  is  delivered  to  Madame 
Bertrand,  lest  you  should  imagine  that  by  its  having  been  sent 
with  my  consent  I  could  vouch  for  its  contents. 

I  am,  my  dear  Sir,  &c 

Bathurst. 


No.  166. 

To  Lieut.-Gknebal  Sib  Hudson  Lowe,  K.C.B. 
Sir,  Downing  Street,  April  12, 1820. 

I  have  had  the  honour  of  laying  before  His  Majesty 
your  despatch  No.  271,  by  which  it  appears  that  you  have 
extended  the  limits  within  which  General  Buonaparte  may  be 
allowed  to  ride  without  being  attended  by  a  British  officer.  I 
am  commanded  by  His  Majesty  to  inform  you  that  he  will 


Ko.  167.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  489 

always  hear  with  great  pleasure  the  adoption  of  any  measure 
which  can  in  any  way  tend  to  mitigate  the  severity  of  those 
regulations  which  it  is  necessary  to  observe  for  the  safe 
custody  of  General  Buonaparte's  person  in  the  island  of  St. 
Helena. 

The  revolution  which  i^pears  to  have  been  lately  effected  in 
Spain,  chiefly  by  the  intervention  of  the  Spanish  army,  has 
naturally  excited  a  considerable  ferment  in  France,  and  more 
particularly  among  the  disbanded  army  of  the  Loire.  Under 
such  circumstances,  the  appearance  of  General  Buonaparte  in 
France  would  certainly  be  very  propitious,  not  only  to  those 
who  are  immediately  attached  to  him,  but  to  those  also  who, 
from  a  revolutionary  spirit,  would  be  glad  of  any  change  which 
would  tend  to  overthrow  the  ancient  establishment  of  the  states. 
It  cannot,  therefore,  be  doubted  that  he  will  receive  strong 
solidtations  to  escape;  and  possibly  some  measures  will  be 
undertaken  in  Europe,  or  planned  here  to  be  undertaken  else- 
where, with  a  view  of  enabling  him  to  attempt  it.  It  appears  to 
me,  however,  that  so  long  as  you  ascertain  his  being  safe  in  his 
house  each  night,  and  at  the  moment  when  any  ship  sails, 
however  dexterous  the  plan  may  be,  it  cannot  possibly  succeed. 
I  have  only  to  add,  that  you  may  be  pretty  sure  that,  if  you 
should  find  him  at  the  present  crisis  disposed  to  be  gradous,  he 
is  meditating  escape ;  and  though  you  will  not  &il  to  meet  his 
advances  with  any  show  of  attention,  and  in  a  manner  as  if  you 
in  no  way  distrusted  them,  you  will  take  care  to  be  on  the  alert 

I  have  the  honour,  &c., 

Bathurst. 


No.  167. 

To  Libut.-Oknbral  Sib  Hxtdsou  Lowe,  K.CB. 
(Private.) 
My  dear  Sir,  Downing  Street,  May  31, 1820. 

In  consequence  of  the  doubts  expressed  in  your  private 
letter  of  the  ,  as  to  the  course  to  be  adopted  by 

you  in  the  event  of  General  Buonaparte's  shooting  a  man,  Lord 
Bathurst  thought  it  advisable  to  make  the  Tme  of  your  duty 
perfectly  clear  by  fortifying  you  with  a  legal  opinion  of  the  law 


4'90.  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON..  No.  168. 

oflScers  of  the  Crown  as  to  the  liability  of  General  Bonaparte, 
under  the  peculiar  circumstances  in  which  he  stands  in  St. 
Helena,  to  trial  and  conviction  for  felony.  TTie  numerous 
avocations  of  the  Attorney  and  Solidtor  General  have  pre- 
vented their  making  a  report  in  time  to  be  forwarded  by  the 
present  opportunity,  and  Lord  Bathurst  has  therefore  directed 
me  to  apprize  you  of  this  circumstance  with  a  view  both  to 
account  for  the  delay  in  transmitting  instructions  upon  this 
point,  and  to  prevent  your  adopting  any  criminal  proceedings 
with  respect  to  GeneraJ  Bonaparte  (if  he  should  act  in  such  a 
manner  as  to  subject  himself  to  them)  until  you  are  in  pos- 
session of  the  instructions  which,  upon  the  receipt  of  the  law- 
oflBcers'  report.  Lord  Bathurst  will  take  the  earliest  opportunity 
of  transmitting  for  your  guidance.    Believe  me,  &a 

Henry  Goulburn. 


No.  168. 

To  D.  IDBBT80K,  Esqv 


Sity  Plantation  House,,  August  29, 1820. 

The  Governor  has  had  his  attention  very  painfully  drawn 
of  late  to  some  complaints  of  a  serious  nature  respecting  the 
supplies  at  Longwood. 

The  first  regarding  the  failure  of  fresh  butter. — ^The  diffi- 
culty was  raised  ^  the  moment  the  Governor  became  informed  of 
it,  sjoA  would  have  been  so  much  sooner  had  he  been  informed. 
The  failure  of  any  article  of  ordinary  and  expected  supply  is 
not  for  a  single  day  to  be  withheld  from  hb  information.  You 
have,  in  this  respect,  no  discretion.  You  are  immediately  to 
report,  either  to  Sir  Thomas  Reade,  in  the  town,,  to  find  means 
to  supply  the  want,  or  to  me,  for  the  Govemor^s  information. 
In  points  where  your  own  foresight  might  prevent  complaint, 
the  occasion  of  such  reports  ought  very  rarely  to  occur. 

The  next  complaint  regards  the  supply  of  fish. — It  is  well 
known  that  the  fishing-boats  with  the  best  fish  on  board  do  not 
come  in  till  late  in  the  afternoon ;   and  the  persons  at  Long- 

'  Sic,  but  query  "  removed  "  ? 


No.  168.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  491 

wood  have  been  frequently  mformed  of  this  circumstance  as  a 
reason  for  General  Bonaparte's  table  not  being  supplied  at  the 
usual  hour  of  his  dinner.  Fish,  however,  is  occasionally  brought 
in  in  the  morning,  and  measures  consequently  might  be  taken 
by  you  to  secure  a  larger  quantity  of  what  is  brought  in  at  that 
time,  particularly  of  the  smaller  fishy  being  that  he  is  most  fond 
of.  Activity  on  your  part,  and  that  of  the  person  you  employ 
in  the  town,  is  all  that  is  wanting  to  remedy  the  complaint  on 
this  head. 

The  next  article  is  bread. — ^There  can  be  no  excuse  for  this 
being  of  a  bad  quality,  flour  being  sent  here  for  the  express  use 
of  General  Bonaparte^s  table.  You  will  please  to  ascertain 
with  precision  whether  this  flour  is  employed  by  the  baker  for 
any  other  tables  than  those  at  Longwood,  except  such  propor- 
tion as  is  directed  by  the  Grovemor  for  his  use. 

The  next  article  is  beer. — ^This  is  an  article  of  such  small 
demand  at  Longwood,  that  no  diflBculty  ought  ever  to  exist. 
No  beer  ought  to  be  sent  up  to  Longwood  which  has  not  been 
tried  and  approved.  It  is  easy  further  to  remedy  any  com- 
plaint on  this  head  by  procuring  some  casks  of  what  is  called 
Hodson's  pale  ale,  which  would  always  ensure  against  any 
complaint  that  might  be  made  on  account  of  casual  defects  in 
the  quality  of  the  usually  provided  beer. 

The  next  article  is  beef. — In  this  respect  you  are  in  some 
degree  dependent  on  the  contractor,  but  it  is  still  your  business 
to  see  ddly  the  meat  that  he  provides,  and  to  cause  it  to  be 
returned  if  not  of  the  best  kind.  The  mutton  should  also  be 
examined  before  it  is  sent  to  Longwood,  and  any  defect  in  the 
quality  instantly  reported  to  Sir  Thomas  Reade  or  to  me. 

Fruit  is  another  article  which  you  are  bound  equally  to  pro- 
vide. The  Governor  can  admit  no  plea  for  your  not  receiving 
a  supply  of  oranges  and  such  fruit  as  may  be  in  season  from 
the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  by  every  vessel  that  comes  fix)m  it 

I  am,  &C., 

G.  GORREQUER. 


492  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  No.  169. 

No.  169. 
To  Likut.-General  Sib  Hudson  Lowe,  K.C.B. 
Sir,  Downing.Street,  November  30,  1820. 

I  have  received  and  laid  before  the  King  your  several 
despatches  enclosing  the  communications  which  have  recently 
passed  between  the  French  Commissioner  and  yourself  on  the 
subject  of  his  renewed  intention  of  proceeding  to  Longwood, 
and  of  holding  an  unrestricted  intercourse  with  the  followers  of 
General  Buonaparte. 

As  it  may  be  inferred  firom  your  despatch  of  the  20th  Sep- 
tember (No.  323)  that  the  Marquis  de  Montchenu  had  de- 
termined not  to  press  the  point  further,  his  Majesty  trusts  that 
he  is  become  sensible  of  the  impossibility  of  your  complying 
with  his  request,  and  that  he  will  not  reduce  you  to  the  painful 
alternative  of  exerting  the  authority  which  you  possess  for  the 
prevention  of  such  a  communication  with  the  followers  of  Ge- 
neral Buonaparte  as  that  which  he  had  proposed.  Should,  how- 
ever, the  attempt  be  renewed,  you  will  continue  to  adhere  to  the 
line  which  you  have  so  properly  laid  down.  You  will  facilitate, 
by  every  means  in  your  power,  the  admission  of  the  Commis- 
sioner to  see  General  Buonaparte  himself,  so  far  as  may  be 
necessary  to  the  discharge  of  his  own  duty,  as  laid  down  in  the 
Treaty  of  Paris  and  the  Protocol  of  the  Congress  of  Aix-la- 
Chapelle ;  but  you  will  firmly  maintain  that  the  Commissioners 
of  the  Allied  Powers  have  no  right,  without  your  acquiescence, 
to  communicate  with  his  followers  or  attendants. 

His  Majesty  feels  it  to  be  particularly  necessary  that  this 
latter  point  should  be  distinctly  understood.  The  custody  of 
General  Buonaparte  having  been  committed  to  his  Majesty  by 
the  Allied  Powers,  his  Majesty  is  alone  responsible  for  the 
prevention  of  his  escape,  and  must  therefore  be  the  sole  judge 
of  what  restrictions  are  necessary  for  this  purpose.  It  is  im- 
possible not  to  feel  that  the  Allied  Powers,  however  cordially 
united  in  interests  and  feelings  at  the  present  moment,  may, 
from  various  circumstances,  entertain  hereafter  difierent  or  con- 
tradictory political  views,  even  with  respect  to  the  detention  of 
General  Buonaparte ;  nor  is  this  less  likely  to  originate  in  the 
instance  of  France  than  in  that  of  any  other  of  the  Govern- 
ments which  were  parties  to  the  Treaty  of  Paris. 


No.  170.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  49S 

Under  such  circumstances  it  is  evident  that  a  free  or  un- 
restricted intercourse  between  the  Commissioners  of  the  Allied 
Powers  and  the  followers  of  General  Buonaparte,  or  with  Ge- 
neral Buonaparte  himself,  would  afford  the  readiest  means  of 
giving  effect  to  such  a  partial  deviation  from  the  general  policy 
of  the  Allied  Powers,  and  might  raise  insuperable  obstacles  to 
the  due  performance  of  the  duty  with  which  his  Majesty  is 
invested. 

His  Majesty  therefore  considers  it  advisable  that  the  prin- 
dple  advanced  by  the  French  Commissioner  should  be  resisted 
on  this  the  first  occasion  of  its  having  ever  been  formally  brought 
forward,  as  there  can  be  now  no  ground  to  suspect  or  distrust 
the  objects  of  the  French  Government ;  so  that,  in  all  future 
cases  in  which  an  unrestricted  intercourse  with  the  followers  of 
General  Buonapaite  or  with  General  Buonaparte  himself  may 
be  claimed  by  any  Commissioner,  the  claim  may  be  resisted  on 
the  ground  of  general  r^ulations,  independent  of  any  consi- 
deration or  discussion  of  the  particular  reasons  which  render  it 
objectionable.  I  have  the  honour,  &c, 

Bathurst. 


No.  170. 

To  Liktjt.-Gbnkbal  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  K.C.B. 
Sir,  Downing  Street,  February  16, 1821. 

The  accounts  which  you  have  of  late  transmitted  respect- 
ing the  health  of  General  Buonaparte  have  not  failed  to  engage 
the  attention  of  his  Majesty's  Government.  As  the  General 
obstinately  persists  in  refusing  the  admittance  of  an  English 
physician,  it  is  very  difficult  to  form  a  right  judgment  of  the 
reports  which  you  receive,  since  they  come  almost  exclusively 
from  persons  whom  you  know  to  have  every  disposition  to  de- 
ceive you.  The  reports  which  Mr.  O'Meara  delivered  to  you 
previous  to  his  departure  are  now  acknowledged  to  have  been 
false,  and  it  cannot  be  forgotten  that  Counts  Montholon  and 
Bertrand,  and  General  Buonaparte  himself,  united  in  actively 
supporting,  if  they  did  not  originally  suggest,  these  misrepre- 
sentations. Still,  however,  there  are  many  circumstances  which 
now  tend  to  confirm  the  reports  which  you  have  transmitted, — 


494         CAPTIHTY  OF  NAPOLEON.       No.  170. 

not  to  the  extent  of  apprehending  immediate  danger,  but  to  the 
belief  of  his  health  really  bepnning  to  decline. 

It  is,  I  think,  quite  clear  that  when  he  rode  to  the  house  of 
Sir  William  Doveton  he  was  disposed  to  break  throu^  the 
system  of  seclusion  he  had  so  long  voluntarily  imposed  upon 
himself  That  he  should  seem  exhausted  with  such  a  ride, 
after  a  three  years'  interruption  of  all  horse  exercise,  is  not  very 
extraordinary,  considering  his  corpulence  and  sedentary  habits ; 
but  his  entire  discontinuance  of  such  exercise  afterwards  does 
imply  something  more  than  accidental  &tigue.  His  looks  seem, 
by  the  report  of  those  on  whom  some  dependence  can  be  placed, 
to  betray  ill  health.  He  is  «een  to  walk,  sometimes  at  least, 
feebly.  He  frequently  dines  alone,  which  it  was  not  his  prac- 
tice to  do ;  and  he  evidently  passes  much  more  of  his  time  alone 
(if  not  in  bed)  than  formerly.  But  then,  on  the  other  hand, 
tbere  are  many  reasons  fc^  suspecting,  not  that  the  whole  is  a 
deceit,  but  that  ihe  extent  of  the  malady  is  designedly  exagge* 
rated.  His  reluctance  to  admit  an  English  physician  is  of  itself 
suspicious.  The  extreme  de^e  which  he  expressed  to  go  to 
Europe  for  his  health,  just  at  the  time  when  the  account  of  the 
commotions  in  Italy  must  have  arrived  in  St.  Helena,  and  the 
prescription  of  mineral  waters  by  his  own  surgeon,  the  drinking 
of  which  was  Madame  Montholon's  pretence  of  proceeding  to 
this  country,  make  the  accounts  of  his  indisposition  somewhat 
questionable ;  and  these  doubts  are  not  removed  by  the  manner 
in  which  Count  Montholon,  knowing  that  his  account  would  be 
read,  writes  to  his  wife  on  the  subject  He  shows  an  evident 
intention  to  deceive,  by  representing  General  Buonaparte  as 
being  too  ill  to  leave  his  apartment,  at  a  time  when,  in  fact,  the 
General  was  daily  taking  exercise  in  his  carriage.  He  at  the 
same  time  betrays  his  belief  that  he  does  not  consider  -the 
General^s  illness  as  one  which  at  least  threatens  immediate 
danger,  by  his  mention  of  future  arrangements  for  his  own 
return  to  Europe;  and,  whatever  may  be  the  apathy  which 
Count  Bertrand  is  accused  of  feeling  towards  General  Buona- 
parte, it  can  hardly  be  imagined  that  he  would  t^nfine  himself 
to  the  daily  formal  visit  which  is  mentioned  in  the  letter  of 
Count  Montholon,  if  he  apprehended  serious  indisposition.  If^ 
however,  there  had  not  been  previous  deceit,  I  should  not  have 
allowed  these  circumstances,  and  others  which  might  be  men- 


No.  170.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  496 

tioned,  to  have  any  weight ;  and,  though  they  are  now  enough 
to  make  ua  wary,  they  ought  not  to  make  us  incredulous.  Be- 
sides which,  I  entertain  no  favourable  opinion  of  those  who  are 
about  General  Buonaparte's  person:  they  are  all  evidently 
weary  of  their  duty ;  and,  as  his  dealh  would  be  their  release, 
they  may  not  take  as  lively  an  interest  in  persuadmg  him  to 
take  medical  advice  as  they  feel  when  theur  own  health  is 
concerned. 

I  am  aware  how  difficult  it  is  to  make  any  communication  to 
the  General  which  will  not  be  liable  to  misinterpretation,  and 
yet,  if  he  be  really  ill,  he  may  derive  some  consolation  by 
knowing  that  the  repeated  accounts  which  have  of  late  been 
transmitted  of  his  declining  health  have  not  been  received  with 
indifference.  You  will  therefore  communicate  to  General  Buo- 
naparte the  great  interest  which  his  Majesty  has  taken  in  the 
recent  accounts  of  his  in(]Usposition,  and  the  anxiety  which  his 
Majesty  feels  to  afford  him  every  relief  of  which  his  situation 
admits.  You  will  assure  General  Buonaparte  that  there  is  no 
alleviation  which  can  be  derived  from  additional  medical  assist- 
ance, nor  any  arrangement  consistent  with  the  safe  custody  of 
his  person  at  St  Helena  (and  his  Majesty  cannot  now  hold  out 
any  expectation  of  a  removal),  which  his  Majesty  is  not  most 
ready  and  desirous  to  afford.  You  will  not  only  repeat  the 
offer,  which  has  been  already  more  than  once  made,  of  such 
further  medical  assistance  as  the  island  of  St.  Helena  affords, 
but  you  will  ^ve  him  the  option  of  procuring  the  attendance  of 
any  of  the  medical  gentlemen  who  are  at  the  Cape,  where  there 
is  one,  at  least,  of  considerable  eminence  in  his  profession ;  and 
in  case  of  any  wish  being  expressed  by  the  Greneral  to  receive 
such  advice,  you  will  consider  yourself  authorised  to  make  a 
communication  to  the  Cape,  and  take  such  other  measures  as 
may  be  necessary  to  secure  the  immediate  attendance  of  the 
person  whom  the  General  may  name.  In  making  this  commu- 
nication to  General  Buonapsule,  his  Majesty  b  confident  that 
the  General  will  at  once  see  the  propriety  of  his  not  requesting 
the  advice  of  either  of  those  medical  attendants  upon  him  who 
have  been  dismissed  from  his  Majesty's  service  on  account  of 
their  misconduct  I  have  the  honour,  &c, 

Bathurst. 


496  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.         Nos.  171,  172. 

No.  171. 
To  Libut.-Genebal  Sir  Hudson  Lowb,  K.C.B. 
(Separate.) 
^r  Colonial  Office,  London,  February  17, 1821. 

Before  this  despatch  reaches  St  Helena  sufficient  time 
will  have  elapsed  since  the  date  of  your  last  communications  to 
enable  you  to  form  a  more  accurate  judgment  with  respect  to 
the  extent  and  reality  of  General  Buonaparte's  indispo^tion. 
Should  your  obserrations  convince  you  that  the  illness  has  been 
assumed,  you  will  of  course  consider  yourself  at  liberty  to  with- 
hold from  him  the  commimication  which  you  are  otherwise 
authorised  to  mike  in  my  despatch  No.  21.  But  should  you, 
on  the  other  hand,  be  satisfied  that  his  health  is  more  or  less 
seriously  affected,  you  will  lose  no  time  in  conveying  to  him  the 
information  which  that  despatch  contains,  and  in  affonUng  to 
him  any  further  relief  or  additional  comfort  of  which  his  situ- 
ation is  susceptible.  I  have  the  honour,  &c., 

Bathurst. 

No.  172. 

To  Eabl  Bathubst,  K.G. 
My  Lord,  St  Helena,  April  11, 1821. 

The  enclosed  extract  of  a  letter  from  Count  Montholon 
may  merit,  as  usual,  your  Lord^p's  perusal.  It  may  be 
re^u*ded  as  a  bulletin  of  General  Bonaparte's  health,  meant 
for  circulation  at  Paris. 

I  shall  have  a  frdler  conmiunication  to  make  by  the  next 
occasion.  Dr.  Amott  has  this  moment  left  me.  The  following 
is  the  most  remaricable  part  of  his  information  to  me. 

He  saw  General  Bonaparte  twice  yesterday.  lo  the  morning 
he  found  him  somewhat  better,  but,  on  seeing  him  in  the  after- 
noon, was  told  he  had  been  attacked  with  vomiting.  He  threw 
sometiung  off  his  stomach  whikt  Dr.  Amott  was  with  him; 
it  appeared  littie  else  than  what  he  had  been  taking  tac  his 
sustenance — ^jelly,  bread,  milk,  capillaire.  The  attack  ceasing, 
General  Bonaparte  began  conversing,  and  told  Dr.  Amott  that 
"  his  fever  was  now  over  {part{e\  and  that  he  was  returned  to 
the  same  state  in  which  he  had  been  for  the  last  six  months, — 


No.  172.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  497 

great  weakness,  loss  of  appetite."  He  then  put  his  hand  to  his 
right  side,  over  the  liver,  and  said  "ig  /o^/'  raising  up  his 
shirt,  in  order  that  Dr.  Amott  might  feel  and  examine,  and 
pointing  out  the  place  to  him.  Count  Bertrand  (who  was  the 
only  other  person  present)  then  explained  in  English  what 
General  Bonaparte  had  been  saying ;  repeated  that  the  fever 
hajj^one  by,  that  he  was  now  returned  to  the  same  state  in 
whidi  he  had  been  for  six  months  past,  and  that  his  complaint 
was  in  the  liver.  Dr.  Amott  felt  and  examined  General 
Bonaparte's  side,  in  the  region  of  the  liver.  He  winced  a  little 
whilst  Dr.  Amott  was  feeling  him,  and,  on  being  asked  if  he 
felt  any  pain,  he  said  he  did.  Dr.  Amott  could,  however, 
perceive  no  induration  or  swelling  whatsoever,  and  immediately 
told  Count  Bertrand  in  English  ^'  he  could  find  no  hardness  or 
swelling."  This  was  translated  to  General  Bonaparte,  who 
merely  signified  he  understood  what  was  said  by  a  kind  of 
contractile  motion  of  his  lower  jaw  and  upper  lip.  He  spoke 
no  further  on  the  subject,  and  began  asking  some  questions  of 
Dr.  Amott  respecting  the  sick  in  camp. 

This  moming,  at  six  o'clock.  Dr.  Amott  was  again  sent  for 
to  see  General  Bonaparte,  who  was  stated  to  have  been  at- 
tacked with  vomiting  four  times  since  three  o'clock.  The  fits 
had  ceased,  however,  when  Dr.  Amott  visited  him,  but  General 
Bonaparte  did  not  appear  quite  so  well  as  when  Dr.  Amott 
called  upon  him  the  moming  preceding.  Dr.  Arnott  had 
strongly  urged,  both  to  Count  Bertrand  and  Count  Montholon, 
his  desire  that  Dr.  Antommarchi  should  be  called  upon  to 
continue  his  visits  at  Longwood ;  and  as  Dr.  Amott  was  leav- 
ing Longwood  to  come  over  to  me,  he  observed  Marchand 
going  to  the  apartments  of  Dr.  Antommarchi,  so  that  it  seems 
to  me  not  uidikely  he  may  be  again  called  in.  It  is  Count 
Bertrand  only  who  has  been  present  during  Dr.  Amott's  last 
visits.  I  am  not  enabled  to  send  further  details  by  the  present 
occasion,  as  the  vessel  is  getting  under  weigh. 

I  have  the  honour,  &c., 

H.  Lowe. 


VOL.  III.  2  K 


498  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.         Nos.  173, 174. 

No.  173. 

A  MONSTEXm  LE  LlEUT.-GENf  RAL  SiB  HtTDSON  LoWE. 

Longwood,  ce  5  Mai,  1821, 
Monsieur  le  Gouvemeur,  k  6  h.  du  soir. 

L'Empereur  Napoleon  est  mort  aujourd'hni,  cinq  Mai, 
mil  huit  cent  yingt>-un,  a  six  heures  moins  dix  minutes,  a  la 
suite  d*ime  longue  et  penible  maladie.  .Tai  I'honneur  de  vous 
en  faire  part.  II  m'a  autorise  a  vous  communiquer,  si  vous  le 
desirez,  ses  demieres  volontes. 

Je  vous  prie  de  me  faire  savoir  quelles  sont  les  dispositions 
prescrites  par  votre  Gouvemement  pour  le  transport  de  son 
corps  en  Europe,  ainsi  que  celles  reU^ves  aux  personnes  de  sa 
suite. 

J'ju  Fhonneur  d'etre,  Monsieur  le  Gouvemeur, 

Votre  tres  humble  et  tres  obSssant  serviteur, 
Le  Comte  de  Montholon. 


No.  174. 

To  Earl  BA-rauRST,  K.G. 
My  Lord,  St.  Helena,  May  6,  1821. 

It  falls  to  my  duty  to  inform  your  Lordship  that  Napo- 
leon Bonaparte  expired  at  about  ten  minutes  before  six  o'clock 
in  the  evening  of  the  5th  May,  1821,  after  an  illness  which  had 
confined  him  to  his  apartments  since  the  17th  March  last.  He 
was  attended  during  the  early  part  of  his  indisposition,  from 
the  17th  to  the  Slst  March,  by  his  own  medical  assistant.  Pro- 
fessor Antommarchi,  alone.  During  the  latter  period,  from  the 
1st  April  to  the  5th  May,  1821,  he  received  the  daily  visits  of 
Dr.  Amott,  of  his  Majesty's  20th  regiment,  generally  in  con- 
junction with  Professor  Antommarchi. 

Dr.  Shortt,  Physician  to  the  Forces,  and  Dr.  Mitchell,  prin- 
cipal medical  officer  of  the  Royal  Navy  on  this  station,  whose 
services,  as  well  as  those  of  any  other  medical  persons  on  the 
island,  had  been  offered,  were  called  upon  in  consultation  by 
Professor  Antommarchi  on  the  3rd  of  May,  but  they  had  not 
any  opportunity  afforded  to  them  of  seeing  the  patient. 

Dr.  Amott  was  with  him  at  the  moment  of  his  decease 


No.  174.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  499 

and  saw  him  expire.  Captain  Crokat,  of  his  Majesty's  20th 
regiment,  orderly  officer  in  attendance,  and  Drs.  Shortt  and 
Mitchell,  saw  the  body  immediately  afterwards.  Dr.  Amott 
remained  with  the  body  during  the  night. 

Early  this  morning,  at  about  seven  o'clock,  I  proceeded  to 
the  apartment  in  which  the  body  lay,  accompanied  by  his  Ex- 
cellency Rear  Admiral  Lambert,  naval  Commander-in-Chief  on 
this  station ;  the  Marquis  de  Montchenu,  Commissioner  of  his 
Majesty  the  King  of  France,  charged  with  the  same  duty  also 
on  the  part  of  his  Majesty  the  Emperor  of  Austria ;  Brigadier- 
General  Coffin,  second  in  command  of  the  troops ;  Thomas  H. 
Brooke  and  Thomas  Greentree,  Esqs.,  Members  of  Council  in 
the  Government  of  this  island ;  and  Captains  Browne,  Hendry, 
and  Marryatt  of  the  Royal  Navy.  After  viewing  the  person 
of  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  which  lay  with  the  face  uncovered,  we 
retired. 

An  opportunity  was  afterwards  afforded,  with  the  concurrence 
of  the  persons  who  had  composed  the  family  of  Napoleon  Bona- 
parte, to  as  many  officers  as  were  desirous,  naval  and  military, 
to  the  Honourable  the  East  India  Company's  officers  and  civil 
servants,  and  to  various  other  individuals  resident  here,  to  enter 
the  room  in  which  the  body  lay,  and  to  view  it.  At  two  o'clock 
this  day  the  body  was  opened  in  the  presence  of  the  following 
medical  gentlemen :  Dr.  Shortt,  M.D. ;  Dr.  Mitchell,  M.D. ; 
Dr.  Burton,  M.D.*,  of  his  Majesty's  66th  regiment ;  and  Mat- 
thew Livingstone,  Esq.,  surgeon  in  the  East  India  Company's 
service.  Professor  Antommarchi  assisted  at  the  dissection. 
General  Bertrand  and  Count  Montholon  were  present. 

After  a  careful  examination  of  the  several  internal  parts  of 
the  body,  the  whole  of  the  medical  gentlemen  present  concurred 
in  a  report  on  their  appearance.  This  report  is  enclosed.  I 
shall  cause  the  body  to  be  interred,  with  the  honours  due  to  a 
general  officer  of  the  highest  rank. 

I  have  intrusted  this  despatch  to  Captain  Crokat,  of  his  Ma- 
jesty's 20th  regiment,  who  was  the  orderly  officer  in  attendance 
upon  the  person  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte  at  the  time  of  his  de- 
cease. He  embarks  on  board  his  Majesty's  sloop  Heron,  which 
Rear- Admiral  Lambert  has  detached  from  the  squadron  under 
his  command,  with  the  intelligence.     I  have  the  honour,  &c. 

H.  Lowe. 
2k2 


500  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  No.  175. 

No.  175. 

To  Lieut.-Genbral  Sib  Hudson  Lowe,  K.C.B. 

Sir,  Downing  Street,  London,  July  10,  1821. 

I  have  received  and  laid  before  the  King  your  despatdies, 
of  the  dates  and  numbers  specified  in  the  margin,  in  which  you 
communicate  the  intelligence  of  General  Buonaparte's  death,  and 
the  arrangements  made  by  you  both  preyiously  and  subsequently 
to  that  event 

I  am  happy  to  assure  you  that  your  conduct,  as  detailed  in 
those  despatches,  has  received  hb  Majesty's  approbation.  It  is 
most  satisfactory  to  his  Majesty  to  observe  that  no  measures 
were  omitted  by  you  for  the  purpose  of  placing  at  General 
Bonaparte's  disposal  the  best  medical  advice,  and  of  affording 
every  relief  and  alleviation  of  his  sufferings,  during  the  latter 
period  of  his  life,  of  which  his  state  admitted.  After  the  dis- 
cussions which  have  taken  place  between  yourself  and  General 
Buonaparte's  attendants,  it  is  no  inconsiderable  gratification  to 
observe  that,  if  your  offers  of  service  and  assistance  ware 
latterly  declined,  the  refusal  to  accept  them  seems  to  have 
arisen,  not  from  any  unwillingness  on  the  part  of  General 
Buonaparte  to  do  justice  to  your  motives,  but  from  the  satisfac- 
tion which  he  expressed  himself  to  feel  in  the  talents  and  con- 
duct of  the  medical  officers  who  had  been  already  selected  to 
attend  upon  him. 

His  Majesty  has  frirther  commanded  me  to  avail  myself  of 
this  opportunity  to  repeat  that  general  approbation  of  your 
conduct  during  the  time  that  you  have  administered  the  Go- 
vernment of  St  Helena,  which  I  have,  on  particular  occasions, 
had  so  often  the  pleasure  of  conveying.  Placed  as  you  have 
been  in  a  situation  which  must,  under  any  circumstances,  have 
been  one  of  heavy  responsibility,  but  which  particular  events 
contributed  to  render  yet  more  difficult  and  invidious,  you  dis- 
charged your  arduous  trust  with  strict  fidelity,  discretion,  and 
humanity,  and  have  effectually  reconciled  the  two  main  duties 
of  your  command, — combining  the  secure  detention  of  Greneral 
Buonaparte's  person,  which  was  of  necessity  the  paramount 
object  of  your  attention,  with  every  practicable  consideration 


No.  176.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  501 

and  indulgence  which  your  own  disposition  prompted  and  your 
instructions  authorised  you  to  show  to  his  peculiar  situation. 

I  have  the  honour,  &c., 

Bathurst. 


No.  176. 

Opinion  of  the  Solicitor-Genbbal  and  Mb.  Tindal  as  to  the  oourse  to  he 
pursued  hy  Sib  Hudson  Lows  with  reference  to  O'Meara's  book,  *  Napo- 
leon in  Exile  ;  or,  a  Voice  from  St.  Helena.* 

1st  We  are  of  opinion,  that,  in  case  any  prosecution  shall  be 
instituted  against  Mr.  O'Meara  on  the  part  of  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe,  those  passages  should  be  selected  from  the  work  which 
not  only  appear  to  be  of  the  most  abusive  and  malignant  cha- 
racter, but  which  can  also  be  shown  to  be  £alse. 

I^  therefore,  there  are  any  obserrations  put  into  the  mouth 
of  Bonaparte  which  can  by  any  evidence  be  shown  not  to  have 
been  made  by  him ;  or  if  there  are  any  direct  attacks  upon  the 
character  of  1^  Hudson  Lowe,  not  purporting  to  be  the  words 
of  Bonaparte,  whidi  can  be  shown  to  be  founded  in  false- 
hood, we  recommend  such  passages  to  be  singled  out;  and 
that,  of  those  which  come  within  either  of  the  forgoing  de- 
scriptions, the  most  malignant  and  offenrive  should  be  brought 
forward. 

2nd.  We  think  the  only  course  to  be  taken  by  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe,  if  any  is  taken,  should  be  by  moving  the  Court  of 
King's  Bench  for  a  criminal  information.  This  mode  will  give 
Sir  Hudson  the  opportunity  of  denying  upon  oath  the  truth  of 
the  imputations  conveyed  by  the  several  parts  of  the  work 
which  are  set  forth.  And  if  a  due  selection  is  made,  upon  the 
principle  above  laid  down,  we  think  the  defendant  will  not  be 
hardy  enough  to  put  in  an  affidavit  asserting  the  truth  of  the 
charges  contained  in  the  libel,  or  that  the  speeches  imputed  to 
Bonaparte  were  really  made  by  him ;  and  even  if  Mr.  O'Meara 
should  file  such  affidavit,  we  think  the  Court  would,  neverthe- 
less, grant  the  information.  For  it  is  no  justification  for  his 
publication  that  Bonaparte  uttered  that  which  forms  a  libel 
upon  Sit  Hudson  Lowe.  But  the  point  to  which  our  most 
anxious  attention  has  been  turned  is,  as  to  the  probable  result 
of  a  trial  upon  the  information  before  a  jury.    For  it  is  a  very 


502  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON.  No.  177. 

different  question  whether  a  writing  is  a  libel  in  contemplation 
of  law,  or  whether,  under  all  the  circumstances  attending  its 
publication,  there  is  a  ground  to  expect  a  jury  to  convict  In 
the  present  case,  it  will  be  strongly  pressed  upon  the  jury  that 
the  publication  of  all  that  relates  to  the  history  of  Bonaparte's 
latter  days  is  matter  of  public  right ;  and  if  tfie  right  to  pub- 
lish a  free  and  fiill  account  of  what  he  did  and  what  he  said 
is  denied,  there  is  an  end  of  the  freedom  and  impartiality  of 
history.  And  we  are  of  opinion,  that  the  jury  will  in  all  pro- 
bability yield  to  th&t  suggestion,  and  will  refuse  to  find  the 
defendant  guilty  of  a  libel,  unless  the  prosecutor  can  show  that 
the  speeches  attributed  to  Bonaparte  were  not  really  his,  but 
that  they  were  falsely  put  into  his  mouth,  as  a  coyer  for  the 
defendant's  malignity.  In  this  particular  case,  therefore,  the 
falsehood  of  the  charge  contained  in  the  libel,  although  imma- 
terial in  contemplation  of  law  to  constitute  a  libel  in  ordinary 
cases,  becomes  material  to  prove  the  libellous  intention  of  the 
defendant.  And  this  consideration  at  once  accounts  for  the 
principle  of  selection  of  parts  of  the  libel  above  liud  down,  and 
for  the  opinion  which  we  now  give,  that  it  is  inexpedient  in  the 
present  case  to  commence  any  prosecution,  unless  such  evi- 
dence can  be  given. 

3rdly.  We  think  the  proceedings,  if  any,  should  be  against 
the  author,  if  the  publisher  is  willing  to  come  forward  to  prove 
his  employment  by  the  author ;  but  otherwise  against  the  pub- 
lisher. The  evidence,  besides  that  of  the  publication,  will  be 
such  as  we  have  before  particularly  commented  on,  and  any 
evidence  that  can  be  added  of  direct  malice  on  the  part  of  the 
defendant  against  the  prosecutor. 

J.  S.  Copley, 

November  21,  1822.  N.  C.  TiNDAL. 


No.  177. 

To  Sir  Hudson  Lowe. 


Dear  Sir,  42,  Woburn  Place,  January  21,  1823. 

You  may  perhaps  recollect  that,  when  I  commanded  the 
Honourable  Company's  ship  Aurora,  and  called  at  St.  Helena 
on  my  way  from  China  to  England,  that  I  had  presents  for  th^ 


No.  178.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  603 

ex-Emperor  Napoleon ;  in  allusion  to  which  I  was  surprised 
to  oheerve,  a  few  days  ago,  on  perusal  of  Mr.  O'Meara's  work 
entitled  ^Napoleon  in  Exile/  in  page  118,  2nd  volume,  the 
following  passage : — 

**  Captain  Haviside,  who  had  brought  them  from  China,  on 
having  obtained  permission  to  visit  Longwood  soon  after  his 
arrival,  was  ordered  by  the  Governor  to  maintain  strict  silence 
on  the  subject  to  all  the  French." 

I  trust  you  will  do  me  the  honour  to  believe  that  1  am  not 
the  author  of  this  misrepresentation,  and  allow  me  to  avail 
myself  of  this  opportunity  of  expressing  my  thanks  for  your 
kind  attention  during  my  visits  to  St  Helena;  and  also  to 
state  that  I  had  no  difficulty  in  landing  the  presents,  and  that 
every  facility  was  given  me  by  Sir  Thomas  Reade  to  visit 
Napoleon,  for  which  purpose  I  went  to  Longwood,  intendmg  to 
report  to  the  ex-Emperor  the  various  valuables  I  had  brought 
from  Mr.  Elphinstone  for  him.  On  pajring  my  respects  to 
Madame  and  Count  Bertrand,  who  received  me  very  graciously, 
and  with  whom  1  conversed  some  time  on  the  subject  of  the 
presents,  I  learned  that  Napoleon  was  too  unwell  to  see  any 
one  that  day ;  and  my  immediate  departure  from  the  island 
was  the  only  reason  that  I  had  not  afterwards  that  gratifi- 
cation. I  am,  dear  Sir,  &c. 

Thomas  Haviside. 


No.  178. 

To  THE  EdITOB  of  THE  *  MORNINO  ChBOKICLE.* 

g^  30,  Craven  Street,  March  3, 1823. 

Mr.  O'Meara  has  published  a  letter  in  the  *  Morning 
Chronicle,'  in  which  my  name  is  introduced,  with  those  of  Lord 
Melville  and  Mr.  Croker,  in  a  way  which  renders  it  necessary 
that  I  should  lose  no  time  in  stating  the  facta  as  tiiey  really 
occurred. 

Mr.  O'Meara  having  long  been  an  acquaintance  of  mine,  we 
kept  up  an  occasional  correspondence,  and  in  the  month  of 
July,  1815, 1  received  a  private  letter  from  him,  giving  several 
particulars  relative  to  Bonaparte  and  his  suite.    Some  expres- 


504  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON.  No.  178. 

sions  in  this  letter  led  me  to  doubt  the  propriety  of  entertaimng 
a  correspondence  of  the  nature  offered  to  me  by  Mr.  O'Meara 
without  the  authority  of  my  official  superiors;  I  therefore 
thought  proper  to  communicate  the  letter  to  Mr.  Croker,  who 
declined  authorising  such  a  correspondence  without  ccmsulting 
Lord  Melville.  His  Lordship,  on  being  referred  to,  said  that 
he  saw  no  reasons  why  I  should  not  receive  the  letters  itUdi 
Mr.  O'Meara  might  dioose  to  write  to  me,  and  that  it  might 
even  be  advantageous  to  hear  from  an  impartial  and  near 
observer  the  situation  of  Bonaparte  and  his  suite.  But,  in 
order  that  no  duplicity  should  be  practised  on  Mr.  O'Meara,  I 
was  desired  to  apprize  him  that  his  letters  would  be  seen  by 
the  Ministers.  I  presume  that  Mr.  O'Meara  could  not  have 
received  this  answer  from  me  before  he  wrote  again  a  letter  in 
the  same  style  as  the  first,  but  soliciting  my  frienddiip  towards 
getting  him  confirmed  in  the  situation  of  surgeon  to  Bonaparte, 
and  stating  as  an  inducement  for  my  doing  so  the  following 
reason : — ^*It  is  my  intention  to  collect  every  anecdote  I  can 
from  Napoleon  and  those  about  him ;  and  perhaps  my  being 
near  him  might  not  be  of  disservice  to  Government,  espedally 
if  he  entertained  thoughts  of  escape ;  at  least  my  being  con- 
stantly near  him  would  probably  lead  to  a  discovery  of  any 
plans  he  might  hereafter  project." 

I  quote  this  passage  to  diow  that  I  was  not  authorised  to 
originate  any  proposal  to  Mr.  O'Meara  to  give  intelligence 
relative  to  Bonaparte,  and  did  not  in  fact  do  so,  but  that  the 
proposition  came  voluntarily  from  him. 

When  I  received  Mr.  O'Meara's  letters  I  handed  them  to 
Mr.  Croker,  who  had  them  copied  for  the  perusal  of  Ministers, 
with  the  omission  only  of  some  occasional  passages  of  an  inde- 
licate nature  (some  of  them  reflecting  on  the  French  ladies  and 
others),  at  which  Mr.  Croker  expressed  to  me  his  disappro- 
bation, and  refused  to  permit  any  such  passages  to  be  copied. 

It  is  right  to  add  ^at  there  were  several  of  those  letters^ 
particularly  towards  the  last,  which  Mr.  Croker  did  not  see, 
owing  to  his  occasional  absence.  Some  of  them  also  I  myself 
never  read ;  but  the  greatest  part,  if  not  the  whole,  of  this  cor- 
respondence is  preserved,  and  may  be  referred  to  if  necessary. 

Mr.  O'Meara  having  stated  in  the  latter  part  of  his  letter 
that  I  offered  him  the  lucrative  situation  of  surgeon  to  Green- 


No.  178.  LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS.  505 

wich  Hospital,  I  beg  leave  to  state,  in  the  most  distinct  manner, 
that  I  never  was  authorised  to  make  any  such  proposition,  and 
that,  therefore,  it  is  but  fair  to  presume  that  I  never  could  have 
done  so. 

I  think  it  only  my  duty  to  Lord  Melville  and  Mr.  Croker  to 
state  that  neither  of  them  ever  saw  any  of  my  letters  to  Mr. 
O'Meara,  and  that  they  therefore  cannot  be  responsible  for  my 
expressions.  Mr.  O'Meara  must  be  aware  that  I  was  not  in 
the  situation  of  being  an  '^amanuensis"  to  either  of  them. 
No  doubt  I  should  have  paid  more  attention  to  my  language  If 
I  could  have  foreseen  that  notes  thus  written  in  the  confidence 
of  private  friendship  were  to  be  published  without  my  consent. 
I  remain,  Sir,  your  very  obedient  servant, 

John  Finlaison. 


506 


CAPnVITT  OP  NAPOLEON. 


General  Statement  of  the  Service  of  LiBtrr.-GENEBAL  Sib  Hudson  Lowk,  K.C.B^ 
drawn  up  by  himself  in  a  Memorial  to  the  Eabl  of  Liyebpool. 


RANK. 


Ensign. 
Lieutenant. 

Captain. 


Miyor. 


Lieutenant- 
Colonel. 


Id  what 
Goipa. 


50th  Regt. 
50th  Regt. 

50th  Regt 


Cordcan 
Rangers. 


7th,  or 

Royal 

Fusileers. 


Royal 
Corsican 
Rangers. 


Date  of 
Aiqpointment. 


Sept.  25, 
1787. 

Nov.  11, 
1791. 


Sept.  25, 
1795. 


July  1, 
1800. 


Dec.  31, 
1803. 


Where  emplojred,  specifying  the  period  of  each  Service, 

the  names  oi  any  Siege,  Battle,  or  ooosklerable  Actka,  wbere 

perBonally  present 


On  garrison  duty  at  Gibraltar. 


On  garrison  duty  at  Gibraltar  until  the  war  broke  ont  ia 
1793,  when  embarked  for  Toulon;  proceeded  to  Corsica; 
present  at  the  attack  of  the  Martelio  Tower,  storming  of 
Convention  Redoubt,  surrender  of  St»  Fiorenzo,  siege  oi 
Bastia;  attack  of  the  Moselle  Fort,  siege  of  Calti;  o« 
garrison  duty  at  Ajaocio. 

Evacuation  of  Corsica ;  Elba ;  appointed  D^uty  Judge 
Advocate  to  the  army;  evacuation  of  Elba;  proceeded  to 
Portugal  to  join  the  army  under  General  8ir  Cliarlea  Stnait; 
remained  in  Portugal  until  the  year  1799;  embarked  for 
Minorca ;  appointed  to  take  charge  of  a  corps  of  Corncans 
then  raising  there ;  mutinies  and  disturbances  quelled  amoogst 
them ;  appointed  inspector  of  foreign  corps. 

Corps  selected  to  proceed  on  the  expedition  to  Egypt  under 
General  Sir  Ralph  Abercromby,  attached  to  the  reserve  under 
Sir  John  Moore ;  commanded  the  corps  at  the  landing  oo  the 
8th  March ;  attacked  by  and  repulsed  a  superior  body  of  the 
French  cavalry  at  the  outposts  on  the  10th  March;  advance 
of  the  12th  March;  battles  of  the  13th  and  2l8t  March; 
with  the  advance  of  the  array  on  the  march  to  Cairo;  affiur 
of  Rahmanie ;  assisted  in  the  capture  of  a  detachment  of 
French  cavalr}',  and  in  the  attack  and  capture  of  a  Frendi 
caravan  in  the  Desert ;  outposts  before  Cairo  ;  received  the 
first  proposals  for  its  surrender  ;  commanded  the  rear-guard 
of  the  escort  to  the  French  army  on  its  march  to  Rosetta; 
outposts  before  Alexandria ;  present  at  the  advances  against 
and  surrender  of  that  fortress ;  returned  to  Malta ;  corps 
reduced  at  the  Peace  of  Amiens;  confirmed  as  Major  Com- 
mandant of  it  from  1st  July,  1800;  half-pay;  appointed 
Major  Royal  Fusileers ;  resigned  this  appointment  on  beiof 
named  one  of  the  permanent  Assistants  Quartermastei^ 
General;  head  of  the  department  in  the  western  district; 
selected  by  Government  in  July,  1803,  to  proceed  on  a  secret 
mission  to  Portugal ;  inspected  the  troops  and  fortresses 
along  the  whole  of  the  northern  and  north-east  frontier,  and 
reported  the  practicability  of  defending  the  country  by  united 
British  and  Portuguese  means. 

Employed  to  raise  the  regiment  of  Royal  Corsican  Rangen, 
and  appointed  Lieutenant-Colonel  Commandant  of  it  on  a 
secret  mission  in  Sardinia,  and  reported  on  the  state  of  that 
island,  by  which  a  subsidy  was  saved ;  embarked  with  the 
expedition  to  Naples,  under  General  Sir  James  Craig ;  com- 
manded the  advance  of  his  army ;  returned  to  Sicily ;  oidered 


LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS. 


507 


BANK. 


In  what 
Corps. 


Date  of 
Appointment. 


Where  employed,  sptdtjing  the  period  of  eadi  Service, 

the  names  of  any  Siege,  Battle,  or  considerable  Action*  where 

personally  present. 


Lieutenant- 
Colonel. 


Royal 
Coreican 
Rangers. 


Dec  31, 
1803. 


Lieutenant-        Royal 
Colonel.        Corsican 
Rangers. 


Colonel. 


Dec.  31, 
1803. 


Jannary  1, 
1812. 


with  his  regiment  to  the  island  of  Capri;  joined  by  tiie 
regiment  of  Malta ;  attacked  by  a  French  naral  and  military 
expedition  from  Naples;  the  regiment  of  Malta  made 
prisoners,  when,  after  a  resistance  of  thirteen  days,  the  walls 
of  the  town  being  breached  and  guns  dismounted,  evacuated 
the  Island  by  a  convention  with  the  French  General,  carrying 
off  the  whole  of  the  garrison,  with  their  arms  and  baggage ; 
appointed  to  command  the  first  line  of  the  advance  of  the 
army  under  the  command  of  Lieutenant>General  Sir  John 
Stuart  to  the  Bay  of  Naples ;  landing  at  Ischia,  drove  the 
enemy  from  the  town,  and  covered  the  besieging  batteries ; 
made  the  capitulation  with  the  French  General,  by  which  the 
garrison  was  forced  to  surrender  as  prisoners  of  war;  returned 
to  Sicily ;  appointed  second  in  command  on  the  expedition 
to  the  Ionian  Islands :  conducted  the  landing  at  Zante ;  attack 
of  the  castle ;  made  the  capitulation  by  which  the  French 
garrison  was  compelled  to  surrender  as  prisoners  of  war. 

Landing  at  Cephalonia ;  appointed  Commandant  and  Chief 
of  the  Civil  Government  of  that  island,  together  with  Ithaca ; 
framed  the  Provisional  Government  for  them ;  expedition  to 
the  island  of  St  Maura,  under  Major-Gcneral  Sir  John 
Oswald ;  expelled  the  enemy  from  the  town ;  conducted  an 
advance  against  his  rear,  under  the  fire  of  the  fortress,  by 
which,  conjointly  with  an  attack  on  the  other  side,  he  was 
forced  to  retire  from  all  his  advanced  works  and  positions ; 
siege  of  the  fortress ;  framed  the  capitulation  with  iiie  French 
General  who  commanded,  and  who  was  compelled  to  sur^ 
render,  with  the  whole  of  his  garrison,  as  prisoners  of  war ; 
thankcKi  three  times  in  the  public  despatches. 

Appointed  Commander  of  the  left  division  of  the  forces  in 
the  Ionian  Islands,  and  Chief  of  the  Civil  Government  of  the 
island  of  St.  Maura^  in  conjunction  with  Cephalonia  and 
Ithaca;  framed  the  Provisional  Government  of  the  three 
islands ;  presented  a  Memoir  on  the  islands  generally  to  the 
Colonial  Depnrtment. 

Obtained  leave  of  absence  to  come  to  England ;  selected 
in  the  beginning  of  1813  to  proceed  on  a  secret  mission  to  the 
north  of  Europe;  went  to  Sweden  and  Russia;  joined  the 
Emperor  of  Russia's  head-quarters  at  Kalish,  in  Poland; 
ordered  to  inspect  the  Russian-German  Legion  then  taken 
into  British  pay ;  returned  to  the  Ihiperial  head-quaiters ; 
present  at  the  battles  o{  Bautzen  and  Wurachen;  with  the 
Russian  army  until  the  armistice  of  June,  1813;  appointed 
to  inspect  the  whole  of  the  Hanoverian  and  German  forces  in 
British  pay  in  the  north  of  Europe ;  proceeded  afterwards 
to  join  Lieut.-General  Lord  Stewart  at  the  head-quarters  of 
the  Prince  Royal  of  Sweden ;  attached  by  him  to  the  Russian 
and  Prussian  army  under  the  command  of  Field-Marshal 
Bliicher;  present  with  the  Field-Marshal  at  the  battle  of 
MOckem;  at  the  battle  of  Leipsic;  at  the  assault  of  the 
town  and  at  the  pursuit  of  the  French  army  to  the  Rhine ; 
returned  to  inspect  the  German  and  Hanoverian  troops; 
called  upon  to  accompany  Field-Marshal  Bliicher's  army 


508 


CAPnVITT  OP  NAPOLEON. 


RANK. 

In  what 
Oorp«. 

Date  of 

Where  employed,  spedfying  the  period  of  eedi  Senrke, 
penooallj  present. 

Major- 
General. 

Lieutenant- 

Geoeral 

with  local 

rank. 

•  • 

•  • 

June  4^ 
1814. 

1815. 

during  the  campaign  in  France ;  joined  it  at  Vcmooulctirs  ; 
battle  of  Britime  le  Ch&teau;  of  La  Bothi^;  of  Chaa^ 
aubert;  affair  of  the  Bridge  of  Mery;  passage  of  the 
Mame;  battle  of  CWww;  of  Xoon;  passage  of  the  Aime; 
battle  of  Fere  Champenoise ;  battle  and  capture  of  Paris  ; 
reported  to  the  British  Govemm«it  during  the  whole  of  th/t 
above  operations ;  knighted  on  his  return  to  Bnghmd ;  tht 
Russian  Order  of  St.  Geoige,  and  the  Prussian  Order  of 
Merit,  conferred  on  him;  appointed  afterwards  a  Kn^ht 
Conunander  of  the  Bath. 

Low  Countries ;  on  Bonaparte's  escape  from  Elba,  arranged 

Commander  of  it  agreed  to  march  to  the  defence  of  Belgium; 
sdected  to  command  an  eipedition,  in  conjunction  with 
Admiral  Lord  Ezmouth,  on  the  south  coast  of  France ;  took 
possession  of  the  citj  of  Marseilles;  received  the  Prince 
Regent's  thanks  through  the  Secretary  of  State  for  tfas 
service;  marched  against  Toulon;  in  ooiyunction  with  the 
Royalists  compeUed  the  fortress  to  hoist  the  white  flag,  and 
to  expel  the  Frendi  Marshal  Brune,  with  the  greater  part 
of  the  troops  that  Bonaparte  had  placed  in  garrison  l^ere; 
appointed  Governor  of  St.  Helena,  with  the  diarge  of  General 
Bonaparte's  person;  had  the  local  rank  of  Lientenant-Gencral 
conferred  upon  him. 

Sir  Hudson  Lowe  reoeived  the  Egyptian  Medal  and  Grand  Cross  of  the  Red  Eagle  of 
Prussia.  He  was  also  a  Knight  of  the  Military  Order  of  Merit  of  Prussia ;  and  <^  St. 
George  of  Russia,  4th  class ;  a  E.C.B.,  and  G.C.M.G. 


INDEX. 


AbelU  Mrs.,  her  aeooimt  of  Napoleon's 

rendenoe  at  the  Brian,  i.  47. 
Address  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  firom  the 

inhabitants   of  St    Helena,    iii.  313; 

*  from  the  inhabitants  of  Santa  Maura, 
336. 

Alexander,  Emperor  of  Russia,  his  opinion 
of  Bonaparte,  L  1 14. 

Alexandria,  heat  of  its  climate,  L  90. 

Alison,  Sir  A.,  his  character  of  Count 
Gneisenan,  i.  110;  his  opinion  of  Sir 
H.  Love,  134;  of  Count  Bertrand,  iii. 
303. 

Ambassadors,  Napoleon's  opnion  of  their 
dudea  at  ibreign  courts,  ii.  138. 

Amherst,  Lord,  his  arrival  at  Sf.  Helena, 
ii.  150;  his  interview  with  Napoleon, 
173;  denies  the  accuracj  of  (VMeara's 
report  of  the  conversation,  175. 

Animal  food,  great  consumption  of,  at 
Lougwood,  i.  361. 

*Anti-GaUican'  newspaper,  letters  in 
cipher  in  the,  iiL  63. 

Antommarchi,  Professor,  his  obiect  as  an 
historian  of  the  Captivity,  f.  3 ;  his 
arrival  at  St.  Helena,  as  surgeon  to 
Napoleon,  iii.  182;  complains  of  the 
restrictions,  190 ;  his  conversation  with 
the  Governor,  191 ;  his  calumnies,  201 ; 
his  Tamtj,  202 ;  his  grumblings,  202 ; 
described  by  Montholon,  255;  his 
opinion  of  Bonaparte's  disease,  267 ;  ap- 
plies for  permission  to  return  to  Eu- 
rope, 275  ;  refuses  to  sign  the  report  of 
the  medical  officers  on  the  autopsy  of 
Napoleon,  293;  his  misstatement  re- 
sardinff  the  liver,  294. 

''Apostilie"  by  Napoleon  on  a  letter  of 
Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  it  228;  Remarks 
on,  by  the  latter,  231. 

*  Appeal,  An,  to  the  British  Nation  on  the 

Treatm«>nt  experienced  by  Napoleon 
Bonaparte  in  the  Island  of  St.  Helena,' 
iklsely  attributed  to  Santini,  ii.  157; 
the  author's  account  of  its  concoction, 
157;  interest  excited  by  it,  158;  Bona- 
parte's testimony  to  its  Cil^ehood,  1 58. 
Amott,  Dr.,  tenders  his  proftrssional  ser- 
vices to  Bonaparte,  iiL  178;  admitted 
to  see  him,  274;  his  opinion  of  his 
patient's  sUte,  274;    his  medical  re- 

C-'See  Reports;  his  legacy  from 
,  »leon,  298. 


B. 

Balcombe,  Mr.,  appointed  purveyor  .to 
Napoleon,  i.  35;  his  departure  for 
England,  iii.  6 ;  concerned  in  clandes- 
tine correspondence  with  St.  Helena, 
61. 

Ball  practice.  Napoleon's,  iii.  210. 

Balmain,  Count  (Russian  Commissioner), 
his  arriyal  at  St  Helena,  i.  189 ;  notice 
of,  by  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  192  ;  his  opi- 
nion of  General  Gonrgaud,  ii.  256;  his 
contradiction  of  (^Mean's  statements, 
iii.  120;  his  departure  for  Europe, 
216. 

Bathurst,  Earl,  instructions  and  despatches 
of,  i.  15-21,  119,  121,  189,  190,  297- 
301,  803,  311,  ii.  118-123,  153,  156, 
181,  201,  202,  213,  243,  iii.  38,  41,  43, 
63,  94,  98,  99,  110,  113,  150,  184,  238, 
250,  314;  his  cognizance  of  tVMeara's 
letters  to  Finlaison,  i.  302,  ii.  242;  his 
kindness  towards  the  exiles,  iiL  4, 238 ; 
his  advice  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  323, 
331;  defends  him  in  the  House  of 
Lords,  334. 

Bautxen,  battle  of,  L  105. 

Baxter,  Mr.,  his  report  on  the  health  of 
Las  Cases  and  his  son,  ii.  14;  bis  re- 
monstrance against  the  monopoly  of 
the  Longwood  contractors,  114;  his 
conversation  with  General  Gourgand, 
249 ;  his  reports  on  Bonaparte's  heuth— 
SM  Reports;  his  account  of  the  so-odled 
fictitious  bulletins,  261. 

Bedford,  Duke  of,  his  present  to  Napo- 
leon, ii.  175. 

Bemadotte,  Crown  Prince  of  Sweden,  i. 
104. 

Bern,  Due  de,  assassination  of^  iii.  218. 

Bertrand,  Count  his  protest  against  the 
proceedings  of  Government,  i.  37*39 ; 
his  passes-  tee  Passes;  letters  on  the 
subject  of  sealed  correspondence,  62, 
64;  his  "Declaration,"  155;  his  com- 
|>laints  of  the  restrictions,  165,  170, 
li.  197;  his  letter  concerning  Madame 
Bertrand's  note,i.  203;  his  intemperate 
manner,  243;  his  interview  with  the 
Governor  after  Las  Cases'  arrest,  387 ; 
his  remonstrance  against  sending  Las 
Cases  to  the  Cape,  iL  35;  his  inter- 
views with  Las  Cases,  38, 43 ;  his  letter 


510 


CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON. 


to  his  father,  89;  his  interriew  with 
Captain  Lamb,  149;  his  letter  on  the 
subject  of  Mr.  £lphinstone*s  present, 
154;  his  condemnation  for  hi^h  trea- 
son, 172;  his  assertion  respecting  the 
officers  of  the  53rd,  214;  his  corre- 
mondence  with  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  on 
the  relations,  219-234;  refuses  Ge- 
neral Gourgaud's  application  for  a  loan 
on  his  departure,  259 ;  his  application 
to  Cardinal  Fesch,   iii.  3;   his  com- 

'  plaints  of  the  Governor's  proceedings 
towards  O'Meara,  10;  his  remonstrance 
against  the  appointment  of  Colonel 
Lyster  as  orderly  officer,  83;  chal- 
lenged by  the  Colonel,  35;  offers  to 
give  "  satisftiction "  to  the  Governor, 
36 ;  his  evil  influence  over  Bonaparte, 
52 ;  attempts  to  induce  Dr.  Verling  to 
quit  Longwood,  109 ;  his  assertion  re- 
garding OLptun  Blakeney's  retirement 
nrom  t£e  post  of  orderly  officer,  117; 
receives  a  novel  command  from  Napo- 
leon, 159;  his  letter  to  Lord  Liverpool 
on  the  health  of  Bonaparte,  238;  his 
objection  to  Antommarchi*s  signing  the 
report  on  the  auto^y  of  Napoleon,  294; 
seeks  a  reconciliation  with  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe,  300 ;  his  character,  303. 

Bertrand,  Countess,  her  note  to  the  Mar- 
quis of  Montchenn,  and  correspondence 
in  consequence,  i.  200-211;  her  debts, 
296 ;  her  remark  on  presenting  her  in- 
fietnt  to  Napoleon,  ii.  81 ;  testimony  to 
the  correctness  of  her  conduct,  131 ; 
her  defence  of  her  husband,  iii.  57 ; 
her  complaints  of  her  position,  182. 

Bingham,  Sir  George,  his  denial  of  Ber- 
trand's  assertion  respecting  the  officers 
of  the  53rd,  ii.  215;  his  departure  for 
England,  iii.  165;  testimony  to  his 
merits,  166. 

Blakeney,  Captain,  succeeds  Captain  Pop- 
pleton  as  orderly  officer  at  Longwood, 
li.  177 ;  his  reports,  214,  iii.  19;  super- 
seded by  Colonel  Lyster,  32;  reap- 
pointed, 36;  superseded  by  Captain 
Nicholls,  65;  his  denial  of  the  charge 
of  inspecting  the  Longwood  linen,  82; 
his  contradiction  of  the  statements  of 
Bertrand  andO*Meara  concerning  him, 
118. 

Bliicher,  Field-Marshal,  his  intention  of 
executing  Napoleon,  i.  11;  letter  of, 
111. 

Bonaparte  family,  notice  of,  i.  87. 

Bonaparte,  Lucien,  Las  Cases'  unfinished 
letter  to,  discovered,  i.  368. 

Bonaparte,  Napoleon,  revived  interest  in 
his  history,  i.  1 ;  character  and  object 
of  his  policy  in  exile,  5 ;  hb  surrender 


on  board  the  Bellerophon,  8 ;  qnestioii 
of  his  status,  8-13;  nis  letter  to  the 
Prince  Regent,  9 ;  declared  a  prisoner 
of  war,  14^  conveyed  to  St  Helena  on 
board  the  Northumberland,  22;  his 
strictures  on  the  policy  of  Govern- 
ment, 24 ;  lands  at  St  Helena,  30 ;  his 
claim  to  the  imperial  title,  41-43  ;  his 
rendence  at  the  Briars,  46 ;  removes  to 
Longwood,  47 ;  complaints  of  Sir  G. 
Cockburn,  67-69,  146;  disposition  to- 
wards Sir  H.  Lowe  on  his  arrival, 
132-135;  and  after  antipathy,  135; 
his  meetings  with  the  Governor,  138- 
141,  158-162,  172-176,  220-226,  246- 
251 ;  dictates  a  declaration  for  his 
suite,  147  ;  his  reflections  on  the  con- 
duct of  the  Allies,  1 60  ;  complains  of 
his  locality,  161,  213,  220;  admits  the 
impropriety  of  his  conduct  to  the  Gover- 
nor, 178-180,  252,  255;  his  prophecy 
concerning  the  Bourbons,  194;  his 
opinions  on  le^timacy  and  jpopnlar 
liberty,  194;  his  command  or  fiinds, 
211,  iii.  7,  222;  proposal  to  erect  a 
house  for  him— «<fe  House;  protests 
against  the  Convention,  i.  257;  his 
•History,'  292;  his  resistance  to 
measures  for  his  comfort,  292;  pro- 
poses to  take  an  assumed  name,  347* 
350;  dictates  a  note  on  the  subject, 
348  ;  his  opinion  of  the  British  army 
and  navy,  355;  his  remarks  on  the 
battle  of  Waterloo  and  the  Duke  of 
Wellin^n,  356;  his  letter  to  Las 
Cases,  li.  3;  his  intention  in  writing 
it,  7 ;  his  character  by  Las  Cases,  1 1 ; 
his  view  of  the  question  of  Las  Cases' 
return  to  Longwood,  23;  desires  to 
see  Las  Cases,  35 ;  receives  a  lock  of 
his  son's  hair,  47 ;  makes  overtures  to 
the  Governor,  50  ;  breaks  off  the 
negotiation,  55;  his  observations  on 
the  Governor's  memoraiidnm,  57;  his 
health,  61,  117,  142,  19.5,  237,  iii.  19, 
25, 32,  231, 238,  247,  267,  279 ;  refuses 
to  take  exercise,  it  61 ;  his  remarks 
on  Las  Cases'  arrest,  73 ;  his  opinion 
of   Sir    Pulteney    Malcolm,   81;    his 

Proposed  invasion  of  England,  84-89; 
is  opinion  as  to  the  burning  of  Mos- 
cow, 88 ;  justifies  his  conduct  at  Jaffa, 
94;  his  opinion  of  the  state  of  England, 
95,  105;  his  desire  for  an  accommo- 
dation, 102 ;  his  testimony  to  the  dis- 
interested conduct  of  Britain,  106  ;  his 
remarks  on  the  foreign  and  commer- 
cial policy  of  ministers,  105-111;  and 
on  Catholic  emancipation,  111;  on 
Lord  Amherst's  embaissy  to  China,  ai.d 
the  propriety  of  ambassadors  adapting 


INDEX. 


511 


tbemselves  to  the  cnstomt  of  foreign 
courts,  138-140;  dictates  remarks  on 
•  Lord  Bathurst's  speech,  143 ;  receives 
a  bust  of  bis  son*  148 ;  his  remarks  on 
*  An  Appeal  to  the  British  Nation,' 
1 59 ;  his  criticism  on  the  restrictions, 
168;  his  remedpr  for  distress  in  Eng- 
land, 171;  visited  by  officers  of  the 
53rd,  1 76 ;  his  increased  exasperation, 
183 ;  quarrels  with  General  Gourgaud, 
188;  his  appellation,  211,  iii.  155; 
dictates  an  abusive  letter  to  the  Gover- 
nor, ii.  212 ;  his  replv  to  Lord  Bath* 
urst's  speech,  213;  his  "Apostille," 
228 ;  his  conduct  on  the  death  of  Cipri- 
ani, 263 ;  his  donation  to  a  benevolent 
institution,  264;  his  second  *'Apo8- 
tille/'  iiL  10;  dismisses  his  English 
servants,  20;  remonstrates  against  the 
appointment  of  Colonel  Lyster  as 
orderly  officer,  33;  refuses  to  show 
himself,  65;  attacked  with  vertigo, 
103 ;  his  note  on  the  choice  of  a  medi- 
cal attendant,  107;  his  'Notes'  on 
Lord  Bathurst's  despatches  of  Jan.  1, 
1818,  HI ;  his  statement  of  g^evances, 
154;  his  love  of  wdrm-bathinc,  158; 
his  novel  command  to  Bertraud,  159; 
arranffements  for  seeing  him,  174;  his 
''declaration,"  175;  abandons  his  seclu- 
sion, 188 ;  his  love  of  (gardening,  194, 
198,  205;  measures  against  intruders, 
206;  military  amusement,  207;  dan- 
gers of  his  ball-practioe,  210;  takes 
offence  at  the  iron  railing  of  his  new 
house,  215;  shoots  a  bullock,  217;  his 
opinion  on  the  assassination  of  the  Due 
de  Berri,  219;  his  remarks  on  events 
in  France,  225 ;  resumes  horse-exercise, 
227;  his  intervention  in  fovour  of  a 
Serjeant,  230 ;  his  increased  satisflaction, 
230 ;  his  mistrust,  232 ;  desires  an  ex- 
tension of  limits,  235 ;  his  obstinacy, 
240 ;  his  picnic  at  Sir  Wm.  Doveton's, 
242;  symptoms  of  his  &tal  malady, 
247,  249 ;  dissatisfied  with  his  attend- 
ants, 254  ;  his  suggestions  regarding 
his  new  house,  263;  his  policy,  265; 
his  mind  affected,  266  ;  his  novel  riding 
exercise,  269;  attacked  with  fever, 
270 ;  plan  for  seeing  him,  273 ;  his  pre- 
sent to  the  20th  regiment,  277;  his 
deathbed,  281-286 ;  his  death,  287 ;  his 
lost  words,  287 ;  the  post-mortem  ex- 
amination, 288  ;  the  cause  of  his  death, 
293 ;  appearance  of  the  body,  295  ;  the 
fhnerai,  296;  his  effects,  298;  his  lega- 
cies, 293,  299 ;  his  character,  300»  307- 
310;  his  companions  in  exile,  302; 
his  conduct  in  captivity,  305 ;  his  ac- 
tions, 310;   his  surrender  involuntary, 


337;  character  of  his  proclamations, 
338 ;  his  treatment  at  St  Helena,  343 ; 
his  annoyances  the  result  of  his  own 
conduct,  346. 

Books,  complaints  ccmcemin^,  i.  249, 263, 
267;  clandestine  transmission  of,  iii.  58. 

Bourbons,  their  fear  and  bribery  of  the 
press,  i.  359,  ii.  115. 

Boys,  Rev.  Mr.,  accepts  a  snuff-box  from 
Napoleon,  iii.  8 ;  his  letter  on  returning 
it  to  O'Meara,  15;  confirms  Mr.  Ver- 
non's statement  concerning  it,  17. 

Brazil,  plots  in,  for  the  liberation  of  Bo- 
naparte, i.  232,  iii.  42. 

Bread,  complaint  concerning,  iii.  130. 

Briars,  Napoleon  at  the,  i.  46. 

Brienne,  battle  of.  Napoleon's  account  of 
his  danffer  at,  135. 

Brune,  Marshal,  at  Toulon,  L  116;  his 
death,  118. 

Bulletins  of  Napoleon's  health,  question 
of  form  of,  ii.  230 ;  fictitious,  question 
of,  261. 

Bunbury,  Sir  Henry,  his  communication 
concerning  Napoleon's  pecuniary  re- 
sources, i.  192. 

Bnonavita,  Abb6,  his  arrival  as  chaplain 
to  Longwood,  iiL  182;  his  letter  on 
the  death  of  George  III.,  218;  de- 
scribed by  Montholon,  255. 

Burial-place  of  Napoleon,  iii.  297. 

Bust  of  Napoleon's  son,  story  of  the,  iL 
145-153. 

Byron,  Lord,  his  lines  on  Napoleon,  ii. 
208. 


Campbell,  Lord,  on  the  treatment  of  Na- 
poleon, i.  125. 

Cantillon,  the  assassin,  Napoleon's  legacy 
to,  iii.  299. 

Capri,  its  surrender  to  Sir  Sidney  Smith, 
i.  92 ;  garrisoned  by  Sir  Hudson  Lowe, 
92;  description  of  the  island,  94;  at- 
tacked by  Greneral  Lamarque,  95;  fall 
of  Ana  Capri,  96;  the  siege,  96;  sur- 
rendered to  the  French,  98;  causes  ot 
its  Ml  98. 

Cases,  Count  de  Las,  object  and  character 
of  his  Journal,  i.  2;  his  testimonv  to 
the  nature  of  the  policy  pursued  at 
Longwood,  5;  false  statement  regard- 
ing Sie  Instructions,  16;  his  account  of 
Sir  Hudson  Lowe's  first  visit  to  Napo- 
leon, 138;  his  "Declaration,"  153;  his 
sobriquet,  239,  ii.93;  his  admissions  in 
favour  of  the  Governor,  i.  255;  object 
of  his  conduct,  291 ;  his  arrest  on  the 
charge  of  inducing  Scott  to  receive  let- 
ters for  Europe,  370;  taken  to  Halt's 


612 


CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON. 


Gate,  371 ;  his  papers  secured,  371 ;  his 
own  accoant  of  the  transaction,  373- 
378;  his  motires  according  to  O'Meara, 
381;  his  Journal,  384;  his  papers,  385; 
removed  to  Ross  Cottage,  386;  inter- 
Yiews  with  the  Governor,  387-393,  ii. 
10-40;  his  official  letter,  L  390;  his 
self-contradiction,  ii.  1,  2;  his  trick 
with  Qaeen  Hortense's  necklace.  9;  his 
opinion  of  Bonaparte,  1 1 ;  applies  for 
inedical  aid,  14;  objects  to  return  to 
Longwood,  16,  27;  tdtematives  offered 
him,  1 7 ;  lus  accoant  of  the  Governor's 
offers,  19;  his  desire  to  leave  St.  He- 
lena, 29;  his  final  decision,  34;  removes 
to  James  Town,  3.^;  his  farewell  inters 
views  with  Bertrand,  38,  43;  advances 
money  to  Napoleon,  38;  his  explana- 
tion of  his  eagerness  to  leave,  41 ;  his 
letter  to  the  Governor,  41 ;  his  depar- 
ture, 43;  his  account  of  Ids  embarka- 
tion, 44;  his  character  by  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe,  45 ;  proof  of  his  mischievous  dis- 
position, 93;  his  protest  fWmi  the  Cape, 
96;  his  evil  influence  with  Napoleon, 
iii.  68;  his  character,  303. 

Cases,  Count  Enmianuel  de  Las,  reports  on 
his  health,  ii.  14, 15;  appointed  senator 
by  Louis  Napoleon,  15;  cause  of  his 
illness,  42;  assaults  and  challenges  Sir 
Hudson  Lowe,  iii.  316. 

Catholic  emancipation.  Napoleon's  re- 
marks upon,  ii.  1 1 1. 

China,  Napoleon's  remarks  on  Lord  Am- 
herst's embassy  to,  ii.  138-141. 

Cipriani,  Napoleon's  maltre-d'hdtel,  his 
opinion  of  Montholon,  i.  294;  of  Bona- 

Sarte's  religious  belief,  354;  his  infi- 
elity,  354,  iii.  3;  his  alleged  remarks 
on  the  Governor's  present  of  coffee,  iL 
83;  his  death,  262;  his  political  prin- 
ciples, 264. 

Ciavering,  Lady,  Las  Cases'  letter  to,  dis- 
covered, i.  368. 

Coals— s«e  Fuel. 

Cockbum,  Sir  George,  charged  with  the 
conveyance  of  Napoleon  to  St.  Helena, 
].  14;  instructions  for  his  g^dance,  15- 
21;  report  to  the  Admiralty  on  his 
arrival,  32-37;  his  reply  to  Count  Ber- 
trand's  protest,  39;  despatches  to  Earl 
Bathurst,  40,  61,  65;  regulations  for 
the  safe  custody  of  Napoleon,  51 ;  reply 
to  Montholon's  complaints,  57;  to  Ber- 
trand  on  the  subject  of  sealed  letters, 
62,  64;  succeeded  in  the  naval  com- 
mand by  Sir  Pulteney  Malcolm,  189. 

Coffee,  ^r  Hudson  Lowe's  present  of,  to 
Napoleon,  ii.  83. 

Coffin,  Brigadier-Genera],  succeeds  Sir 
George  Bingham  at  St  Helena,  iii.  237.  | 


Cole,  Mr.,  his  contradiction  of  CMetn's 
charges,  iii.  119. 

Commissioners,  the  foreign,  their  arriral 
at  St  Helena,  L  189;  account  of^  bySr 
Hudson  Lowe,  191 ;  their  desire  of  see- 
ing Napdeon,  196;  their  instmctions, 
196,  197;  effect  of  their  arrival  on  the 
Act  of  Parliament,  210;  their  embar- 
rassing proceedings,  232;  Napdleoo'i 
refusal  to  receive  them  officially,  235; 
inconvenience  of  their  residence  at  St 
Helena,  ii.  48;  Lord  Bathorst's  instruc- 
tions concerning,  244. 

Convention  of  the  2nd  of  August,  1815, 
protest  against,  i.  257. 

Correspondence,  clandestine,  i.  200^  209, 
253,  367,  iu.  42,  57,  97,  228. 

Correspondence,  sealed,  i.  62-64,  243,  S53, 
262,  266, 11224,  iii.  84. 

Correspondence  within  the  island,  ques- 
tion of,  i.  200-205,  253, 265,  270,  li.  217. 

Corsican  Rangers,  formation  of  the  corps, 
L  89;  testimony  to  their  merits,  90;  s 
second  corps  raised,  91 ;  their  services, 
92-100. 

Corvisart,  his  warning  to  Napoleon,  iiL 
267. 

Courts-martial,  on  Mr.  Stokoe,  iiL  178; 
on  an  officer  of  the  66th,  234. 

Crokat,  Captain,  supersedes  Captain  Lot- 
jrens  as  orderly  officer  at  Longwoodt 
iii.  279;  his  report,  280. 

Croker,  Right  Hon.  J.  W.,  his  connection 
with  the  correspondence  of  O'Meara 
and  Finlaison,  i.  302,  305;  his  letter  to 
O'Meara  disndssing  him  from  the  navy, 
iii.  116. 

Crucifix,  allurion  by  Manzoni  to  the 
placing  of  one  on  Napoleon's  pij^  st 
his  death,  iii.  287. 


D. 


Darling,  Mr.,  questioned  as  to  the  alleged 
dampness  or  Napoleon's  apartments, 
iii.  23. 

"  Declaration"  of  N^K>leon  to  Lord  li- 
verpool,  iii.  175. 

Declarations  of  the  French  officers,  i. 
152-157;  other  fbrms  ordered  by  Go- 
vernment, 323 ;  alterations  made  oy  the 
officers  and  refused  by  the  Governor, 
324 ;  discussion  on  the  subject,  325 ;  the 
signing,  327-329. 

Disguises  at  Loninrood,  iii.  232, 234. 

Dodgio,  Lieut.-Colonel,  succeeds  Colood 
Lascelles  in  the  command  of  the  66th, 
iii.  29 ;  calls  a  meeting  of  the  officers 
relative  to  a  letter  to  O'Meara  on  hii 
expulsion  from  their  mess,  29. 


INDEX. 


513 


Doveton,  Sir  William,  anecdote  of,  iii. 
242  ;  visited  by  Napoleon,  242  ;  his  de- 
scription of  the  breakfast,  and  of  his 
visitor's  appearance,  245. 


E. 


East  India  Company,  Napoleon's  remarks 
on  the  affiiirs  of,  i.  25 ;  their  resolution 
against  slavery,  iii.  55. 

*  Edinburgh  Review,'  its  notice  of  Mr. 
Warden's  *  liCtters,'  ii.  138. 

Egypt,  Napoleon's  remarks  on  our  opera- 
tions there,  i.  139,  140. 

Elphinstone,  Hon.  John,  his  present  to 
Napoleon,  ii.  153. 

England,  Napoleon's  plan  for  the  invasicm 
of,  ii.  84 ;  his  observations  on  the  state 
of,  95;  on  the  distress  of  the  lower 
classes,  105 ;  his  testimony  to  the  disin- 
terested conduct  of,  106 ;  her  duty  and 
conduct  in  regard  to  Napoleon,  iii.  389. 

Escape  (of  Napoleon),  warnings  as  to,  i. 
309 ;  offers  to  assist  in  the,  ii.  142  ;  ru- 
mours of  plans  for,  iii.  150;  question  of 
possibility  o^  232 ;  fears  of  the  Govern- 
ment concerning,  250. 

Etiquette  at  Longwood,  iii.  226. 

Exmouth,  Admiral  Lord,  his  letter  con- 
cerning Marshal  Brune,  i.  1 17 ;  his  testi- 
mony to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe's  merits,  118. 

Expenses  of  the  Longwood  establishment, 
regiUation  of,  L  189,  211,  218, 242, 244, 
266,275,  282-288,  iL  118,  iii.  1;  rea- 
sons for  the  insufficiency  of  the  allow- 
ance for,  i.  360 ;  Major  Gorrequer's  state- 
ment concerning,  iii.  122-128;  household 
expenses,  14a 

'Exposition,'  O'Meara's,  failure  of  at- 
tempts to  circulate  it  in  St  Helena,  iii. 
185;  character  of  the  work,  186. 


F. 

'Facts  from  St.  Helena,'  object  of  the 

work,  iii.  181. 
Farquhar,  Sat  Robert,  his  testimony  in 

favonr  of  Sir  H.  Lowe,  i.  129. 
Fesch,  Cardinal,  his  application  concern- 
ing a  priest  for  Napoleon,  iiL  94.   , 
Finlaison,  Mr.,  his  letter  to  O'Meara,  1. 

301 ;  to  the  *  Morning  Chronicle,'  308. 
Fitziames,  Duke  of.  Napoleon's  opinion 

o^  i.  240. 
Fleury  de  Chabouloa,  his  '  M^oires  pour 

servir,'  &c,  noticed  by  Montholon,  iii. 

229 ;  and  by  Napoleon,  230. 

VOL.  III. 


Forbes,  Lord,  bis  testimony  concerning 

the  deftsnce  of  Capri,  i.  99. 
Fowler,  Mr.,  ^ves  information  ooneern- 

ittg  olandesUtM  eorrespoudeoce,  iii.  58. 
Freedom,   popular,    Napoleon's   dictum 

concerning,  i.  194. 
Fuel,  oompUiints  concerning  the  supply 

of,  at  Longwood,  ii.  204-208 ;  quantity 

supplied,  204,  206;  consumption  there 

compared    with    that    at    Plantation 

House,  206. 
Funeral  of  Napoleon,  iii.  296. 

G. 

Gardening,  Napoleon's  love  of,  iii.  194. 

George  111.,  notice  of  his  death,  and  cha- 
racter by  the  Abb^  Buonavita,  iii.  218. 

George  I  v.,  his  approval  of  Sir  Hudson 
Lowe's  conduct  during  his  government 
of  St  Helena,  iii  314;  and  cordial  re- 
ception of  him  on  his  return,  315. 

Gneisenau,  Count  de,  letters  of,  i.  107, 
110,  112,  113;  his  character  by  Sir  A. 
Alison,  110. 

Gorrequer,  Major,  his  minutes  of  conver- 
sations, i.  217,  243,  283,  287,  851,  391, 
ii.  11,  14,  27,  38,  43,  147,  184,  191, 
214,  235,  246,  250;  his  account  of  an 
interview  with  Las  Cases  after  his 
arrest,  L  371 ;  and  with  Montholon  to 
inform  him  of  the  arrest,  379 ;  his  letter 
to  O'Meara  on  the  supply  of  fuel  at 
Longwood,  204;  his  conversations  with 
Montholon  on  the  table  expenses,  iii. 
1 ;  and  on  the  refusal  of  Napoleon  to 
show  himself,  71 ;  his  observations  on 
O'Meara's  statement  regarding  the  sup- 
plies at  Longwood,  121-146 ;  his  state- 
ment of  the  supply  of  wines,  146 ;  and 
of  malt  liquors,  147;  his  letter  on  the 
attention  shown  to  Napoleon  in  snudl 
matters,  197;  succeeds  Colond  Wyn- 
yard  as  militarysecretary,  231. 

Goulbum,  RiffhtHon.  Henry,  despatches 
of,  L  808,  \l  242,  244,  ill.  5,  150;  his 
attentions  towards  the  French  at  Long- 
wood,  4 ;  his  report  to  Earl  Bathurst  of 
Greneral  Goorgaud's  revelations,  38. 

Gourgaud,  Baron,  his  illness,  and  cha- 
racter by  O'Meara,  I  75  j  his  "  Decla- 
ration," 154;  <}uarrel8  with  Napoleon, 
iL  188;  his  disapprobation  of  Napo- 
poleon's  conduct  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe, 
190;  his  application  to  be  removed  from 
Longwood,  247 ;  his  papers,  250 ;  his 
statements,  254 ;  his  explaiuUion  con- 
eeming  an  alleged  pension  to  his  mo- 
ther, 255  ;  his  ruling  weakness,  256 ; 
his  application  to  Bertrand  for  a  loan 

2   L 


514 


CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON. 


refused,  259;  his  account  of  Napoleon's 
pecuniary  resources,  259  j  dispEuraging 
reports  concerning  him,  iiL  2 ;  his  re- 
ydadons  to  Mr.  GouIVluii,  37-41 ;  sent 
to  Hamburgh,  151 ;  his  upright  conduct 
at  St  Helena,  302. 
Grievances,  Napoleon's  list  of,  iii.  1 54.^ 
Grouchy,  Marshal,  Napoleon's  opinion 
of,  iii.  230. 


H. 

Hall,  Mr.,  his  evidence  as  to  O'Meara's 

calumnies,  iii.  96. 
Hardinge,  Sir  Henry  (Viscount),  letter 

of,  i.  114. 
Haricot  question,  the,  iiL  223. 
Helena,  St,  climate  and  temperature  of,  L 
25,  28 ;  description  of  the  island,  27, 
iiL  340  ;  ito  healthiness,  i.  29 ;  state  of 
its  public  buildings,  195;  character  of 
the  natives,  iiL  242 ;  reception  of  Sir 
Hudson  Lowe  by  the  inhabitants,  330. 

Ilgnry^  Mr.,  his  testimony  to  the  healthi- 
ness of  St  Helena,  i.  29 ;  to  the  conduct 
of  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  126-128;  his  re- 
marks on  Napoleon's  neglect  to  visit 
Cipriani  on  his  deathbed,  iL  263 ;  his 
account  of  the  expulsion  of  O'Meara 
from  the  mess  of  the  66th,  iii.  27 ;  his 
opinion  of  the  '  Voice  from  St  Helena,' 
28;  his  account  of  the  appearance  of 
Napoleon's  body  after  death,  295 ;  his 
opinion  of  Count  Bertrand,  303. 

Hobhouse,  Mr.  (Lord  Broughton),  his 
'  Letters  by  an  Englishman'  sent  to  St 
Helena  as  a  present  to  Napoleon,  L  192 ; 
complaints  of  its  detention,  249,  268. 

Holland,  Lord,  his  motion  regarding  the 
detention  of  Napoleon,  L  9;  his  protest 
a^inst  the  bill  for  that  purpose,  12; 
his  present  to  Napoleon,  ii.  175. 

Holland,  Lady,  her  present  to  Napoleon, 
iL  175. 

Holmes,  Mr.  Wm.,  concerned  in  clan- 
destine correspondence  with  St  Helena, 
iii.  58. 

Hook,  Theodore,  hiB  *  Facts  from  St.  He- 
lena' noticed,  iii.  181 ;  his  anecdote  of 
Sir  Wm.  Doveton,  242. 

Horses,  application  to  the  Cape  for,  iii. 
194. 

Horton,  Sir  Robert  Wilmot,  appointed 
Grovemor  of  Ceylon,  iii.  335. 

House,  proposal  to  erect  a  new  one  for 
Bonaparte's  residence,  212,  269  ;  re- 
ference to  Montholon  and  Bertrand  on 
the  subject,  212;  Montholon's  reply, 
213 ;  reference  to  Lord  Bathurst,  227 ; 
phins  submitted  to  Count  Montholon, 


iii.  51 ;  the  f^mdation  traced,  57;  com- 
pletion of,  257  ;  arrangements  regard- 
ing, 260-265. 

Hugo,  Victor,  his  parallel  between  Sir 
Hudson  Lowe  and  Louis  Napoleon,  1 6. 

Hurricane,  occurrence  of  a,  at  N^>oleon's 
death,  iiL  287. 


Ibbetson,  Mr.,  appointed  purveyor  to 
Longwood,  iii,  6. 

Lnpenal  title,  question  of  according  it  to 
Napoleon,  L  41-43,  ii.  244,  iii.  11,  341 ; 
claimed,  i.  260,  261,  324,  ii.  230;  Napo- 
leon's object  in  claiming  it,  iiL  342. 

Informers  employed  by  Napoleon,  ii.  94. 

Instructions  concerning  the  cnstodjr  aiwi 
treatment  of  Napoleon  and  his  suite,  I 
15-21,  44,  119, 121, 189,  297-301,  308, 
it  120-123,  201,  202,  213,  243,  uL  99, 
110,150,184. 

Intrusions  at  Longwood,  complaints  of,  i> 
272,  iii.  97. 


Jackson,  Lieut-Colonel,  his  tribute  to  the 
memory  of  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  L  128; 
remarlu  on  the  disagreements  of  the 
Longwood  hou6ehold,230;  his  statement 
concerning  General  Gourgaud,  ii.  256. 

Jackson,  Ma^r,  his  letter  concerning  Na- 
poleon's present  to  the  20th  regin^^^ 
iii.  278. 

Jaffa,  Napoleon's  justification  of  his  con- 
duct at,  ii.  94. 

Journal,  Las  Cases',  character  of^  L  384, 
iL  98. 

K. 

Keating,  Sir  Henry,  his  testimony  in 
favour  of  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  i.  130;  bis 
interview  with  Napoleon,  193;  has  de- 
nial of  an  alleged  communicatioo  ^ 
Napoleon,  249. 

L. 

Lamarque,  General,  takes  Ana  Capri»  ^ 
96 ;  lays  siege  to  Capri,  96 ;  the  \a^ 
surrendered  to  him,  98. 

Lamartine,  his  testimony  in  fitvour  of  S^^ 
Hudson  Lowe,  i.  7 ;  observatiotf  <* 
Napoleon's  claim  to  the  imperial  title, 
43 ;  and  on  his  conduct  at  St  UelenSt 
iiL  309. 

Lamb,  Caption,  his  interview  with  Ber*  \ 


INDEX. 


515 


trend  on  the  subject  of  the  bust,  ii. 

149. 
Lambert,    Admiral,    succeeds   Admiral 

Plampin  in  the  naval  command  at  St 

Helena,  iii.  232. 
**  Lanterns,"  the  purveyor's,  i.  295. 
Lascar,  removal  of  a,  from  Longwood,  i. 

181,  254. 
Las  0&8es—8ee  Cases,  Count  de  Las. 
Lascelles,  Captain,  his  letter  to  O'Meara 

announcing  his    expulsion    from    the 

mess  of  the  66th,  iii.  25;  removed  by 

the  Governor,  29. 
Legitimacy,  Bonaparte's  remarks  on,  i. 

194. 
Le  Page,  cook  at  Longwood,  illness  of,  i. 

184 ;  his  proposal,  185. 
Letter,    anonymous,    in    a   Portsmouth 

newspaper,  i.  301. 
Letters  and  documents  in  the  nature  of 

proofs  and  illustrations,  L  295,  ii.  265, 

iii.  359. 

*  Letters  written  on  board  H.  M.  S.  North- 

umberland and  at  St.  Helena'— setf 
Warden,  Mr. 

*  Life  of  Napoleon,'  Sir  Walter  Scott's,  un- 

favourable to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  iiL  327 ; 
review  of  its  statements,  349. 

Limits,  Napoleon's,  i  50,  263,  268,  341, 
343,  ii.  198,  209,  216,  222,  iii.  204. 

Linen,  charge  made  against  the  orderly 
officer  of  examining,  iii.  82. 

Longwood,  character  of  policy  pursued 
at,  i.  5,  137,  ii.  20.5,  iii.  265,  345 ;  the 
precincts,  i.  47 ;  description  o^  48-51 ; 
expenses  of  the  estabushment  on  Sir 
Hudson  Lowe's  arrival,  151 ;  expenses 
of— see  Expenses ;  complaints  concern- 
ing the  locality,  161,  213,  260;  repurs 
and  additions  —  see  Repairs;  interior 
arrangements,  239  ;  estimated  table  ex- 
penses of^  in  1816,  245;  state  of  the 
nouse,  353;  style  of  living  at,  361,  ii. 
192 ;  consumption  of  fhel  at,  204,  206 ; 
number  of  fires  at,  207;  visitors  to, 
214;  alleged  dampness  of  the  house, 
iii.  22 ;  etiquette  at,  226 ;  desecration 
0^331. 

Lords,  House  of,  debate  in,  on  the  treat- 
ment of  Bonaparte,  ii.  143. 

Loudon  and  Moira,  Countess  of,  her  ar- 
rival at  St.  Helena,  i.  168. 

Lowe,  Sir  Hudson,  nature  of  proofk  in 
support  of  charges  against  him,  L  4; 
warrant  issued  to,  for  the  detention  of 
Bonaparte,  83;  his  early  career,  85; 
his  stay  at  Ajaccio,  87 ;  appointed 
Deputy  Judge  Advocate,  89 ;  proceeds 
to  Egypt  in  command  of  the  Corsican 
Rangers,  89 ;  his  mission  to  Portugal, 
91 ;  assumes  the  command  of  Capri, 


92;  surrenders  the  island  to  General 
Lamarque,  98 ;  serves  at  Ischia,  Zante, 
and  Santa  Bfimra,  100,  101 ;  made 
Governor  of  Cephalonia  and  Ithaca, 
102 ;  his  mission  to  the  north  of  Eu- 
rope, 103 ;  his  description  of  Madame 
de  Stael  and  Bemadotte,  104 ;  his  first 
view  of  Napoleon,  105;  his  services 
under  Blucher,  106-109;  knighted, 
109  ;  serves  in  the  LowCountKes,  109- 
114 ;  his  interview  with  the  Emperor 
Alexander,  115 ;  assumes  the  command 
at  Genoa,  116;  garrisons  Toulon,  117: 
summoned  to  London,  117;  consultea 
by  Lord  Castlereagh  at  Paris,  118; 
nominated  Governor  of  St.  Helena, 
119;  marries,  is  made  K.C.B..  and 
sails  for  St  Helena,  122  ;  his  assailants, 
122-126;  testimonies  in  his  fiivour, 
126-130;  his  manner  and  disposition, 
135;  his  interviews  with  Bonaparte, 
138-141,  158-162,  172-176,  220-226, 
246-251 ;  report  of  his  proceedings  on 
•arriving  at  St  Helena,  150;  complains 
of  Napoleon's  seclusion,  166  ;  invites 
him  to  dinner,  168;  his  forbearance, 
179  ;  issues  a  proclamation  concerning 
correspondence,  198;  his  reply  to  Ber- 
trand  on  the  subject  of  Madame  Ber- 
trand's  note,  206  ;  his  readiness  to  con- 
sult Napoleon's  wishes,  216,  269,  iii. 
95 ;  replies  to  Count  Montholon's  **  Re- 
monstrance," i.  267  ;  his  instmctiens  to 
CMeara,  315;  his  denial  of  Bona- 
parte's charge  of  having  laid  his  band 
on  his  sword,  318 ;  the  denial  corrobo- 
rated by  O'Meara,  359  ;  issues  altered 
regulations,  330;  his  reasons  for  the 
alterations,  332-343 ;  rescinds  them, 
346;  arrests  Scott,  a  servant  of  Las 
Cases,  369;  arrests  Las  Cases,  370; 
his  account  of  the  arrests  and  of  Las 
Cases'  Journal  and  other  papers,  382  ; 
his  interviews  with  Las  Cases,  387- 
393,  ii.  10-40 ;  his  remarks  on  Napo- 
leon's letter  to  Las  Cases,  7 ;  offers  to 
allow  Las  Cases  to  return  to  Longwood, 
16;  decides  to  send  him  to  the  Cape, 
20;  renews  his  former  offier  condi- 
tionally, 22,  31 ;  his  explanation  to 
Bertrand,  31;  refuses  to  allow  Las 
Cases  to  take  leave  of  Bonaparte,  ex- 
cept in  presence  of  a  British  officer, 
36 ;  his  remarks  on  Las  Cases'  letter 
of  Dec.  1816,  41  ;  and  on  the  Count's 
treatment  of  his  son,  42;  his  view  of 
Las  Cases'  character,  45 ;  his  memo- 
randum concerning  an  accommodation, 
54 ;  returned  with  Napoleon's  observa- 
tions, 57;  his  remarks  thereon,  58; 
sends  a  present  of  coffee  to  Longwood, 

2  L  2 


516 


CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON. 


83 ;  statement  of  his  concessions,  91 ; 
obserrations  on  Las  Cases'  protest,  96 ; 
his  answer  to  Sir  P.  Malcolm  on  charges 
made  by  Napoleon,  12^-130 ;  bis  re- 
marks on  Mr.  Warden's  *  Letters,*  134; 
bis  conduct  regarding  the  bust  of  Napo- 
leon's son,  147;  and  Mr.  Elphinstone's 
present,  1 54 ;  his  replj  to  Bonaparte's 
I>roposij  for  a  mediation,  166;  his  con- 
siderate conduct  towards  Bertrand,  172; 
his  questions  to  Captain  Poppleton,  177; 
to  O'Meara  regaraing  the  regulations, 
184 ;  his  opinion  of  the  causes  of  Bona- 
parte's abtuse,  187;  proposes  to  build  a 
saloon  at  Longwooa,  196;  offi*rs  medi- 
cal aid  to  Napoleon,  195,  218,  231 ;  to 
hire  a  summer  residence  for  him,  200, 
216;  difficulty  of  his  position,  202; 
his  further  concessions,  209 ;  accedes  to 
the  change  in  Bonaparte's  appellatiou, 
211 ;  complains  of  Bertrand's  perver- 
sions, 211;  his  correspondence  with 
Bertrand  on  the  regulations,  218-234; 
his  Remarks  on  Napoleon's  "Apos- 
tille,"  231;  his  dissatisfaction  with 
O'Meara,  235;  generous  conduct  to 
Gourgaud,  259;  subjects  O'Meara  to 
the  restrictions,  iii.  8;  accepts  his  re- 
signation, 11;  on  O'Meara  s  applica- 
tion rescinds  the  order  touching  the 
restrictions,  1 9 ;  his  questions  to  O'Meara 
regarding  Bonaparte's  letter  to  Lord 
Liverpool,  21;  to  Mr.  Darline  on  the 
alleged  dampness  of  NapoleoiPs  apart- 
ments, 23;  replies  to  Bertrand's  re- 
monstrance concerning  Colonel  Lyster, 
33;  shows  Bertrand's  letter  to  the  Co- 
lonel, 35;  reprimands  O'Meara  for  his 
conduct  regarding  the  affidr  of  the 
snuff-box,  36;  removes  hiih  from  St 
Helena,  48;  his  anti-slavery  measures, 
53;  conversations  with  Count  Montho- 
lon,  65-91 ;  his  explanation  concerning 
O'Meara,  91 ;  consents  to  Mr.  Stokoe 
residing  at  Longwood,  105;  his  obser- 
vations on  Napoleon's  'Notes,'  112; 
his  refutation  of  O'Meara's  charges, 
116;.  his  determination  not  to  corre- 
spond with  Bertrand,  156;  his  "Note" 
to  Napoleon  concerning  the  Commis- 
sioners,  167;  his  unexpected  meeting 
with  Napoleon,  171;  his  «Note"  in 
reply  to  Bonaparte's  "Declaration," 
176;  his  conversation  with  Antoror 
marchi,  191 ;  writes  to  the  Cape  for 
horses  for  Longwood,  194;  enlarges 
the  limits,  204;  again  encounters  Na- 
poleon, 248;  determines  to  enforce  the 
instructions  for  seeing  him,  271;  his 
las't  offer  of  medical  assistance,  282; 
his  letter  to  Lady  Holland  on  the  death 


of  Napoleon,  288;  hb  departure  ibr 
England,  313;  receives  an  addrrsi 
from  the  inhabitanta  of  St  Helena  on 
resigning  his  authority,  313;  approval 
of  his  government  by  the  King,  314; 
his  reception  at  Court,  315;  appoiot«d 
to  the  colonelcy  of  the  98rd  regiment, 
316;  resolves  to  prosecute  O'Meara, 
317;  difficulties  of  the  task,  317;  ol^ 
tains  a  rule  nisi,  320;  the  rule  dis- 
charged on  a  question  of  tine,  331; 
seeks  advice  of  Lord  Batbnnt,  323; 
his  error  in  not  acting  upon  it  3S5; 
made  Commander  of  the  Fore«fl  tt 
Ceylon,  327;  hismterview  with  Prince 
Mettemich,  327;  obtains  leave  of  ab- 
sence, 329;  tooches  at  St  Hdena  on 
his  way  home,  330;  visits  Longwood, 
330 ;  has  an  audienee  of  the  Gkike  of 
Wellington,  332  ;  returns  to  Ceylon, 
332;  attacked  by  Lord  Teynhara  and 
defended  by  the  Duke  of  Wdlington 
and  Lord  Bathurst,  333;  returns  to 
England  and  memorializes  the  Govern- 
ment, 335;  his  death,  336;  review  of 
his  conduct  at  St.  Helena,  347. 

Lowe,  Miss,  daughter  of  Sir  Hudson,  re- 
ceives a  pension,  iii.  336. 

Lutyens,  Captain,  succeeds  Captain 
Nicholls  as  orderiy  officer  at  Long- 
wood,  UL  210;  his  reports,  210,  211, 
214,  217,  218,  227,  240,  248,  259,  273; 
his  account  of  Vignali's  personation  of 
Napoleon,  233 ;  superseded  by  Captain 
Crokat,  279 ;  receives  a  complimentaTX 
message  fWmi  Napoleon,  279. 

Lyster,  Lieut-Colonel,  succeeds  Captain 
Blakeney  as  orderly  officer  at  Long- 
wood,  iii.  32 ;  his  challenge  to  Bertrand, 
35 ;  his  consequent  removal,  36. 

M. 

Maceroni,  Colonel,  his  account  of  the 
pamphlet  *  An  Appeal  to  the  British 
Nation,'  &c.,  attnbuted  to  Santini,  ii. 
157. 

Maitland,  Captain,  his  *  Narrative  of  the 
Surrender  of  Bonaparte'  quoted,  i.  13. 

Malcolm,  Sir  Pulteney,  succeeds  Sir 
George  Cockbum  in  the  naval  com- 
mand at  St  Helena,  i.  189;  presented 
to  Bonaparte,  195;  other  interviews 
with  him,  242;  ii.  81,  123;  his  al- 
leged statement  regarding  the  Dnke  of 
Wellington,  I.  242 ;  his  testimony  in 
ftivour  of  Sir  H.  Lowe,  245 ;  defends 
the  Governor's  conduct  248-250;  his 
proposed  intermediation,  ii.  55,  166; 
his  letter  to  the  Governor  detailing  a 


ISDEX- 


617 


coDTeraation  with  Napoleon,  128-127  ; 
hU  explanation  touching  his  remark  on 
the  Governor's  temper,  130 ;  succeeded 
by  Admiral  Plampin,  171. 

Maltese  re^ment,  the  Royal,  its  conduct 
at  Ana  Capri,  i.  95. 

Maurel,  Jnl^  his  sarcastic  remark  on 
Napoleon,  liL  309. 

M*Carthy,  Lieut,  his  letter  to  O'Meara 
on  his  expulaon  fh)m  the  mess  of  the 
C6th,  iii.  26. 

Melville,  Lord,  his  sanction  to  the  receipt 
of  O'Meara's  letters  by  Mr.  Finlaison, 
i.  308. 

'Memoirs  of  Napoleon,'  hj  O'Meara, 
M.onthok>n*s  remarks  on,  iii.  220 ;  the 
dictature  of  Bonaparte,  220. 

Ministry,  the  English,  nature  of  prooft  in 
support  of  charges  against,  i.  4;  its 
difficulty  on  the  surrender  of  Napo- 
leon, 8 ;  his  remarks  on  the  policy  of, 
ii.  105-112  ;  defence  of,  iii.  337-347. 

Montehenu,  Marquis  de  (French  Commis- 
sioner), his  arrival  at  6t  Helena,  L 
189;  notice  o^  by  Sir  Hudson  Lowe, 
191;  his  contradiction  of  O'Meara's 
statements,  iii.  120;  his  conversation 
with  the  Governor,  218;  announces 
his  intention  of  visiting  Bonaparte, 
240. 

Montholon,  Count  de,  object  of  his 
*  Recits,'  i.  2  ;  his  testimony  as  to  the 
Longwood  policy,  6,  137;  assertion 
concerning  the  disarming  of  Napoleon, 
21 ;  his  catalogue  of  grievances,  54 ; 
his  want  of  veracity,  72,  183 ;  his 
"Declaration,"  154;  his  testimony  to 
Bonaparte's  deceptions,  158  ;  complains 
of  the  removal  of  his  servant,  182 ;  his 
sobriquet,  186  ;  his  reply  to  the  Gover- 
nor on  the  subject  of  Napoleon's  resi- 
dence, 213;  his  *'  Remonstrance,"  257- 
267  ;  obiect  of  his  conduct,  291 ;  his 
"court,*^  294;  his  account  of  the  re- 
ception of  the  Governor's  letter  on  the 
subject  of  the  declarations,  327;  bis 
account  of  the  breaking  up  of  Napo- 
leon's plate,  363;  his  remarks  on  Sir 
Hudson  Lowe's  present  of  coffee,  ii.  83; 
his  misstatement  concerning  Bona- 
parte's health,  117;  his  evidence  to 
the  misconduct  of  British  subjects,  142; 
his  account  of  Gourgaud's  departure, 
248 ;  his  assertion  of  the  dampness  of 
Longwood  House,  iii.  25;  his  state- 
ment concerning  O'Meara's  journal,  50; 
conversations  with  the  Governor,  65- 
91 ;  with  Major  Gorrequer,  71 ;  his 
opinion  of  CMeara,  77, 79 ;  his  proposal 
to  Dr.  Verling,    152;    applies  to  the 


Governor  on  the  subject  of  Madame 
Montholon's  departure,  161  ;  his  expec- 
tancies, 221 ;  his  mode  of  acting,  224  ; 
his  acknowledgments  to  the  Governor, 
236 ;  complains  of  the  provisions,  237 ; 
his  application  to  the  Governor  regard- 
ing a  chan^  of  attendants,  254-258; 
his  descripuon  of  some  of  them,  255 ; 
his  account  of  Napoleon's  health,  266- 
268 ;  his  plan  for  enabling  the  orderly 
officer  to  see  him,  273 ;  his  account  of 
Napoleon's  condition  on  his  deathbed, 
282-285 ;  his  character,  303. 

Montholon,  Countess  de,  testimony  to  the 
correctness  of  her  conduct,  iL  181;  her 
departure  from  St  Helena,  iii.  168. 

Moore,  Sir  John,  his  testimony  in  favour 
of  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  i.  90,  91  ;  his 
opinion  of  the  Court  of  Palermo,  92. 

Moscow,  Napoleon's  opinion  of  the  burn- 
ing of,  ii.  88. 

"Mouton,"  O'Meara's  use  of  the  term, 
ii.  235. 

Mijffling,  Baron  von,  on  the  probable 
movements  of  Bonaparte,  L  1 12. 


N. 

Name  (Bonaparte's),  propcraed  change  of, 
i  346-353,  ii.  66;  objecuons  to,  122. 

Napier,  Sir  William,  his  remark  on  the 
loss  of  Capri  by  ^  Hudson  Lowe,  L 
93. 

Napoleon — see  Bonaparte,  Napoleon. 

Necklace,  a  diamond,  Las  Cases'  trick 
concerning,  iL  9. 

Newspapers,  complaints  concerning  the 
supply  of,  i.  263,  267 ;  list  of,  sent  to 
LoDSwood,  ii.  160. 

NichoUs,  Captain,  succeeds  Captain 
Blakene^  as  orderly  officer  at  Long- 
wood,  ill.  63;  his  reports,  160,  167, 169, 
182, 205;  complaints  of  his  difficulties, 
102,  160,  169,  172;  extracts  from  his 
journal,  93,  157,  175.  195,  199,  205, 
208,  210;  succeeded  by  Captain  Lut- 
yens,  210. 

*  Notes  approuvles  par  Napoleon,'  iii. 
111. 


o. 

*  Observations '  by  Napoleon  on  Lord 
Bathurst's  speech,  iL  213;  clandestinely 
forwarded  to  England,  214. 

Officers  of  the  66th  regiment,  their  pro- 
ceedings and  correspondence  on  the 


518 


CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON. 


expulsion  of  O'Meara  firom  thdr  mess, 
iii.  25-31 ;  their  testimony  to  0*Meara's 
falsehood,  31;  their  contradiction  of 
Bertrand's  statement  concerning  Cap- 
tain Blakeney,  118. 

O'Hara,  Grenend,  his  command  at  Gib- 
raltar, 86. 

O'Meara,  Bany  Edward,  object  and 
character  of  his  pnblications,  i.  2,  81- 
83;  his  account  of  Bonaparte  and  his 
followers  during  the  voyage,  23;  his 
conyersations  with  Napoleon,  24,  67, 
145,  235,  314,  317,  346,  355,  ii.  23, 
60,  65,  73,  84,  102,  106,  114.  135-141, 
164,  168,  182,  iii.  12;  his  aescription 
of  Longwood,  i.  48-51 ;  his  account  of 
his  duties,  73;  pay,  73,  74;  his  account 
of  Gourgaud,  75;  early  career  of,  76; 
letter  to  the  *  Morning  Chronide,'  77- 
80;  character  of  his  letters,  80;  his 
account  of  Sr  H.  Lowe's  first  visit  to 
Napoleon,  141,  143;  of  Napoleon's  pre- 
possession agiunstSir  Hudson,  163;  his 
readiness  to  give  information,  180;  his 
coarseness,  183;  his  account  of  Madame 
Bertrand's  note  to  Montcbenu,  200;  his 
testimony  to  the  motives  of  action  at 
LoDgwood,  237;  applies  for  increase  of 
salary,  279;  remarks  on  the  sale  of 
Napoleon's  plate,  289;  his  denial  of  an 
anonymous  letter  in  a  Portsmouth  news- 
paper, 303;  his  conduct  with  respect  to 
Montholon's  "Remonstrance,"  304;  his 
account  of  the  signing  the  declaration, 
328;  his  description  ofthe  style  of  living 
of  the  French  exiles,  360;  his  atrocious 
charge  against  the  Governor  with  re- 
spect to  Napoleon,  365;  his  reports  on 
Bonaparte's  health, — see  Reports  ;  his 
statement  of  the  events  leadmg  to  Las 
Cases'  arrest,  378;  his  opinion  of  Las 
Cases'  motives,  381 ;  his  report  on  the 
health  of  the  yonnger  Las  Cases,  ii. 
1 5 ;  his  account  of  Las  Cases'  depar- 
ture, 43;  of  Napoleon's  overture  for  an 
accommodation,  50;  his  long  letter  to 
Mr.  Finlaison  of  Dec  29,  1816,  62-78; 
his  misstatement  concerning  Bertrand's 
letter  to  his  fkther,  89;  concerning  the 

.  bust  of  the  Due  de  Reichstadt,  145, 1 51 ; 
his  account  of  a  dispute  with  the  Go- 
vernor, 161 ;  change  of  his  tone  regard- 
ing the  latter,  162;  his  account  of  a 
conversation  between  Napoleon  and 
Lord  Amherst,  176;  his  suggesUons 
re^rding  the  restrictions,  185;  his 
opmion  on  the  allowance  for  Long- 
wood,  191;  his  description  of  the  style 
of  living  there,  192;  his  letter  to  Major 
Gorrequer  on  the  supply  of  fbel  at 


Longwood,  206;  lus  insoltin^  bebm- 
viour  to  the  Governor,  235;  lus  pledge 
to  Napoleon,  239;  his  self-coiMieinna- 
tion,  241;  conversation  with  the  Go- 
venor  respecting  General  Gonrpmod, 
246,  iii.  3 ;  his  opinion  of  Napoleon's 
malady,  4, 19;  his  conduct  in  the  affiur 
of  the  snuff-box,  7 ;  snlpeded  to  the 
restrictions,  8;  tenders  his  resigoatioe, 
9;  deliberately  disobeys  orders,  9;  his 
resignation  accepted,  1 1 ;  his  verskm 
of  the  affidr  of  the  snuff-box,  13;  tbe 
restrictions  removed,  19;  his  peijary 
concerning  papers  sent  to  Ejigland,  21 ; 
expelled  the  mess  of  the  66th,  25 ;  his 
letter  to  the  officers  and  their  replj, 
26;  reports  Mr.  Stokoe's  objectioa  to 
attend  Napoleon,  32;  excluded  Aroai 
the  table  of  the  orderly  officer,  34; 
removed  from  Longwood,  47  ;  his  dif- 
ferent versions  of  the  delivery  of  tbe 
order,  47 ;  refuses  to  give  a  copy  of  his 
medical  journal,  49;  complains  of  his 
baggage  being  plundered,  49;  sails  for 
Englaud,  50;  his  slanderous  reports  at 
Ascension,  96;  his  letter  to  the  Ad- 
miralty, 113;  dismissed  from  the  navy, 
114;  his  scale  of  the  supply  at  Long- 
wood,  147;  his  mistake  respecting  Mr. 
Stokoe's  return  to  St.  Helena*  170  ;  his 
*  Memoirs  of  Napoleon,'  notice  o^  220; 
his  account  of  a  proposed  inscnptioD 
for  Napoleon's  coffin,  295;  prosecuted 
by  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  for  libel,  31 7« 
Orderly  officer  at  Longwood,  duties  of 
the,  i.  44-46. 


Parliament,  Acts  of,  regarding  Napoleon, 
i.  83,  121;  published  at  St.  Helena, 
198. 

Passes  to  Longwood,  i.  51,  69,  166,  2M 
271,  274,  281,  337,  il  IS,  223. 

Peltier,  Napoleon's  opinion  of,  iL  114. 

Phaeton,  a,  given  by  Napoleon  to  Ma- 
dame Bertrand,  i.  296. 

Pichon,  Napoleon's  account  of,  ii.  137. 

Picnic,  Napoleon's,  iii.  242. 

Piontkowski,  Captain,  remarks  on,  hy 
Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  iL  60;  and  by 
O'Meara,  61. 

Plampin,  Admiral,  succeeds  SirPulteney 
Malcolm  in  the  naval  command  at 
St  Helena,  ii.  171;  his  opinion  of 
O'Meara,  iii.  96;  succeeded  by  Ad- 
miral Lambert,  232. 

Plate,  sale  of;  by  Napoleon,  L  288,  290, 
297,  362;  its  object,  289,  362,  ii.  92. 


INDEX. 


519 


Poppleton,  Ctptain,  fint  orderly  officer  at 
Longwood,  reports  of,  i.  157,  188,  241, 
271,  277,  329,  ii.  113,  142,  150;  his 
explanation  concerning  the  opening  an 
envelope  addressed  to  Napoleon,  L  313; 
his  opinion  of  Count  Montholon,  386; 
superseded  by  Captain  Blakeney,  ii. 
177;  his  answers  to  the  Govemor's 
questions  respecting  his  duties,  177- 
180;  his  acceptance  of  a  snuff-box  from 
Napoleon,  iii.  320. 

Post-mortem  examination  of  the  body  of 
Napoleon,  iii.  289. 

Prochimations,  by  Colonel  Wilkes,  i.  30, 
46;  by  Sir  H.Lowe,  198. 

Proclamations  of  Napoleon,  their  cha- 
racter, iii.  338. 

Provisions,  complunts  concerning,  i.  237, 
240,  288,  295,  ii.  82,  113,  iii.  2,  237; 
attention  i>aid  to  the  supply  of,  i.  241, 
ii.  114;  prices  of,  iii  140;  quality  of, 
141;  O'Aieara's  scale  of  the  supply  of, 
147. 

Q. 

•  Quarterly  Review,*  its  criticism  of  Mr. 
Warden's  *  Letters,'  ii.  133. 


Railing,  iron,  at  Longwood,  complaint 
concerning,  iii.  215,  248,  261. 

Reade,  Sir  Thomas,  his  account  of  an 
interview  with  Napoleon,  i.  319;  his 
report  on  the  arrest  of  Las  Cases,  370; 
his  instructions  to  the  orderly  officer 
for  seeing  Bonaparte,  iii.  174,  271;  his 
report  ofan  inquiry  relative  to  Antom- 
marchi's  chane  against  a  sentinel*  191 ; 
his  report  of  the  post-mortem  examina- 
tion of  the  body  of  Napoleon,  290. 

Reardon,  Lieut,  his  opinion  of  CMeara, 
iii.  28;  removed  from  St.  Helena,  29. 

Regent,  the  Prince,  his  alleged  promise 
to  Napoleon,  iiL  75. 

Regulations  and  restrictions  regarding 
Napoleon  and  his  suite,  i.  31,  51,  167, 
168,  198,  974.  308,  311,  322,  330,  345, 
it  72,  216,  iii.  204;  complaints  of,  i. 
165,  170,  229,  243,  ii.  37,  51,  57,  197, 
212,  219;  alterations  made  in,  i.  330;  ex- 
planations of  and  reasons  for  the  alter- 
ations, 332-343;  regulations  in  force 
in  October,  1 8 1 7,  ii.  2 1 6 ;  correspondence 
of  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  and  Count  Ber- 
trand  on,  219-234. 

Reichstadt,  Due  de,  a  lock  of  his  hair 
sent  to  Napoleon,  ii.  47;  story  of  the 
bust  of,  14.5-153. 


''Remarks"  by  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  on 
Napoleon's  '*  Apostille,"  ii.  231. 

Remonstrance  by  Count  Montholon 
against  the  Convention  of  the  Allied 
Sovereigns,  i.  257,  267;  efforts  made 
to  send  a  copy  to  England,  305;  sent 
by  0*Meara  to  the  Admiralty,  305. 

Repairs,  &c.,  at  Longwood,  i.  214,  217, 
264,  269. 

Reports  on  Bonaparte's  health:  by 
O'Meara,  i.  366,  li.  61,  195,  209,  iii. 
19,  25;  by  Mr.  Baxter,  il  261;  by  Mr. 
Stokoe,  iii.  106;  by  Dr.  Amott,  279, 
281,  286,  287. 

Reservoirs  for  Bonaparte's  garden,  iii. 
200. 

Residence  of  Napoleon,  question  of,  i.  32, 
57,  172,  212-218,  227,  264,  269,  292, 
iii.  45. 

Rethwick,  or  Radovitch,  Filippo,  brings 
a  bust  of  Napoleon's  son  to  St  Helena, 
iL  146;  his  visit  to  Longwood,  150; 
his  conduct  to  the  proprietors,  152. 

Review  of  evidence,  ui.  337. 

Ricketts,  Mr.,  his  conversation  with  Na- 
poleon, iii.  1 54^ 

Riding-exercise,  novel  mode  of,  iii.  269. 

Ripley,  Captain,  proposal  to  him  concern- 
ing clandestine  correspondence,  iii.  165. 

Rosemary  Hall,  proposal  to  build  a  resi- 
dence for  Napoleon  at  i.  227 ;  objected 
to  by  Lord  Bathurst,  iii.  459. 

Rutledge,  Mr.,  takes  chai^^  of  the  body 
of  Napoleon,  iii.  290 ;  hu  memorandum 
of  the  watch,  291.* 


S. 


Saloon,  proposed  erection  of  a,  at  Long- 
wood,  ii.  196,  199. 

Santini,  a  domestic  at  Longwood,  his 
alleged  intention  of  shooting  Sir  H. 
Lowe,  i.  242;  authorship  of  *An  Ap- 
peal to  the  B^tish  Nation,'  «tc,  attri- 
buted to  him,  ii.  157 ;  his  testimony  to 
the  disagreements  among  the  French 
officers,  189. 

Saucepans,  application  concerning,  i.  294. 

Soott,  James,  servant  of  Las  Cases,  arrest 
of,  i.  369. 

Scott,  John,  his  information  to  the  Go- 
vernor concerning  clandestine  corre- 
spondence, i.  868. 

Scott,  Sir  Walter,  on  the  government  of 
Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  i.  123:  his  *  Life  of 
Napoleon,'  iii.  327, 328 :  his  means  for  a 
defence  of  Sir  Hudson  Lowe,  329 ;  his 
view  of  the  character  and  conduct  of 
the  latter,  349. 


520 


CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON. 


Sentries,  and  regulations  regarding,  i. 
345,  li.  49,  53,  210,  211,  217,  223, 
262. 

Shortt,  Dr.,  his  note  on  the  death  of  Na- 
poleon, iii.  293. 

Signals,  secret,  established  at  St  Helena, 
1.52. 

Slavery,  measures  for  its  abolitiim  at  St. 
Helena,  iii.  53. 

Slaves,  number  of.  at  St  Helena,  belong- 
ing to  ^e  East  India  Company,  iii.  56. 

Snuff-box,  Napoleon^spresent  of  a,  ^ron^^h 
O'Meara,  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  Boys,  aflBiir 
of,  iii.  7-17. 

Soldiers,  playing  at,  iii.  207. 

Somerset,  liord  Charles,  his  opinion  of 
Las  Cases  and  his  Journal,  iSi.  148 ;  his 
visit  to  Longwood,  209. 

Spencer,  Captain  the  Hon.  Robert,  his 
visit  to  Longwood,  iiL  246. 

Spies,  Sicilian,  i.  93. 

Stael,  Madame  de,  at  the  Court  of  Stock- 
holm, t  104. 

Staff,  list  of  Sir  H.  Lowe's,  i.  122. 

Stokoe,  Mr.,  declines  to  attend  Napoleon, 
iii.  32;  subsequently  called  in,  103; 
consents  to  become  his  physician,  104; 
his  opinion  of  Napoleon  s  disease,  106; 
his  medical  reports — see  Reports;  ex- 
amined by  Admiral  Plampin,  1 09 ;  in- 
Talided  and  sent  home,  1 10 ;  sent  back 
to  St.  Helena  and  tried  by  court-mar- 
tial, 178;  sentenced  to  be  dismissed 
from  the  navy,  180. 

Sttirmer,  Baron  de  (Austrian  Commis- 
sioner), his  arrival  at  St.  Helena,  i. 
189;  account  of,  by  Sir  Hudson  Lowe, 
191 ;  his  letter  enclosing  Mr.  Welle's 
declaration,  ii.  47;  end^vours  to  see 
Bonaparte,  96;  his  removal,  iii.  31. 

Suite,  hst  of  Napoleon's,  i.  22 ;  disagree- 
ments among,  230,  ii.  189 ;  reduction 
of,  i.  298,  321,  350,  ii.  71 ;  additions 
to,  iiL  182;  offer  to  repbioe,  241 ;  their 
defMirture  from  St.  Helena,  313. 

Supplies,  Major  Qorrequer's  statement 
ooBceming,  iii.  121-148. 

Sussex,  the  Duke  of,  signs  Lord  Holland's 
protest  against  detaining  Napoleon,  i. 
12. 

Suzaarelli,  the  spy,  i.  93. 

T. 

Tent,  erection  of  a,  at  Longwood,  i.  264. 
Teynham,    Lord,    attacks    Sir    Hudson 

Lowe  in  tbe  House  of  Lords,  iii.  333  ; 

apologizes,  334. 
Thoaistocles,  suggested  paralld  between 

him  and  Napoleon,  i.  9. 


•Times*  news^per,  Napoleon's  state- 
ment concerning,  i.  359,  ii.  115. 

Tindal,  Mr.  (Chief  Justice),  Ms  advice  to 
Sir  Hudson  Lowe  againet  iedictiiig 
O'Meara,  iii.  822. 

Trifles,  attention  shown  to<,  for  the  com- 
fort of  the  exiles,  iii.  197. 


u. 

tJrmston,  Mr.,  his  letter  concemiBg  re- 
porto  of  the  treatment  of  Bonaparte^  iL 
92. 


Veriin^,  Dr.,  applies  to  O'Meara  for  per- 
mission to  inspect  his  medical  journal, 
iii.  48 ;  attempt  to  get  rid  of  him  from 
Longwood,  109;  proposal  to  him  by 
Count  Montholon,  152;  tenders  hb 
services  to  Napoleon,  177;  returns  to 
England,  189. 

Vernon,  Rev.  Mr.,  his  account  of 
O'Meara's  conduct  in  the  affiur  of  the 
snuff-box,  iii.  14 ;  his  denial  of  asser^ 
tions  in  the  '  Exposition,'  186. 

Vignali,  Abb^,  arrives  at  Longwood  as 
chaplain,  iii.  183 ;  personates  Napoleon, 
232;  described  by  Montholon,  255, 
256. 

Visits  to  Longwood,  instructions  as  to, 
i.  811 ;  regulations  concerning,  345, 
ii.  217,  iii.  90;  report  on,  ii.  214. 

'  Voice,  A,  from  St.  Helena,'  character  of 
the  work,  iiL  28. 

W. 

War,  horrors  oi,  ui.  312. 

Wtfdea,  Mr.,  his  *  Letters  written  on 
board  H.M.S.  Northumberland  and  at 
St.  Helena'  noticed,  i.  22;  opinions  of 
the  French  exiles  concemii^  it,  ii.  1^ ; 
Napoleon's  remarks  upon  it,  132;  its 
authority  in  England,  133;  object  of 
the  publication,  134 ;  the  asthor's  ef- 
fiXMnery,  134. 

Warming-pan,  substitute  for  a,  i.  354. 

Warnings  as  to  the  escape  of  Napoleon,  i. 
309. 

Warrant  for  the  detention  of  Napoleon 
issued,  i.  83. 

Waterloo,  batUe  of,  Napoleon's  remarks 
upon,  i.  356. 

Welle,  Mr.,  forwards  to  Long^wood  a  lock 
of  hair  of  Na|>oleon's  son,  ii.  47. 

Wellington,    Duke    of,    his  facility  in 


INDEX. 


521 


business,  i.  113;  Napoleon's  strictures 
on  his  condact  at  the  oatUe  of  Waterloo, 
357  'j  his  title  to  gratitade,  iii.  312 ;  his 
rephes  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe's  applica- 
tion for  employment,  332  ;  defends 
him  in  the  House  of  Lords,  333 ;  his 
note  on  the  same  subject,  335. 
Wilkes,  Colonel,  proclamations  by,  i.  30- 
32,  46;  his  pension*  iii.  325. 


Wines  supplied  to  the  Longwood  estab- 
lishment, iii.  146. 

Wood,  scarcity  of;  at  St.  Helena,  ii.  204 ; 
and  see  Pud. 

Wynyard,  Colonel,  his  report  on  Count 
Montholon's  statement  as  to  the  damp- 
ness of  Longwood  House,  iii.  25 ;  his 
instructions  to  the  orderly  officer,  173 ; 
his  departure  for  England,  231. 


LETTERS  AND  DOCUMENTS. 


Act  for  the  more  effectually  detaining  in  custody  Napoleon  Buonaparte  (April  11, 
1816),  i.  449. 

AMnERST,  Lord — 

To  Sir  Hudson  Lowe — 
Oct.  2,  1822. — Denial  of  statements  in  O'Meara's  '  Voice,'  ii  390. 

Anontmous — 

To  Napoleon  le  Grand,  ^c. — 
March  29,  1816. — Advising  him  to  escape  from  St.  Helena,  i.  447. 

To  Count  Bertrand — 

Means  and  method  of  escape  for  Napoleon,  referred  to  in  the  preceding,  i.  448. 
Balooube,  Mr. — 

To  Sir  Hudson  Lowe — 

Sept.  26,  1817. — Report  of  an  interview  with  NapoleoB,  ii.  421. 

Bathurst,  Earl — 

To  Sir  Hudson  Lowe — 
Sept.   12,   1815. — Instructions    concerning   the   charge   of  Bonaparte,    and 

announcing  his  appointment  as  Governor  of  St  Helena,  i.  437. 
Jan.  8,  1816. — Instruction  to  treat  Napoleon  as  a  prisoner  of  war,  i.  445. 
April  12, 1816. — Warrant  for  the  detention  of  Napoleon,  i.  452. 
Feb.  7,  1817. — Approving  his  conduct  in  the  arrest  of  Las  Cases,  and  giving 

instructions  concerning  him,  ii.  323. 
Feb.  7,  1817. — Instructions  concerning  limits  and  sentries,  ii.  324. 
April  22,  1817.~Sending  the  'Mauuscrit  venu  de  Ste.  H^^ne;'  supply  of 

Bonaparte's  table,  ii.  381. 
June  11,  1817.— Instructions  concerning  correspondence,  ii.  384. 
Aii^.  19,  1817.— Approval  of  his  forwarding  to  Bonimarte  certain  presents  from 

England ;  remans  on  the  conduct  of  Lord  Holland  and  the  Duke  of  Bedford ; 

instructions  as  to  future  presents  for  Napoleon,  iL  407. 
Aug.  25,  1817. — Instructions  regarding  repairs  at  Longwood,  ii.  409. 
Aug.  26, 1817. — Instructions  concerning  O  Meara's  intended  return  to  England, 

ii.  410. 
Sept.  1,  1817.— Probable  reports  of  Napoleon's  treatment;  extension  of  his 

limits ;  correspondence  with  his  suite ;  his  table  allowance,  h,  412. 
Sept.  17,  1817. — Instructions  concerning  the  erection  of  a  new  residence  for 

Napoleon,  ii.  415. 
Sept.  18,  1817.— Measures  to  be  taken  in  the  event  of  Bonaparte's  death,  ii.  416. 
Oct.  24,  1817. — Concerning  expenses  of  the  establishment  at  Longwood,  ii.  442. 
Oct.  24,  1817. — On  the  conduct  of  Count  Bertrand,  ii.  443. 
Dec.  13,  1817.— Instruction  to  permit  General  Gourgaud  to  quit  St.  Helena, 

ii.  467. 


522  CAPTIYITY  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Bathurst,  Earl— conftaircrf. 

To  Sir  Hudson  Lowe — continued. 

Jan.  I,  1818. — Approval  of  his  ^rocee^^  in  the  correspondence  with  Comrt 
Bertrand ;  instructions  respecting  sentnes,  correspondence,  and  visilE,  iiL  MI. 

Jan.  1, 1818. — Receipt  of  Ae  sealed  packet  addressed  to  the  Earl  of  Lirerpool, 
and  transmission  of  a  copy  to  St.  Helena ;  with  N2^>oleon's  Notes  C  Notes 
approav6es  par  Napol^n)  on  this  and  the  preceding  despatch,  and  Sir  Hadsoo, 
Lowe's  Observations  in  reply,  iii.  365. 

May  5,  1818. — Instructions  respecting  clandestine  correspondence,  iii.  997. 

May  16,  1818. — Stating  General  Gourgaud*s  information  concerning  Bona- 
parte's health,  in  opposition  to  O'Meara's  reports;  direction  to  remove 
O'Meara  from  Longwood,  iii.  399. 

May  18, 1818.— Former  reasons  for  objecting  to  the  removal  of  O'Meara;  in- 
struction to  remove  him  ;  restrictions  on  the  French  officers,  iii.  400. 

JiUy  21,  1818. — Instructions  respecting  the  foreign  Commissioners,  iii.  406. 

Aug.  10, 1818. — Relative  to  sending  out  attendants  to  Bonaparte,  iii.  414. 

Aug.  27,  1818. — Napoleon's  intention  of  selling  out  stock  in  the  Navy  5  per 
Cents,  iii.  415. 

Nov.  1818. — Congratulations  on  the  intercepting  of  clandestine  correspondenoe; 
O'Meara's  charges ;  admission  of  orderly  officer  to  Bonaparte ;  requiring  reply 
to  Napoleon's  letter  to  Lord  Liverpool,  iii.  470. 

Nov.  30,  1818. — Modification  of  instruction  as  to  the  admission  of  the  orderly 
officer  by  Napoleon  twice  daily,  iii.  472. 

July  5,  1819. — Approbation  of  ms  proceedings,  iii.  483. 

Julv  7,  1819. — Approval  of  his  resistance  to  the  pretensions  of  the  French 
Commissioner,  and  instructions  respecting  the  Commissioners  generally, 
iii.  483. 

July  12,  1819.— Reasons  for  not  prosecuting  the  *  Morning  Chronicle'  and 
O'Meara ;  the  new  attendants  on  Bonaparte ;  Mr.  Ricketts'  visit ;  instractioDs 
regarding  Mr.  Balcombe,  iii.  484. 

March  16,  1820. — Antici^ted  changes  in  Bonaparte's  suite,  ii.  487. 

March  16,  1820. — Directions  as  to  enclosed  de^^atch,  iii.  488. 

March  16,  1820. — Intended  presents  from  Lady  Holland  and  others,  iii.  488. 

April  12, 1820. — Approving  extension  of  Napoleon's  limits;  recommending 
vigilance  on  account  of  events  in  E^arope,  iii.  488. 

Nov.  30,  1820. — Instructions  respecting  the  Commisaoncrs,  with  particular  re- 
ference to  the  conduct  of  the  Marquis  de  Montchenu,  iii.  492. 

Feb.  16,  1821.— Health  and  habits  of  Napoleon;  instructions  concerning  the 
offer  of  medical  aid,  ii.  493. 

Feb.  17, 1821. — Instructions  regarding  the  preceding  despatch,  iii.  496. 

July  10,  1821. — General  approval  of  his  government,  iiL  600. 
Speech  in  the  House  of  Lords  in  reply  to  Lord  Holland's  motion  on  the  treatment 
of  Bonaparte,  March  18,  1817,  ii.333. 

Baxter,  Mr.— 

To  Sir  Hudson  Lotcc — 
Oct.  29,  1817. — Report  on  Napoleon's  health,  ii.  451. 

Nov.  27,  1817.— Conversation  with  Count  Bertrand  respecting  Napoleon's 
health,  ii.  466. 

Beagoini,  Messrs. — 

2b  FUippo  Eadovitch— 
Jan.  29,  1817. — Intrusting  to  him  a  bust  of  Napoleon's  son,  ii.  395. 

Bertrand,  Count — 

To  Sir  George  Cockhum — 
Nov.  5,  1815.— Detailing  occurrences  after  the  embarkation  of  Napoleon  on 

board  the  Bellerophon,  i.  439. 
March  13,  1816.— On  the  subject  of  sending  a  sealed  letter  to  the  Prince  Be- 

gent,  i.  446. 
March  20,  ]816.'->On  the  Admiral's  refusal  to  forward  sealed  corren»ondence, 
i.  446. 


INDEX.  523 

Bertrand,  Count — continued. 
To  Captain  Lamb — 

Jane  16,  1817.— Napoleon's  thanks  for  bringing  the  bust  of  his  son,  ii.  897. 
To  Sir  Hudson  Lowe-^ 

April  21,  1816. — On  his  situation  at  St.  Helena,  and  his  desire  for  a  temporary 
absence,  i.  453. 

April  32,  1816.— Reply  to  a  letter  on  the  same  subject,  i.  455. 

May  12, 1816. — Receipt  of  invitation  to  Napoleon  to  dine  with  the  Coontess  of 
Loudon,  L  456. 

June  14,  1816.— On  the  offer  of  fowling-pieces  and  articles  for  the  toilette, 
i.  456. 

July  2, 1816.— Madame  Bertrand's  note  to  the  Marquis  de  Montchenu,  and 
correspondence  generally  within  the  island,  i.  456. 

Not.  30,  1816. — List  of  certain  of  Las  Cases'  papers,  and  requesting  they  may 
be  sent  to  Lonirwood,  ii.  267. 

Dec  26,  1816. — Kemonstrating  against  sending  Las  Cases  to  the  Cape  instead 
of  to  England,  and  intimating  Napoleon's  desire  to  see  him  before  his  de- 
parture, li.  319. 

Dec.  29,  1816.— Referring  to  the  regulations  of  the  9th  of  October,  and  re- 
iterating the  demand  that  Las  Cases  may  be  allowed  to  take  leave  of  Napo- 
leon, ii.  321. 

July  3,  1817. — Notifying  Napoleon's  willingness  to  receive  Sir  Pulteney  Mal- 
colm and  Admiral  Plunpin,  iL  388. 

July  10,  1817. — ^Acknowledging  receipt  of  Mr.  Elphinstone's  present,  and 
compluning  of  the  Governor's  note  accompanying  it,  ii.  891. 

Sept.  30,  1817. — Napoleon's  health ;  complaints  of  the  restrictions,  ii.  423. 

Oct.  27,  1817. — Referring  to  his  letter  of  Sept.  30;  desiring  a  recurrence  to 
the  state  of  things  in  existence  before  the  Governor's  arrival,  ii.  447. 

April  13,  1818. — Remonstrance  against  the  removal  of  O'Meara,  iii.  394. 

April  24,  1818. — Remonstrance  on  depriving  Mr.  Balcombe  of  the  purveyor- 
ship,  and  on  the  removal  of  O'Meara,  iiL  395. 

July  20,  1818.— Compliuning  of  the  appointment  of  Colonel  Lyster  as  orderly 
officer ;  and  other  grievances,  iii.  404. 

July  24,  1818.— SencUng  the  challenge  of  Colonel  Lyster,  and  offering  to  give 
satisfaction  to  the  Governor,  iii.  412. 
To  Dr,  aMearOr— 

May  9,  1818. — Desiring  him  to  resume  attendance  upon  Bonaparte  under  cer- 
tain conditions,  iii.  398. 
To  FUippo  Radocitch — 

Sending  payment  for  the  bust  of  Napoleon's  son,  ii.  405. 

Bingham,  Sir  George — 
To  Sir  Hudson  Lowe — 
Oct.  29,  1817.— Sir  George  Cockbum's  practice  with  regard  to  correspondence, 

ii.  449. 
Oct.  29,  1817.— Placing  of  picquets  round  Longwood  by  Sir  George  Cockbum, 

ii.  449. 
Oct  29,  1817. — Sir  George  Cockbum's  mode  of  guarding  Ixmgwood  House 

after  sunset,  ii.  450. 
Dec.  30,  1817.— On  the  subject  of  Napoleon's  limits,  ii.  489. 
March  11,  1819.— Report  of  the  negotiating  at  Rome  of  bills  from  St  Helena, 
iii.  473. 
Blijcher,  Field-Marshal — 
To  Sir  Hudson  Lowe — 
Forwarding  Russian  Order  of  St.  George,  i.  431. 

Bokjlpabtb,  Napoleon— 
To  Count  de  Las  Cases — 
Dec.  11, 1816.— His  forewell  on  Las  Cases'  departure,  and  reflections  on  Sir 
Hudson  Lowe,  ii.  870. 
To  Oeneral  Oourgaud — 
Feb.  12, 1818.— Expressing  regret  at  his  departure,  iii.  392, 


524  CAPTIVITY  OP  NAPOLEON. 

BoNAPABTE,  Napoleon — continued, 

'Notes  approuY^es  pap  Napoleon'  on  Lord  Bathnrst's  letter  of  Jan.  1,  IfilS, 

iii.  365. 
Observationg  on  Lord  Bathuret's  speech  in  reply  to  Lord  HoUand's  motion  of 

March  18,1817,11.  347. 
Remarks  on  Alterations  in  Regulations — see  Regulations. 

BuNBUBY,  Lieut-Colonel — 
To  Lieut-Colonel  Loire — 
Oct.  25,  1808.^Congratiilating  him  on  his  defence  of  Capri,  i.  416. 

Campbell,  Major-General — 
To  Liettt. -Colonel  Lowe-^ 
Oct.  25,  1808.>- Congratulating  him  on  his  defence  of  Capri,  1.  415- 

Cases,  Count  de  Las — 
To  Count  Bertrcmd— 
Dec.  20,  1816. — ^Referring  himself  to  Napoleon's  wishes  as  to  his  return  to 

Longwood,  ii.  313, 
Dec.  25,  1816. — Concerning  the  GoTemor's  permission  for  his  return  to  Long- 
wood,  and  his  farewell  on  quitting  St.  Helena,  n.  319. 
To  Prince  Lucien  Bonaparte — 
Aug.  1,  1816. — Detailing  erents  since  Napoleon's  departure  from  Malmaison, 

1.476. 
Oct  1, 1816. — ^In  continuation  of  the  aboTc,  i.  485. 
To  Lady  Clanering — 

Not.  10,  1816 Complainag  of  his  situation,  and  requesting  news,  L  488. 

To  Sir  JffudtOH  Lowe-^ 
Dec.  4,  1816.~-I>emandiBg  to  be  remoTed  from  St  Helena,  ii.  268. 
Dec  6, 1816. — Complaining  of  the  ill  health  of  himself  and  his  son,  and  begging 

to  be  sent  to  England,  ii.  268. 
Dec  19, 1816. — Detail  of  occurrences  at  St  Helena,  reeajNtulation  of  griev- 
ances, reproaches  addressed  to  the  GoTemor,  and  &  Hudson  Lowe's  notes 
in  reply,  it  279. 
Dec  22,  1816.— Commenting  on  the  Goyemor's  ofiEer  to  permit  him  to  return 
to  Lonprood,  but  declines  to  avail  himself  of  it ;  his  Journal ;  declares  his 
determmatioB  to  have  recourse  to  the  law  \  renews  his  application  to  be  re- 
moved from  St  Helena,  u.  314. 

Cathcabt,  Lord — 

To  Sir  Hudson  Lowe — 
May  18,  1814. — Expressing  the  satisfaction  of  the  Emperor  Alexand^  with 
his  services,  i.  430. 

Chitrch,  Captain — 

To  LieuL'Colonel  Lowe — 
Oct.  5,  l808.^Action  with  the  French  at  Ana  Capri,  and  retreat  to  Capri, 
L402. 

Convention  of  August  2,  1815,  L  435. 

Declabation  of  the  Congress  <^  Vienna,  March  13, 1815,  i.  432. 

Finlaison,  Mr. — 

To  the  Editor  of  the  *  Morning  Clvronicle  * — 
March  3,  1823.— Explanation  concerning  his  correspondence  with  0*Meara, 
iii.  503. 

Gneisenau,  Count  de — 
To  Sir  Hudson  Lowe — 
Nov.  23,  1814.— Proposed  cession  of  Germanic  States;  eulegiun  on  Qie  Doke 

of  Wellington,  i.  431. 
Oct  17,  1817.— The  importance  of  his  trust;  the  <Manu8crit  de  Ste.  Belcne;' 
the  state  of  France ;  the  writer's  pursoitB,  iL  440. 


INDEX,  625 

GoRREQUER,  Major — 
To  Mr,  robetson^ 

Aag.  29,  182a — Complaints  respecting  snpplies  at  Longwood,  iiL  490. 
Minutes  of  an  interview  between  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  and  (S>uut  Las  Cases  (Dec.  4, 
1816%  i.  490. 

GouLBURN,  Rt.  Hon.  Henry — 
To  Sir  ffudaon  Lowe — 

Aug.  26,  1817. — Concerning  a  letter  of  Count  Bertrand  to  Madame  Lndekerke, 
and  the  purchase  of  certain  political  publications,  iL  4U. 

Jan.  23,  1818. — Informing  him  of  Lord  Bathurst's  cognizance  of  0'Meara*s 
correspondence  with  Mr.  Finlaison,  iii.  384. 

April  30,  1818 — Concerning  Napoleon's  wardrobe,  iii.  396. 

May  23,  1818. — Explanation  couoeming  restrictions,  iii.  401. 

Oct.  31,  1818. — Insisting  on  the  necessity  of  Bonaparte's  being  seen  daily  by 
the  orderly  officer,  iiL  469. 

Nov.  28,  1818.— Stating  the  loss  of  a  letter  from  LordBathurst  recommending 
the  removal  of  CMeara  and  of  the  Goremor's  reply,  and  requesting  copies, 
iii.  472. 

May  31,  1820. — Instructions  in  anticipation  of  acddent  fh>m  Bonaparte's  prac- 
tice of  shooting,  iii.  489. 

GouROAUD,  General — 
To  Sir  Hudson  Lowe — 
Feb.  8,  1818.— Requesting  to  be  sent  to  Europe,  and  meanwhile  to  be  removed 
from  Longwood,  iii.  391. 
To  Count  MoHtholon^ 
Feb.  4,  1818.— Challenging  him  to  fight  a  duel,  iii.  389. 
Feb.  4,  1818. — Reply  to  his  refusal,  and  renewing  the  challenge,  iii.  390. 
To  the  Emperor  Napoleon — 
Feb.  11,  1818.— Farewell  on  leaving  St  Helena,  iii.  391. 

Hardinge,  Sir  Henry — 
To  Sir  Hudson  Lotte — 
April  22, 1815. — Requesting  a  continuance  of  advices;  operations  of  the  cam- 
paign, i.  434. 

Haviside,  Captain- 
To  Sir  Hudson  Loxce — 
Jan.  21,  1823.-'Coutradicting  a  passage  in  O'Meara's  *  Napoleon  in  Exile,* 
iiL  502. 

HoLLANi),  Lord — 

Speech  in  the  House  of  Lords  introducing  his  motion  on  the  treatment  of  Bona- 
parte (March  18,  1817),  ii.  327. 

Lamb,  Captain — 

Deposition  before  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  touching  the  bust  of  Napoleon's  son,  ii.  403. 
Long  WOOD,  Return  of  the  establishment  at  (April  1817),  ii.  380. 
Lows,  Sir  Hudson— 
To  Earl  Bathurst— 
May  13,  1817. — Interview  of  Sir  Pultency  Malcolm  with  Napoleon;  reasons  f>r 

not  profiting  by  the  Admiral's  intermediation,  ii.  382. 
July  2,  1817. — Lord  Amherst's  interview  with  Napoleon,  ii.  389. 
July  27,  1817.— Dissatisfiwtion  with   O'Meara;    relations  with  the  Conimis- 

sionera ;  conduct  of  the  French  officers,  ii.  393. 
June  8,  1817. — Arrival  of  a  bust  of  Napoleon's  son,  ii.  397. 
June  19,  1817. — Proceedings  with  regard  to  the  bust,  ii.  400. 
July  3,  1817. — Further  proceedings  in  the  same  matter,  iL  404. 
Sept.  17,  1817. — Compl^ts  of  the  supply  of  fuel  at  Longwood;  Connt  Moii- 
tholou's  unceasing  demands;  difficulty  of  satisfying  the  exiles ;  good  conduct 
of  Cip.nani,  ii.  418. 


526  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON. 

Lowe,  &r  Hadson — continued. 
To  Earl  Bathurst — continued. 

Dec.  30,  1817. — Observations  on  Count  Bertrand's  letter  of  complaints  of  Sept. 
30,  ii.  426. 

Oct  30,  1817.— Detailing  a  correspondence  with  Count  Bertrand  on  the  ref- 
lations, and  the  offers  of  concessions  to  the  comfort  and  conTcnience  of  Na- 
poleon, ii.  453. 

Oct.  31,  1817.— On  the  subject  of  bulletins  of  Napoleon's  health,  ii.  459. 

Oct.  31,  1817. — The  packet  addressed  to  Lord  Liverpool;  intercourse  of  iJhe 
exiles  with  the  inhabitants ;  the  "  etat  de  choses"  in  the  time  of  Sir  George 
Cockbum,  ii.  462. 

Dec.  18,  1817.— Sending  reports  on  Napoleon's  health;  CMeara's  pledge  to 
Napoleon ;  the  Commissioners,  ii.  468. 

Dec.  26, 1817.— In  continuance  of  his  letter  of  Oct.  30,  and  referring  to  Mr. 
Baxter's  conversation  with  Count  Bertrand  respecting  bulletins,  ii.  486. 

Jan.  20,  1818.— Dissatisfaction  with  O'Meara,  and  review  of  his  proceedings, 
iii.  376. 

Jan.  25,  1818. — Napoleon's  interdict  regarding  bulletins;  O'Meara's  altered 
conduct  with  respect  to  giving  information,  and  his  pledge  to  Ni^Kdeoii;  bia 
letter  to  the  Governor,  and  Sir  Thomas  Reade's  reply,  iii.  384. 

July  27,  1818.— AppcMntment  of  Colonel  Lyster  as  orderiy  officer  atLongwood, 
his  quarrel  with  Count  Bertrand,  and  removal,  iii.  407. 

July  30, 1818.— On  the  subject  of  O'Meara's  removal,  iii.  411. 

Sept  29,  1818.— Sending  report  of  plots  for  eluding  the  reflations;  O'Meara'a 
usolent  conduct  encouraged  by  Napoleon ;  conduct  of  Mr.  Balcombe ;  asnst- 
ance  rendered  the  Governor  by  Admiral  Plampin,  iii.  415. 

Oct.  12,  1818.— Conversations  with  Count  Montholon  on  the  subject  of  Nape* 
Icon's  seclusion  and  Uie  necessity  of  his  admitting  the  orderly  officer  or  & 
medical  attendant;  evil  influence  of  Bertrand  assisted  by  O'Meara,  iii.  420. 

Oct  25,  1818. — Continuance  of  the  interviews  with  Montholon;  Bertrand's 
visit  to  Lieut.  Reardon;  choice  of  medical  attendant,  iu.  425. 

Oct  28,  1818.— Sending  plan  of  new  residence  for  Napoleon  and  list  of  articles 
required ;  sale  of  buildmg  materials,  iii.  428. 

April  3,  1819. — Mr.  Ricketts'  interview  with  Napoleon,  iii.  474. 

April  11, 1821. — Information  concerning  Bonaparte's  fiital  illness,  iii.  496. 

May  6,  1821.—  Napoleon's  death,  and  post-mortem  examination,  iii.  498. 
To  Count  Bertrand— 

Dec  23, 1816.— Announcing  Las  Cases'  decision  to  leave  St  Helena,  iL  318. 

Dec.  29, 1816.— Informing  him  of  Las  Cases'  approaching  embarkation,  and 
concerning  some  of  his  papers,  ii.  320. 

Jan.  28,  1817. — Concerning  a  passage  in  a  letter  to  Mons.  H.  Bertrand,  iL 
322. 

July  2,  1817. — Announcing  Admiral  Plampin's  desire  to  be  presented  to  Bona- 
parte, ii.  388. 

July  10,  1817. — Forwarding  Mr.  Elphinstone's  present,  ii.  391. 

July  25,  1817. — Transmitting,  separately,  a  newspaper  containing  an  announce- 
ment of  Bertrand's  condemnation  for  high  treason,  ii.  393. 

June  16, 1817. — Mode  of  conveyance  to  St  Helena  of  the  bust  of  Napoleon's 
son,  ii.  397, 

July  26,  1817.— Remarks  on  his  letter  to  Radovitch,  ii.  406. 

Oct.  6,  1817.— Offer  of  medical  assistance  to  Napoleon,  ii.  435. 

Oct  21,  1817.— On  Napoleon's  letter  to  Lord  Liverpool,  il  442. 

Oct.  26,  1817.— Offer  of  a  summer  residence  to  Bonaparte,  and  extension  of 
limits,  ii.  444. 

Oct.  26,  1817.— Transmitting  copy  of  the  regulations  in  force ;  complaining  of 
the  use  of  the  imperial  titie,  iL  445. 

Oct  29,  1817. — Sending  extract  from  instructions  concerning  correspondence 
in  the  island,  ii.  447. 
To  Colonel  Bunbury — 

March  26,  1814.— Battie  of  Mon«mirail,  i.  422. 
To  Sir  Henry  Bunbury — 

Jan.  13,  1816. — Measures  for  the  safe  custody  of  Napoleon,  i.  443. 


INDEX.  627 

Lows,  Sir  Un&Bon— continued. 

General  statement  of  his  serrices,  iii.  506. 
To  Mr,  Ooulbum — 

Dec.  18,  1819.— Distribution  of  stores,  iii.  485. 
7b  the  Marquis  de  Montgrand — 
Sept.  17,  1817.— Thaoks  for  a  testimonial  from  the  Monicipal  Council  of  Mar- 
seilles, ii.  417. 
To  Count  MonthoUm — 
Sept.  11,  1816.— Directions  for  the  correspondence  with  him  of  the  French 

officers,  i.  464. 
Sept.  12,  1816. — Answer  to  an  accusation  of  detaining  letters,  i.  465. 
July  12,  1818. — Offering  medical  aid  to  Napoleon,  iii.  403. 
Notes  on  Napoleon's  Observations  on  Lord  Bathorsf  s  speech  of  March  18, 1817, 
ii.  350. 

Notes  in  refutation  of  the  charges  contuned  in  O'Meara's  letter  to  the  Admiralty 

of  Oct  28,  1818,  iii.  430. 
To  Major-General  Oakea — 

July  18,  1809.— Departure  of  Colonel  Bunbury  fh>m  the  army;  his  Capri  re- 
ports, i.  416. 
Observations  iu  reply  to  Napoleon's  Remarks,  &c — see  Regulations. 
Observations  on  Mr.  Balcombe's  report  of  an  interview  with  Napoleon  (Sept.  26, 

1817),  ii.  422. 
Observations  on  the  '  Notes  approuv^  par  Napol^n,'  iii.  365. 
Observations  on  Montholon's  propositions  concerning  the  reception  by  Napoleon 

of  medical  assistance  (April  10,  1819),  iii.  476. 
Observations  on  Count  Montholon's  letter  of  complaints  of  April  8,  1819,  iii. 

480. 
To  Sir  Charles  Stewart^ 

Feb.  17,  1814.— March  upon  Paris,  1814,  i.  419. 
To  Sir  John  Stuart^ 

Oct.  6,  1808.— Defence  of  Capri,  and  loss  of  Ana  Capri,  i.  397. 

Oct  18,  1808. — Surrender  of  the  island  of  Capri,  i.  405. 

Nov.  30, 1808. — Causes  of  the  loss  of  Ana  Capri,  and  arrangements  for  its  de- 
fence, i.  411. 

LuMLET,  Brigadier-General — 
To  LieuL'Colonel  Lowe — 
Oct  28,  1808. — Enclosing  Brigade  order  on  the  defence  and  surrender  of  Capri, 
i.  415. 

MoNTHOix>N,  Count  de — 
To  Sir  George  Cockbum — 
Dec.  21,  1815.— Remonstrance  on  the  subject  of  the  Reg^ulations  concerning 
Napoleon  and  his  suite,  i.  440. 
To  General  Gourgaud — 

Feb.  4,  1814.— Refusing  to  fight  a  duel  with  him,  iii.  390. 
To  Sir  Hudson  Lowe— 
July  8,  1816.— Reply  cooceming  repairs  at  Longwood,  and  complaints  of  the 

situation,  i.  458. 
Aug.  28, 1816.— Remonstrance  on  the  subject  of  Count  Bertrand's  passes,  i. 

460. 
Sept.  9,  1816.— Accusing  him  of  detidning  letters,  and  complaining  generally  of 

the  regulations,  i.  461. 
Sept  11,  1816.— Retuminff  two  letters,  i.  464. 
July  26,  1818. — Napoleon  s  refusal  to  receive  medical  advice^  iiL  418. 
July  26,  1818.— The  same  subject,  iii.  413. 

Apnl  1, 1819. — Propositions  specifying  the  terms  upcm  which  Napoleon  was 
disposed  to  receive  medical  assutanoe;  with  the  Governor's  obsenrationa 
thovoD,  iL%  476. 


528  CAPTIVITY  OF  NAPOLEON. 

MoNTHOLON,  CoTiiit  dc — Continued, 
To  Sir  Hudson  Lowe — continued. 
April  8,  1819. — Complaining  generally  of  the  Governor's  ooodnct,  iii.  478. 
May  5,  1821. — Announcing  the  death  of  Napoleon,  iii.  498. 

Oakes,  Major-General — 

To  Lieut,'  Colonel  Lowe — 
Aug.  29,  1809. — Remonstrating  against  his  intention  of  quitting  the  army,  and 
referring  favourably  to  his  defence  of  Capri,  i.  417. 

O'Mbaba,  Barry  Edward — 
To  Mr.  Croker— 
Oct.  28,  1818.— Charges  i^gainst  Sir  Hudson  Lowe;  with  Notes  by  Sir  Hudson 
in  refutation,  iii.  430. 

To  Major  Gorrequer — 
July  10,  1818.— Medical  treatment  of  Napoleoo;  application  to  Mr.  Stokoe  for 
his  opinion,  iii.  402. 

To  Sir  Hudson  Lowe — 
Dec  16,  1816, — Conversation  with  Napoleon,  ii.  272. 
June  30,  1817.— Napoleon's  remarks  on  Murat  and  on  Maceroni,  ii.  386. 
July  2,  1817.— Napoleon's  remarks  on  the  subject  of  the  bust  of  his  son,  ii.  401. 
Oct  8,  1817. — Report  on  Napoleon's  health,  and  his  refusal  to  take  exercise, 

ii.  436. 
Oct.  15,  1817. — Napoleon's  wishes  regarding  bulletins  of  hb  health,  ii,  437. 
Oct  29,  1817.— The  same  subject,  ii.  448. 
Dec.  23,  1817. — Detailing  his  engagement  to  attend  on  Napoleon  j  question  of 

bulletins;  complaints  of  the  Governor's  conduct,  ii.  469. 
7b  Sir  Thomas  Reade— 
June  20,  1817. — Conversation  with  Napoleon  concerning  the  bust  of  his  son, 

ii.  398. 

Opinion  of  the  Solicitor-General  and  Mr.  "Hndal  as  to  the  course  to  be  pursued 
by  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  with  reference  to  O'Meara's  book,  *  Napoleon  in 
Exile,  or  a  Voice  from  St  Helena,'  iiL  501. 

Reade,  Sir  Thomas — 

To  Sir  Hudson  Lowe — 
Feb.  20, 1819.— Statement  by  the  town-major  that  he  had  seen  in  Mr.  Bal- 
combe's  possession  a  bill  for  4000/.  signed  *'  Napoleon,"  iii,  473. 
7b  Mr,  O'Meara— 
Jan.  19, 1818.— Remarks  on  his  letter  of  Dec  23,  1817,  ii.  472. 
April  10,  1818. — Conveying  to  him  the  Governor's  order  not  to  quit  Longwood, 
except  in  specified  cases  (published  by  O'Meara  instead  of  the  preceding 
letter),  ii.  486. 

Regulations,  heads  of  some  proposed  Alterations  in  (Oct  9,  1816),  with  Remarks 
approved  by  Napoleon,  and  Sir  Hudson  Lowe's  Observations  in  reply,  i.  4C6. 

Retherwick,  or  Radovitch,  Filippo — 
To  Sir  Hudson  Lowe — 
June  23, 1817.— Concerning  his  bringing  out  a  bust  of  Napoleon's  ssm^  and 
asking  permission  to  land,  ii.  399.  ' 
Examined  concerning  his  alleged  loss  (July  19,  1817),  ii.  402. 
Return  of  the  establishment  at  Longwood  (April,  1817),  ii.  380. 
Robinson,  Mr. — 

Communication  to  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  respecting  Napoleon's  intimacy  with  his 
family,  ii.  466. 

Stewart,  Sir  Charles  (Marquis  of  Londonderry) — 
To  Colonel  Lowe — 
Feb.  13, 1814. — Thanking  him  for  reports:  movements  of  the  troops  in  Prai.ce. 
i.  421. 


INDEX.  529 

Stewabt,  Sir  Chtalea— continued. 
To  Mcnor-  General  Lowe — 
April  14,  1814. — Transmitdng  letter  from  Colonel  Thiele  with  the  Prussian 
Order  of  Merit,  i.  429. 

Stokoe,  Mr. — 

To  Admiral  Plampin — 
July  13, 1818.~-StatiDg  his  unwillingness  to  visit  Napoleon  alone,  iii.  404. 

Stuaet,  Sir  John — 

To  Lieut,-Colonel  Lowe — 
Oct.  31,  1808.— Expressing  satisftustion  with  the  defence  of  Capri,  i.  413, 
Oct.  31,  1808. — Requesting  an  abstract  of  events  at  Capri,  i.  414. 

SriCrBMER,  Baron— 

To  Prince  Mettemich^ 
Reporting  his  conversation  with  General  Gonrgaud  concerning  Napoleon,  iii. 
392. 
Thiele,  Colonel  Von— 

To  Sir  Charles  Stewart— 
April  11,  1814. — Transmitting  Prussian  Order  of  Merit  for  General  Lowe, 
1.  430. 

Wabrant  for  the  detention  of  Napoleon  Buonaparte  (April  12, 1816),  i.  4.'^2. 


TUE    END. 


IA)M>ON  :   PI(1>T£0  BY  W.  CLOWES  AND  eOM<,  STAMFORD  STR£ET. 

VOL.  III.  2    M 


/.<>• 


RETURN  TO:      CIRCULATION  DEPARTMENT 
198  Main  Stacks 


LOAN  PERIOD     1 
Home  Use 

2 

3 

4 

5 

1   ^ 

ALL  BOOKS  MAY  BE  RECALLED  AFTER  7  DAYS. 

Renewals  and  Recharges  may  be  made  4  days  prior  to  the  due  date. 
Books  may  be  renewed  by  catling  642-3405. 

DUE  AS  STAMPED  BELOW. 

SEP  0  9  2004 

FORM  NO.  DD6 
50M    4-04 


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA,  BERKELEY 
Berkeley.  California  94720-6000 


the  aaptivi- 


Hk.k*  —  , — - ..^ 


MAR  18  1937 


v.s3 


UNIVERSmr  OF  CALIFORNIA  UBRAfOT 


