UC-NRLF 


-*'ir^^'< 


B    3    437    33S 


;i. 


',<?**   "^i 


'3. 


"^•O' 


^^ 


B^-  '1  ^viW-r 


^*?<<!?^  L"«l! 


X^ 


i:^/*-   %. 


•^-.1 


--.i  i. , 


-<" 


J  4     >ri^ 


..-!5* 


^f^-^, 


IV 


^^aSfc^ 


5      ^'#    :uv^«'«^<        \  \^ 


,^\ 


r/  ' 


/V 


% 


f* 


'.i;. 


«fe^ 


i 


\n 


.^- 


*.   -<i 


AHOVER      LIBRARY 
.16 


LETTERS 

WRITTEN    ON    BOARD 

ms  i«a|«sta'is  ^6{J>  t6«  i^ortfiumfierlanJj, 

AND 

SAINT  HELENA; 


IN  WHICH 


THE  CONDUCT  AND  CONVERSATIONS 

OF 

Napoleon  25ttonaparte, 

AND  HIS  SUITE, 

DURING  THE  VOYAGE,    AND   THE    FIRST  MONTHS   OF    HIS    RESIDENCE   IN 
THAT    ISLAND, 

ARE  FAITHFULLY  DESCRIBED  AND  RELATED, 


BY  WILLIAM  WARDEN, 

Surgeon  on  hoard  the  NortJmmberland, 


NON    EGO,    SED    DEMOCRITUS    DIXIT. 


FOURTH  EDITION. 


Hotttron: 

PUBLISHED  FOR  THE  AUTHOR, 
BY  R.  ACKERMANN,  No.  101,  STRAND; 

And  may  he  had  of  all  Booksellers  in  the  United  Kingdom. 

1816. 


Printed  by  W.  Ciowes, 
Northumbeilaud- court,  Strand. 


INTRODUCTION. 


HAVING  sailed  in  my  professional 
character  on  board  the  ship  which  carried 
Napoleon  Buonaparte  to  Si,  Helena^ 
and  having  remained  several  months  on 
the  Island,  the  enquiries  concei^tlijig  him, 
on  my  return  to  England,  were  so  re- 
peated, that  I  may  be  said  to  have  been 
in  a  state  of  persecution  from  the  curiosity 
which  prevails  respecting  that  extraordi- 
nary character.  Circumstances,  con- 
nected with  my  profession,  gave  me  fre- 
quent opportunities  of  conversing  with 
him ;  and  with  the  principal  persons  of 
his  suite,  I  may  be  said,  particularly 
during  the  voyage,  to  have  hved  in  rather 
intimate  society. 


VI  INTRODUCTION. 

The  subjects  of  various  conversations 
with  him,  and  with  them,  I  committed  to 
my  Journal,  from  whose  pages  the  fol- 
lowing Letters  were  formed,  with  such 
additions  as  might  occur  to  my  recollec- 
tion at  the  time  they  were  written. — No 
idea,  however,  could  be  more  remote 
from  my  mind,  than  that  they  would 
extend  beyond  the  circle  for  whose  grati- 
fication they  were  composed.  But  a 
wish  for  their  publication  seemed  to  meet 
me  wherever  I  went ;  the  most  minute 
circumstance  respecting  the  present  point 
of  Napoleon's  career,  appeared  to  excite 
an  extraordinary  Interest,  and  I  have 
yielded,  rather  reluctantly,  to  become  an 
Author,  from  persuasions  I  scarce  knew 
how  to  resist ;  and  to  which,  I  had  some 
reasons  to  suspect  resistance  might  be  in 
vain.  Whether  these  Letters  will 
answer  the  general  expectations  of  those 
who  have  seen,  and  of  a  still  far  greater 
number  of  those  who  have  only  heard  of, 


INTRODUCTION.  VU 

them,  I  do  not  consider  myself  as  qualified 
to  judge.  All  I  have  to  say  in  their  fa- 
vour is  this : — That  every  fact  related  in 
them  is  true  ;  and  the  purport  of  every 
conversation  correct. — It  will  not,  I  trust, 
be  thought  necessary  for  me  to  say  more; 
— and  the  Justice  I  owe  to  myself,  will 
not  allow  me  to  say  less. 

William  Warden. 


1  was  induced  to  give  a  Plate  of  Na- 
poleon, which  is  copied  from  a  French 
Engraving,  because,  and  I  consider  my- 
self as  perfectly  Master  of  his  Lineaments, 
I  think  it  the  most  decided  Likeness  that 
has  been  given  of  him. 

Fac  Similes  of  the  writing  of  extraor- 
dinary men  are,  I  am  told,  particular 
objects  of  research,  and  therefore  I  have 
introduced    the   graphic   Characters  of 


INTRODUCTION.  Vll 

them,  I  do  not  consider  myself  as  qualified 
to  judge.  All  I  have  to  say  in  their  fa- 
vour is  this : — That  every  fact  related  in 
them  is  true  ;  and  the  purport  of  every 
conversation  correct. — It  will  not,  I  trust, 
be  thought  necessary  for  me  to  say  more ; 
— and  the  Justice  I  owe  to  myself,  will 
not  allow  me  to  say  less. 

William  Warden. 


1  was  induced  to  give  a  Plate  of  Na- 
poleon, which  is  copied  from  a  French 
Engraving,  because,  and  I  consider  my- 
self as  perfectly  Master  of  his  Lineaments, 
I  think  it  the  most  decided  Likeness  that 
has  been  given  of  him. 

Fac  Similes  of  the  writing  of  extraor- 
dinary men  are,  I  am  told,  particular 
objects  of  research,  and  therefore  I  have 
introduced    the   graphic   Characters  of 


Vlll  INTRODUCTION. 

Napoleon,  in  a  note  on  General  Ber- 
trand's  Sketch  of  the  Battle  of  Areola. 

The  Medal  was  struck  on  Napoleon^s 
marriage  :  the  Original,  which  is  in  gold, 
was  presented  to  me  by  General  Bertrand. 
He  considered  it  as  of  great  Medallic 
value  from  its  raritj.  I  have  since  heard, 
however,  that  these  Medals  are  by  no 
means  uncommon,  at  least  in  inferior 
metal.  But  be  that  as  it  may,  an  apology 
will  not,  I  presume,  be  thought  necessary 
for  having  given  an  engraving  of  it. — At 
the  same  time  it  may  be  proper  to  observe, 
that  the  smaller  circle  is  the  size  of  the 
Medal.  The  emblematic  representation 
was  enlarged  for  the  better  illustration  of 
the  design. 


LETTERS 

FROM 

SAINT  HELENA, 

Sfc.  Sfc.  Sfc. 


At  Sea, 


MY    DEAR 


IT  is,  certainly,  not  the  first  time 
that  I  have  been  induced  to  exclaim  how 
strange  and  unexpected  are  the  occurrences 
of  Life  ;  how  frequently  is  the  calm  of  to-day 
succeeded  by  the  storm  of  to-morrow,  and 
the  ordinary  course  of  Nature  interrupted  by 
phoenomena,  which  the  Philosopher  himself 
is  puzzled  to  explain :  But  the  world  of  po- 
litics illustrates  the  Doctrine  of  Wonders  as 
much  as  the  operations  of  the  Elements. — 
Nothing,  I  presume,  could  have  been  less 
probable  to  the  view  of  Captain  Maitland's 
mind  when  he  was  ordered  on  duty  ofFRoch- 

B 


(     2     ) 

fort  than  the  voluntary  surrender  of  the  Ex- 
emperor  of  France  and  his  suite,  with  bag  and 
baggage,  on  board  the  Bellerophon,  To  have 
taken  the  ship  on  which  he  might  have  at- 
tempted to  make  his  escape,  was  a  natural 
expectation,  as  it  would  have  been  a  probable 
event ;  but  the  manner  in  which  such  an  ex- 
traordinary person  submitted  himself  to  his 
custody,  must  have  taken  him,  which  could 
not  have  happened  in  any  other  part  of  his 
duty,  by  surprize.  Indeed,  to  compare  small 
things  with  great,  I  cannot  reconcile  to  my 
common  notions  of  probability  the  subject  of 
my  present  Epistle,  and  that  the  Letters 
which  you  would  naturally  expect  to  receive 
from  me,  instead  of  the  common  topics  of  a 
sea  voyage,  should  contain  an  account  of  the 
conduct,  and  information  respecting  the  cha- 
racter of  Napoleon  Buonaparte,  from  the  per- 
sonal opportunities  which  my  situation  so  un- 
expectedly afforded  me. 

Such  has  been  the  attention  which  this 
eminent  person  has  attracted  ;  so  great  the 
daily  croud  of  boats,  and  other  vessels  filled 


(    3     ) 

with  curious  spectators,  (some  of  wliom  it  is 
confidently  said,  have  come  on  purpose  from 
remote  parts  of  the  country,  and  even  from  Lon- 
don,) to  snatch  such  a  glimpse  of  him  as  could 
be  caught  at  the  distance  they  were  obliged 
to  keep  from  the  Bellerophon^  on  whose  gang- 
way he  occasionally  stood  ;  that  1  feel  myself 
more  than  justified  in  supposing  the  most 
trifling  particulars,  respecting  him  and  his 
suite,  to  be  welcome  to  you  and  those  of  our 
comUion  friends,  to  whom  you  may  chuse  to 
communicate  them  !  and  of  this  you  may 
be  assured,  that  I  shall  inform  you  of  little 
that  occurred  after  Napoleon  put  his  foot  on 
the  deck  of  our  ship  but  what  I  m}  self  saw  and 
heard.  My  piece-meal  narrative,  for  such  it 
must  be,  will  have  the  merit  of  authenticity, 
if  it  should  be  thought  to  have  no  other.  I 
have  written  down  every  thing  respecting  our 
distinguished  passenger,  as  it  has  hitherto 
happened  ;  and  I  shall  continue  to  do  so  as  cir- 
cumstances occur,  in  the  way  best  suited  to  a 
Seaman,  by  adopting  the  form  of  a  JournaL 
You  must,  therefore,  expect  nothing  but  a 
succession  of  detached  articles  ;  a  recital  of 

b2 


(     4     ) 

domestic  occurrences,  if  I  may  use  the  ex- 
pression, on  board  a  ship,  as  they  occurred, 
^vhen  the  Ex-emperor  offered  himself  to  my 
observation  ;  and  1  shall  begin  Avith  his  short 
passage  from  the  Bellerophon  to  the  North- 
umberland. 

On  the  3d  of  August,  1815,  his  Majesty's 
ship  Northumberland  J  Captain  Ross,  bearing 
the  flag  of  Admiral  Sir  George  Cockburn, 
who  was  selected  by  Government  for  this  im- 
portant duty,  weighed  anchor  from  Spithead, 
and,  after  having  contended  with  adverse 
winds,  came  within  sight  of  the  Berry-head, 
a  head-land  forming  the  extremity  of  Torbay, 
at  an  early  hour  of  the  day.  She  was  there 
joined  by  the  Tonnant,  Captain  Brenton, 
bearing  the  flag  of  Lord  Keith,  Admiral  of 
the  Channel  fleet,  accompanied  by  the  Bel- 
lerophon,  Captain   Maitland,  the  latter  ship 

having  onboard  Napoleon  Buonaparte. 

As  soon  as  signals  were  exchanged  with  the 
approaching  ship,  a  salute  was  fired  from 
the  Northumberland,  and  answered  by  the 
Tonnant. — Lord  Keith,  having  had  au  inter- 


(     5     ) 

y'lew  with  sir  George  Cockburn,  anchored  un- 
der Berry-head,  to  avoid,  as  it  was  supposed, 
the  eager  curiosity  of  the  very  numerous  visi- 
tors in  all  descriptions  of  vessels,  who  con- 
stantly surrounded  the  Bellerophon,  The  re- 
mainder of  the  evening  passed  without  any 
occurrence  that  is  worthy  of  notice. 

On  the  following  morning,  the  Count  de 
las  Cases,  Chamberlain  to  the  Ex-emperor, 
came  on  board  to  arrange  the  requisite  ac- 
commodations for  his  fallen  master.  The 
baggage  followed — nor  shall  I  attempt  to  de- 
scribe the  universal  and  anxious  curiosity 
which  was  displayed  on  board,  to  see  the  effects 
of  the  extraordinary  personage  to  whom  they 
belonged  ;  the  sole  remaining  possessions  of 
a  man  who  had  so  lately  commanded  the  art, 
industry,  and  produce  of  many  kingdoms  : 
But  it  was  not  calculated  to  gratify  the  ex- 
pectation that  awaited  its  arrival  One  ma- 
hogany case,  indeed,  was  distinguished  by  the 
Imperial  arms,  but  the  rest  exhibited  no  better 
figure  and  appearance  than  the  properties  of 
anitinerari  theatie. 


(     6     ) 

The  Count  de  las  Cases  does  not  exceed 
five  feet  and  an  inch  in  heiglit,  and  appears 
to  be  fifty  years  of  age,  of  a  meagre  form, 
and  with  a  wrinkled  forehead  :  His  dress 
was  a  French  naval  uniform.  His  stay  on 
board  the  I^  or  thumb  er  land  did  not  exceed  an 
hour ;  but,  while  he  was  employed  in  the  hasty 
discharge  of  his  office,  his  diminutive  ap- 
pearance did  not  fail  to  invite  observations 
from  the  inquisitive  beholders.  Some  of 
them,  I  could  fancy,  expected  Herculean  fi- 
gures to  be  employed  in  the  service  of  a  man 
who  had  lately  bestrode  so  large  a  portion 
of  Europe.  If  there  were  any  under  such  im- 
pressions, and  we  never  can  answer  for  the 
impression  of  the  moment,  they  had  certainly 
forgotten,  if  they  had  ever  been  informed, 
that  Alexander  the  Great,  the  mighty  Lord 
of  vanquished  nations,  is  represented  in  his- 
tory as  a  man  of  small  stature — and,  indeed, 
they  were  shortly  to  be  convinced,  that  Bona- 
parte himself  would  not  gratify  any  expecta- 
tions of  an  athletic  fignrce 

From  eleven  to  twelve  we  were  prepared 


(     7    ) 

to  receive  Napoleon  on  board — and,  Lord 
Keith,  as  it  may  be  presumed,  from  a  noble 
delicacy  to  his  situation  and  feelings,  declined 
receiving  the  usual  compliments  attendant  on 
his  rank,  that  they  might,  according  to  their 
settled  form,  devolve  on  the  Ex^emperor,  whose 
sounding  Titles  had  passed  away  with  the 
power  that  bestowed  them,  The  rank  of 
General  is  considered  as  adequate  to  all  his 
claims  on  a  Government  who  never  acknow- 
ledged him  under  any  other.  A  Captain^s 
guard  of  marines  was  arranged  on  the  poop, 
to  wait  his  arrival,  with  orders  to  present 
arms,  and  the  drum  to  beat  the  roll  thrice; 
the  usual  salute  to  a  general  officer  in  the 
British  service. 

The  barge  of  the  Tonnant  reached  the 
Northumberland  in  a  few  minutes  after  it 
left   the   Bellerophon  ^.      Our   quarter-deck 

*  I  have  been  given  to  understand  that  Buonaparte's 
conduct  on  board  the  Bellerophon  had  been  such  as  rather 
to  conciliate  the  good  humour  of  all  on  board,  so  that  his 
departure  was  not  attead4^d  with  the  slightest  mark  of 
disapprobation  or  disrespect ;  but  with  that  kind  of  awful 
silence  which  accompanies  the  fatal  close  of  a  public  exe- 
cution. 


(     8     ) 

was  covered  with  officers,  and  there  were 
also  some  individuals  of  rank,  who  had 
come  round  from  motives  of  curiosity,  to 
view  the  passing  scene.  Besides  the  object 
of  general  attraction  and  attention,  the  Barge 
contained  Lord  Keith  and  Sir  George  Cock- 
burn,  Marshal  Bertrand^  who  had  shared  in 
all  his  Imperial  Master^s  fortunes,  and  the 
Generals  Montholon  and  Coiirgon,  who  had 
been,  and  still  continued  to  retain  the  titles  of, 
his  Aides-de-Camp.  As  the  Boat  approached, 
the  figure  of  Napoleon  was  readily  distinguish- 
ed, from  his  apparent  resemblance  to  the  va- 
rious prints  of  him  which  are  displayed  in  the 
windows  of  the  shops.  The  Marines  occupied 
the  front  of  the  poop,  and  the  officers  kept  the 
quarter-deck.  An  universal  silence  prevailed 
when  the  Barge  reached  the  side,  and  there  was 
a  grave,  but  anxious  aspect  in  all  the  specta- 
tors which,  in  the  opinion  of  others  as  well  as 
myself,  was  no  small  addition  to  the  solem- 
nity of  the  ceremonial.  Count  Bertrand  as- 
cended first,  and  having  bowed,  retired  a  few 
steps  to  give  place  to  him  whom  he  still  con- 
sidered as  his  Master,  and  in  whose  presence 
he  appeared  to  feel  that  all  his  most  respectful 


{    9    ) 

homage  was  still  due.  The  whole  ship's  com- 
pany seemed  at  this  moment  to  be  in  breath- 
less expectation.  Lord  Keith  w  as  the  last  who 
quitted  the  barge,  and  I  cannot  give  yon  a 
more  complete  idea  of  the  wrapped  attention 
of  all  onboard  to  the  figureof  Napoleon,  than 
that  his  Lordship,  high  as  he  is  in  naval  cha- 
racter, Admiral  also  of  the  Channel  Fleet,  to 
which  we  belonged,  arrayed  in  the  full  uni- 
form of  his  rank,  and  emblazoned  with  the 
decorations  of  his  orders,  did  not  seem  to  be 
noticed,  nor  scarcely  even  lo  be  seen,  among 
the  group  which  was  subject  to  him. 

With  a  slow  step  Buonaparte  mounted  the 
gangway,  and,  on  feeling  himself  firm  on  the 
quarter-deck,  he  raised  his  hat,  when  the 
guard  presented  arms  and  the  drum  rolled. 
The  officers  of  the  Northumherland^  who 
were  uncovered,  stood  considerably  in  ad- 
vance. Those  he  approached,  and  saluted 
with  an  air  of  the  most  affable  politeness. 
He  then  addressed  himself  to  Sir  George 
Cockburn,  and  hastily  asked  for  the  Capitaine 
de  Vaisseati,  Avho  was  immediately  introduced; 


(     10     ) 

but  finding  that  he  did  not  speak  French,  he 
successively  spoke  to  several  others,  till  an 
officer  of  artillery  replied  to  him  in  that  lan- 
guage. Lord  Lowther,  and  the  Honourable 
Mr.  Lyttelton  v.  ere  then  introduced  to  him  ; 
and,  in  a  few  minutes,  he  intimated  a  desire, 
though  more  by  gesture  than  by  words,  to 
enter  the  cabin,  where  he  continued  for  about 
an  hour. 

His  dress  was  that  of  a  General  of  French 
infantry,  when  it  formed  a  part  of  his  Army. 
The  coat  was  green  faced  with  white ;  the 
rest  was  white,  with  white  silk  stockings,  and 
a  handsome  shoe  with  gold  oval  buckles.  He 
was  decorated  with  a  red  ribbon  and  a  star,  with 
three  medals  suspended  from  a  button-hole. 
One  of  them  represented  the  iron  crown, 
and  the  others,  different  gradations  of  the  Le- 
gion of  Honour.  His  face  was  pale,  and  his 
beard  of  an  unshaven  appearance.  Indeed, 
his  general  aspect  justified  the  conjecture  that 
he  had  not  passed  the  preceding  night  in 
sound  repose.  His  forehead  is  thinly  covered 
with  dark  hair,  as  well  as  the  top  of  his  head, 


(  11  ) 

which  is  large,  and  has  a  singular  flatness : 
what  hair  he  has  behind,  is  bushy,  and  I  could 
not  discern  the  slightest  mixture  of  white  in 
it.  His  eyes,  which  are  grey,  are  in  continual 
motion,  and  hurry  rapidly  to  the  various 
objects  around  him.  His  teeth  are  regular 
and  good  ;  his  neck  is  short,  but  his  shoul- 
ders of  the  finest  proportion.  The  rest  of 
his  figure,  though  a  little  blended  with  the 
Dutch  fulness,  is  of  a  very  handsome  form. 

It  may  be  thought,  perhaps,  that  1  am 
very  minute  in  my  description  of  this  distin- 
guished person, — but  I  fancied  you  would 
expect  it  of  me,  and  that  your  well-known, 
predominant  curiosity  on  the  subject  must 
be  gratified  by  it.  Besides,  I  may  be  naturally 
induced,  from  my  studies,  my  profession,  and 
my  habits,  to  examine  the  human  figure  with 
an  anatomical  eye  ;  and,  on  particular  occa- 
sions and  with  particular  objects,  I  have 
sometimes  ventured,  for  I  may  safely  acknow- 
ledge it  to  you,  to  indulge  a  reverie  as  to 
the  conformation  of  the  human  frame,  and 
deduce  notions,  erroneous  enough  perhaps, 


(     t2     ) 

from  a  comparative  view  of  corporal  form 
and  structure,  Mith  intellectual  capacity  and 
leading  dispositions.  Indeed,  I  am  ready 
to  acknowledge  that  1  actually  presumed  to 
play  Lavater  a  little  with,  the  late  Emperor 
of  France  and  King  of  Italy — but  I  shall  not 
trouble  you,  at  present,  w  ith  the  result  of  my 
vagaries. 

On  returning  upon  deck,  he  engaged  in 
conversation  with  Lord  Lowther,  Mr.  Lyttel- 
ton,  and  Sir  George  Byngham,  for  an  hour 
before  dinner. — It  is  understood,  that  he  com- 
plained of  the  severity  with  which  he  was 
treated,  in  being  consigned  to  pass  his  days 
on  the  Rock  of  St.  Helena,  buffetted  by  the 
winds,  and  amidst  the  waste  of  waters ;  and 
that  he  could  not  comprehend  the  policy  or 
the  apprehensions  of  England  in  refusing  him 
an  asylum,  now  that  his  political  career  was 
terminated.  He  continued  to  repeat  a  suc- 
cession of  questions  to  the  same  effect,  with 
some  degree  of  impetuosity  ;  but  it  would  be 
taking  a  liberty  with  Mr.  Lyttelton,  w  ho  prin- 
cipally maintained  the  discourse  with  him,  to 


(    13    ) 

repeat  that  Gentleman's  replies  from  the  in- 
formation of  others.  I  shall  only  observe,  that 
they  were  accompanied  with  that  courteous 
address  which  might  be  expected  of  him. 

In  a  conversation  which  I  had  with  Count 
Bertrand  on  the  following  day,  he  complained 
in  very  forcible  terms,  of  the  needless  cruelty 
of  their  allotment.  The  Emperor,  he  said,  for 
that  title  he  continued  to  receive  from  his  at- 
tendants, had  throvvn  himself  on  the  mercy  of 
England,  from  a  full  and  consoling  confidence 
that  he  should  there  find  a  place  of  refuge. 
He  asked,  what  worse  fate  could  have  befallen 
him,  had  he  been  taken  a  prisoner  on  board 
an  American  ship,  in  which  he  might  have 
endeavoured  to  make  his  escape.  He  rea- 
soned, for  some  time,  on  the  probability  of 
success  in  such  an  attempt ;  and  they  might 
now,  he  added,  have  cause  to  repent  that  his 
Imperial  Master  had  not  risqued  it. — He  then 
proceeded  : — 

"  Could  not  the  Emperor  think  you,  have 
placed  himself  at  the  head  of  the  army  of  the 


(    14    ) 

Loire  ?  and  can  you  persuade  yourself  that 
it  would  not  have  been  proud  to  ranere  itself 
under  his  command  ?  And  is  it  not  possible 
— nay,  more  than  probable,  that  he  would 
have  been  joined  by  numerous  adherents 
from  the  North,  the  South,  and  the  East? 
Nor  can  it  be  denied  that  he  might  have 
placed  himself  in  such  a  position,  as  to  have 
made  far  better  terms  for  himself  than  have 
now  been  imposed  upon  him.  It  was  to 
save  the  further  effusion  of  blood  that  he 
threw  himself  into  your  arms  ;  that  he  trusted 
to  the  honour  of  a  nation  famed  for  its 
generosity  and  love  of  justice  ;  nor  would 
it  have  been  a  disgrace  to  England  to  have 
acknowledged  Napoleon  Buonaparte  as  a 
citizen.  He  demanded  to  be  enrolled  among 
the  humblest  of  them  ;  and  wished  for  little 
more  than  the  Heavens  as  a  covering,  and 
the  soil  of  England,  on  which  he  might  tread 
in  safety.  Was  this  too  much  for  such  a  man 
to  ask  ? — surely  not :  nor  could  such  a  man 
imagine,  in  any  moment  of  depression,  if  it 
were  possible  for  such  a  spirit  as  his  to  be  so 
depressed,  that  the  boon  would  be  refused 


{    15    ) 

him.  It  might  rather  have  been  a  subject 
of  pride  to  England,  that  the  conqueror  of 
almost  all  Europe  but  herself,  sought,  in  his 
adverse  fortune,  to  pass  the  remainder  of  a 
life,  which  forms  so  splendid  an  epocha  in 
the  history  of  our  age,  in  any  retired  spot  of 
her  domains,  which  did  might  have  allotted 
him/' 

He  acknowledged  that  Napoleon  had 
consulted  him  as  to  the  probable  magnani- 
mity  of  the  English  government,  on  the  mea- 
sure then  in  contemplation  ;  but  in  this  in- 
stance, he  said,  "  I  refused  the  opinion  which 
he  requested  of  me.  It  was  not  from  any  pre- 
conceived opinion  to  the  prejudice  of  the 
English  nation,  no,— far  from  it,  that  I  he- 
sitated for  once  to  obey  him.  But  I  could 
not  allow  myself  to  become  his  counsellor  in 
such  a  critical  moment,  and  on  a  matter  of  so 
much  importance  to  the  comfort  of  his  future 
life  and  the  honour  of  his  name.  I  was  not 
afraid  of  any  personal  injury  being  offered  to 
him  :  of  that  I  entertained  not  the  shadow  of 
an  apprehension ;  but  I  thought  it  not  im- 


(     16    ) 

possible  that  his  liberty  might  be  endangered, 
as  indeed  it  was,  by  the  resolution  of  that 
hour.  I  was  so  agitated  by  my  hopes  and 
mv  fears  in  alternate  succession,  that  1  could 
only  beg  of  him  to  accept  my  loyal  and  faith- 
ful assurance  that  I  would  wait  upon  his 
fortunes  whatever  they  might  be ;  but  it 
was  for  him  alone  to  shape  the  way  to  them. 
Nor  can  I  express,"  he  added,  "  how  much  I 
rejoice  at  my  persevering  resolution;  for  had 
any  opinion  of  mine  been  accessary,  in  the 
slightest  degree,  to  the  situation  in  which 
I  now  behold  my  Emperor,  I  should  never 
again  enjoy  a  peaceful  moment/'  The  terms 
in  which  he  expressed  his  thoughts,  and  the 
tones  which  animated  them,  proved  the 
state  of  his  feelings.  There  was  a  kind  of 
soldier-like  resolution  in  his  manner  ;  but,  I 
could  perceive  that  sorrow  was  in  his  heart  : 
and  firm  as  I  am  in  my  loyalty  as  an  English- 
man, and  proud  as  I  am,  and  as  every  man, 
born  in  our  glorious  island  ought  to  be,  of 
that  distinguished  name,  and  though  his  en- 
thusiasm betrayed  him  into  sentiments  and 
opinion,  in  which  I  could  not,  by  any  means, 


(    17    ) 

acquiesce,  I  do  not  hesitate  to  acknowledge 
my  disposition  to  admire  the  emotions  of  this 
faithful  Frenchman. 

Madame  Bertrand's  complaints  were  dif- 
ferent in  their  character  as  well  as  language 
from  those  of  the  Count  her  husband  :  her 
air  and  manner  were  sometimes  even  accom- 
panied with  a  gleam  of  distraction.  "  What 
can  you  think/'  she  once  said  to  me,  "  of  my 
situation  ?  does  it  not  appear  to  you  to  be 
most  lamentable  ;  and  where  are  expressions 
to  be  found  that  can  suit  the  description  of  it 
to  the  poignancy  of  my  feelings  ?  What  a 
change  for  a  woman  who  had  held  a  high 
rank  in  the  gayest  and  most  splendid  court  in 
Europe  ;  where  her  consequence  was  such  that 
thousands  sought  her  smiles  and  were  proud 
to  bask  in  them.  The  wife  of  Count  Ber- 
trand,  Grand  Marshal  of  the  Palace  of  the 
Emperor  of  France  is  now  destined  with  her 
three  children,  to  accompany  an  exiled  hus- 
band to  an  insulated  Rock,  where  the  pride 
of  station,  the  pomp  of  life,  and  the  song  of 
pleasure,  wall  be  exchanged  for  a  scene   of 

c 


(    18    ) 

captivity  ;  and  such,  with  all  its  promised  at- 
tentions and  indulgencies,  it  must  appear  to 
us,  surrounded  as  it  is,  by  the  barrier  of  a 
boundless  ocean/' 

She  was  curious  to  know  what  the  people 
of  England  thought  of  her  husband  ;  when  I 
told  her  that,  as  far  as  I  could  judge,  they 
entertained  an  higher  opinion  of  him  than 
of  any  Marshal  of  France,  and  that  his  faith- 
ful  attachment  to  Napoleon  had  a  romantic 
air  which  was  not  without  its  admir'^rs  in 
England.  It  was,  indeed,  in  consequence  of 
that  determined  feeling,  in  opposition  to  what 
might  be  supposed  to  be  his  real  interest,  and 
the  earnest  entreaties  of  his  family,  that 
Madame  Bertrand  had  well  nigh  completed 
an  act  of  suicide.  The  agonizing  attempt  to 
throw  herself  from  the  Bellerophon  into  the 
sea  took  place,  it  seems,  in  the  evening  of  the 
day  when  Napoleon  was  informed  of  his  fu- 
ture allotment,  and,  probably,  at  the  moment 
when  the  afflicting  communication  was  first 
made  to  her. 


(     19    ) 

The  Little  Bertrands  Bre  interesting  chil- 
dren :  the  youngest  is  between  three  and  four 
years  old ;  the  eldest  is  ^  native  of  Trieste,  and 
was  born  when  his  father  was  Governor  of  the 
Ill^rian  Provinces  ;'  the  second  is  a  girl  of  an 
animated  disposition,  that  betrays  occasional 
symptoms  of  violence.  The  military  charac- 
ter appears  to  have  almost  exclusively  seized 
on  the  infant  minds  of  these  sprightly  urchins  : 
from  morning  till  night  they  are  employed  in 
fencing,  marching,  charging  on  a  half-canter, 
in  imitation  of  cavalry,  ^c.  ^c.  in  which  the 
girl  joins  with  a  true  Amazonian  spirit,  under 
the  direction  of  a  little  French  boy,  who,  I 
presume,  w  as  born  in  a  camp. 

When  I  accidentally  mentioned  to  Madame 
Bertrand  that  it  had  been  generally  supposed 
she  intended  to  have  remained  in  England,  for 
the  education  of  her  children,  she,  with  a  kind 
of  wild  but  interesting  expression  of  counte- 
nance, not  unusual  with  her,  vehemently  ex- 
claimed ''  What,  Sir,  leave  my  husband  at 
such  a  moment !  That  is  a  degree  of  heroism 
which  my  heart  disavows :  though  in  a  year, 
c  2 


(    20    ) 

perhaps,  I  may  be  induced  to  return/*  And 
on  my  suggesting  that  a  favourable  opportu- 
nity  would  be  offered  on  board  the  Northum- 
berland, she  appeared  to  acquiesce  in  the  pro- 
bability of  such  an  event. 

Neither  Count  or  Madame  Montholon 
can  speak  English :  he  is  a  handsome  little 
man,  and  she  a  very  elegant  woman ;  they 
have  one  coamion  comfort,  and  they  seem 
to  think  it  so,  in  a  charming  little  boy : 
You  must  perceive,  that  I  am  by  degrees, 
though  rather  in  an  irregular  manner,  making 
you  acquainted  with  the  whole  of  our  cu- 
rious party ;  but  you  must  be  sensible  that 
it  is  the  best  mode  which  I  can  employ. 

— Buonaparte,  previous  to  his  leaving  the 
Bellerophon,  was,  it  seems,  recommended  to 
select  three  of  his  suite  to  accompany  him  to 
St.  Helena.  Bertrand  was,  at  that  time,  sup- 
posed  to  be  particularly  proscribed  ;  but  it  is 
understood  that  Lord  Keith  took  upon  himself 
the  reponsibihty  of  including  such  an  at- 
tached  friend  in  the  number  of  the  exiled 


(    21    ) 

Generars  attendants.  The  others  were  the 
Count  de  las  Cases,  who  had  been  a  Captain  in 
the  French  Navy,  and  is  a  man  of  Hterary  at- 
tainments ;  General  Count  Montholon,  and 
Lieutenant-General  Gourgond,  his  two  Aides- 
de-Camp,  who  were  devoted  to  his  fortunes. 
The  latter  Officers  served  him  in  the  Russian 
Campaign,  and  describe  the  winter  which  they 
encountered  there  in  all  its  horrors.  The 
Russian  cavalry  they  extol ;  but  represent 
the  Cossacks  as  easily  dispersed.  They  do 
not  appear  to  hold  the  Prussians  in  very  high 
estimation,  but  consider  them,  at  the  same 
time,  as  superior  to  the  Austrians.  The  Eng- 
lish Infantry,  at  the  battle  of  Waterloo,  filled 
them  with  absolute  astonishment ;  but  they 
represent  our  Cavalry  as  much  too  impetuous; 
they  probably  found  them  so  on  that  glorious 
day. 

In  a  conversation  with  Count  Bertrand, 
which  happened  to  glance  on  that  subject, 
he  could  not  hide  his  sensations.  The  little  he 
said  was  in  a  plaintive  tone,  though  expressed 
with  candour,  and  accompanied  with  expres- 


(    22    ) 

sive  shrugs  of  lamentation.  "  W^  fought  that 
day/'  he  said,  "  foi^  the  Crown  of  France  ;  but 
you  gained  the  battle,  and  we  are  undone/' — 
.1  asked -him  whether  he  had  read  Marshal 
Ney's  Letter  to  the  Duke  of  Otranto,  in  de- 
fence of  his  conduct  on  the  bloody  field.  That 
publication,  it  appeared,  he  bad  not  seen  ; 
and  when  I  informed  him  in  what  manner  the 
Marshal  had  censured  his  Master's  conduct, 
and  that,  in  the  public  opinion,  he  was  thought 
to  have  cleared  himself  from  the  imputation 
of  erroneous  conduct ;---".WelI,  well,"  he 
replied,  "  Had  I  been  in  the  command  of 
Marshal  Ney's  division,  I  might,  perhaps, 
have  done  worse  :  but,  as  I  was,  I  saw  much 
to  blame;'*  but,  in  comparing  Buonaparte 
with  Ney,  he  cast  his  eyes  upwards  to  the 
heavens,  and  suddenly  lowering  them  to  the 
earth,  he  exclaimed,  with  a  very  significant 
action,  "  Indeed,  indeed,  the  difference  is 
equally  great." 

— From  the  information  \  received  in  my 
conversation  with  our  French  guests,  it  ap- 
pears that  the  Emperor's  abdication  in  favour 


(    23     ) 

of  his  Son,  is  a  matter,  whicb,  as  far  at  least 
as  my  knowledge  extends,  has  been  altoge- 
ther misconceived  in  England  :  I  mean  as  re- 
ferring to  the  immediate  and  proximate  causes 
of  it.     If  the  communications  made  to  me 
were  correct,  and  I  am  not  willing  to  imagine 
that  they  were  invented  merely  to  impose  upon 
me,  a  grand  political  scheme  was  cc^ntrived  by 
F Quelle  to  out- wit  his  Master,  and  it  proved 
successful.  The  name  of  that  crafty  politician 
and  ready  revolutionist  is  never  mentioned  by 
the  members  of  our  little^  cabin  Utica  without 
the  accompaniment  of  execrations,  which  it 
is  not  necessary  for  you  to  hear,  as  it  v^  ould 
be  ridiculous  for  me  to  repeat.     Not  Tal- 
leyrand himself  is  so  loaded  with  them  as  the 
Arch-betrayer,  who  has  been  just  mentioned. 
It  was,  indeed,  a  decided  opinion  of  the  mo- 
ment, among  our  Exiles,  that  Fouche  would 
contrive  to  hang  Talleyrand  ;  or  that  the  lat- 
ter would  provide  an  equal  fate  for  the  former ; 
and  that  if  they  both  were  suspended  from  the 
same  gibbet,  it  ought  to  be  preserved  as  an 
object  of  public  respect  for  the  service  it  had 


(    24    ) 

done  to  mankind,  by  punishing  and  exposing 
two  as  consummate  offenders  as  ever  disgraced 
the  social  world. — The  Historiette  to  which  I 
have  alluded,  was  thus  related. — 

On  Napoleon's  return  to  Paris,  after  his 
disastrous  defeat  at  Waterloo,  and  when  he 
may  be  supposed  to  have  been  agitated  by 
doubt  and  perplexity,  as  to  the  conduct  he 
should  pursue  in  that  extraordinary  crisis ;  a 
Letter  was  offered  to  his  attention  by  the  Duke 
of  Otranto,  as  having  been  received  bythe  latter 
from  Prince  JMetternich  the  Austrian  Minister. 
It  was  dated  in  the  preceding  April,  and  the 
diplomatic  writer  stated  the  decided  object  of 
his  Imperial  Master,  to  be  the  final  expulsion  of 
Napoleon  the  First  from  the  throne  of  France  ; 
and  that  the  French  nation  should  be  left  to 
their  uninterrupted  decision,  whether  they 
would  have  a  monarchy  under  Napoleon  the 
Second,  or  adopt  a  Republican  form  of  Go- 
vernment.— Austria  professed  to  have  no 
right,  and  consequently  felt  no  intention  to 
dictate  to  the  French  Nation.     The  final  and 


(    25    ) 

mtified  expulsion  of  the  Traitor,  (such  was 
the  expression)  is  all  the  Austrian  Emperor 
demands  of  France. 

Napoleon  seized  the  bait ;  and  immedi- 
ately abdicated  in  favour  of  his  Son  :  but  he 
had  no  sooner  taken  this  step,  than  he  disco- 
vered the  double  game  that  Fouche  was  play- 
ing. The  Letter  was  a  forgery,  and  it  soon 
appeared  that  the  Emperor  of  Austria  had  it 
not  in  his  power,  if  he  had  ever  indulged  the 
contemplation,  to  clothe  his  Granson  with 
political  character. 

After  he  quitted  Paris,  the  Ex-emperor 
and  his  suite  pursued  an  uninterrupted  pro- 
gress to  the  sea-coast,  and  it  is  their  opinion 
that  they  might  have  continued  in  an  inactive 
state,  and  without  any  reasonable  apprehen- 
sion of  disturbance,  for  a  much  longer  time 
than  Buonaparte's  impatience  would  allow, 
in  the  vicinity  of  Rochfort. 

— On  his  first  arrival  among  us,  he  occa- 
sionally expressed  a  wish  to  be  informed  of 


(    26    ) 

the  contents  of  the  English  newspapers;  but  as 
it  could  not  be  a  pleasant  circumstance  to  him, 
to  be  made  acquainted  with  the  manner  in  which 
his  character,    conduct,    and   circumstances 
were  necessarily  treated  and  observed  upon 
by  our  Journals,  there  was  a  delicacy  main- 
tained in  the  avoiding  a  communication  of 
their  contents.  That  truth  is  not  to  be  spoken, 
orinany  way  imparted,  atall  times,  is  a  proverb 
which  Avas  now  faithfully  adhered  to  on  board 
the  Northumberland.  The  Count  de  las  Cases 
had  indeed  offered  to  qualify  his  General  in 
the  course  of  a  month,  to  read  an  English 
newspaper,  with  the  requisite  intelligence  of 
the  language  ;  an  undertaking  which  it  is  not 
very  probable  he  would  have  been  able  to 
accomplish ;   but  he  could   not  induce  his 
Master  to  become  his  Scholar  :  for  the  matter 
wa,s  cut  short  by  the  following  reply. — "  I 
well  know  that  you  think  me  a  very  clever 
fellow  :  but  be  that  as  it  may — I  cannot  do 
every  thing  ;  and  among  those  things  which 
I  should  find  impracticable,  is  the  making 
myself  master  of  the  English  language,  in  a 
few  weeks/' 


{    27    ) 

— Here  I  shall  conclude  my  first  Letter ; 
or,  as  it  may  prove,  the  first  division  of  my 
epistolary  narrative :  at  all  events,  it  will  be 
ready  forthe  rirst  opportunity  which  occurs  for 
its  transmission  to  you. — If  it  tends  to  your 
amusement,  or,  in  any  degree,  to  the  satisfac- 
tion of  your  curiosity,  tant  mieux  :  but  be 
that  as  it  may,  it  will  give  me  the  opportunity 
of  saying — How  do  you  do  ? — God  bless  }ou  ! 
as  well  as  of  offering  my  sincere  regards  and 
kind  remembrances  to  our  common  friends. 

Adieu,  &c.  &c. 

W.  W. 


At  Sea, 


MY  DEAR , 

I  renew  my  desultory  occupation  : — 
la  tache  journaliere^  telle  quevous  la  voulez. — 
On  the  first  day  of  his  arrival  on  board,  our 
distinguished  Passenger,  displayed  rather  an 
eager  appetite:  I  observed  that  he  made  a  very 


(    28    ) 

hearty  dinner,  which  he  moistened  with  claret. 
He  passed  the  evening  on  the  quarter-deck, 
where  he  was  amused  by  the  band  of  the  53d 
regiment;  when  He  personally  required  them 
to  give  the  airs  of  "  God  save  the  King,"  and 
"  Rule  Britannia."  At  intervals  he  chatted 
in  a  way  of  easy  pleasantry  with  the  officers 
who  were  qualified  to  hold  a  conversation  with 
him  in  the  French  language.  I  remarked  that, 
on  these  occasions,  he  always  maintains  what 
seems  to  be  an  invariable  attitude,  which  has 
somewhat  of  importance  in  it,  and  probably 
such  as  he  had  been  accustomed  to  display  at 
the  Thuilleries,  when  giving  audience  to  his 
Marshals  or  Officers  of  State.  He  never 
moves  his  hands  from  their  habitual  places  in 
his  dress,  but  to  apply  them  to  his  snuff-box  ; 
and  it  struck  me  as  a  particular  circumstance, 
to  which  I  paid  an  observing  attention, 
though  it  might  have  been  connected  with 
his  former  dignity, — That  he  never  offered  a 
pinch  to  any  one  with  whom  he  was  con- 
versing. 

— On  the  subsequent  day  he  breakfasted 


{    29    ) 

at  eleven.     His  meal  consists  of  meat  and 

claret,   which  is  closed   with   coffee. At 

dinner,  I  observed  that  he  selected  a  mutton 
cutlet,  which  he  contrived  to  dispose  of  with- 
out the  aid  of  either  knife  or  fork. 

— He  passed  much  of  the  third  day  on  deck, 
and  appeared  to  have  paid  particular  atten- 
tion to  his  toilette.  He  receives  no  other 
mark  of  respect  from  the  officers  of  the  ship 
than  would  be  shewn  to  a  private  gentleman, 
nor  does  he  seem  to  court  or  expect  more 
than  he  receives.  He  is  probably  contented 
with  the  homage  of  his  own  attendants,  who 
always  appear  before  him  uncovered,  so  that 
if  a  line  were  drawn  round  them,  it  might  be 
supposed  that  you  saw  an  equal  space  in  the 
Palace  of  5am^  Cloud. 

— He  played  at  cards  in  the  evening :  the 
game  was  Whist,  and  he  was  a  loser.  It 
did  not  appear  to  be  played  in  the  same  way 
as  is  practised  at  our  card-tables  in  England  ; 
but  I  am  not  qualified  to  explain  the  va- 
rieties. 


(     30     ) 

— The  whole  of  the  next  day  Napoleon 
passed  in  his  cabin.  It  was  generally  per- 
ceived by  his  attendants  that  he  was  sea- 
sick ;  but  he  was  either  so  little  of  a  sailor, 
if  that  can  be  supposed,  as  not  to  know  the 
ordinary  effects  of  a  ship's  motion  on  persons 
unused  to  the  sea,  or  he  suspected  that  his 
Megrim  arose  from  some  other  cause  ;  for,  it 
seems,  he  would  by  no  means  allow  the  salt- 
water origin  of  it.  None  of  his  people,  I  pre- 
sume, would  venture,  on  the  occasion,  to  re- 
peat to  him  his  brother  Canute's  practical 
Lecture  to  his  Courtiers,  on  the  unmannerly 
power  of  the  ocean. 


— Among  his  baggage  were  two  camp- 
beds,  which  had  accompanied  him  in  most 
of  his  campaigns.  One  of  them,  a  very  im- 
probable destination  when  it  was  first  con- 
structed, was  now  an  essential  article  of  his 
cabin  ;  the  other  was  no  longer  to  give  repose 
to  some  military  hero,  in  the  hurry  of  a  cam- 
paign, but  is  pressed  by  such  a  marine  heroine 
as  Madame  Bertrand,  amidst  the  dashing  of 


{    31    ) 

waters.  They  are,  however,  altogether  as 
comfortable  as  the  combined  skill  of  the 
upholsterer  and  the  machinist  could  make 
them.  They  are  about  six  feet  long  and 
three  feet  wide,  with  strong  green  silk 
furniture  :  the  frames  are  of  steel,  and  so 
worked  and  shaped  as  to  surprize  by  their 
lightness  and  the  consequent  ease  with  which 
they  are  moved.  When  I  happened  to  be 
seated  on  one  of  them,  I  could  not  but  reflect 
on  the  battles  of  Wagram,  Austerlitz,  Fried- 
land,  ^c.  Sfc. 

This  was  a  situation,  where  the  politician 
and  the  sage  might  be  inspired,  as  it  were, 
to  contemplate  the  changes  and  the  chances 
of  the  world;  but  as  I  do  not  presume  to 
possess  enough  of  those  characters,  either  dis- 
tinctly or  collectively,  to  justify  my  engaging 
in  a  train  of  reflection  on  these  affecting 
subjects,  I  shall  leave  such  employment  to 
your  better  thoughts,  and  the  exercise  of  your 
enthusiastic  propensity. 

—Notwithstanding    it    blew    fresh,    and 


(    32    ) 

there  was  considerable  motion,  Buonaparte 
made  his  appearance  upon  deck  between 
three  and  four,  p.  m.  when  he  amused  himself 
with  asking  questions  of  the  Lieutenant  of 
the  Watch :  such  as,  how  many  leagues  the 
ship  went  in  an  hour  ?— whether  the  sea  was 
likely  to  go  down  ? — what  the  strange  vessel 
was  on  the  bow  of  the  Northumberland  P — 
In  short,  enough  to  prove  that  nothing  es- 
caped his  notice.  But  I  could  not  help  smil- 
ing when  I  beheld  the  man  who  had  stalked 
so  proudly,  and  with  so  firm  a  step  over  sub- 
missive countries,  tottering  on  the  deck  of  a 
ship,  and  catching  at  any  arm  to  save  himself 
from  falling ;  for  he  has  not  yet  found  his 
sea-legs.  Among  other  objects  of  hisattention, 
he  observed  that  Mr,  Smith,  who  was  taking 
the  usual  to-and-fro  walk  with  his  brother 
midshipmen,  to  be  much  older  than  the  rest; 
and,  on  this  account,  he  appears  to  have  asked 
him  how  long  he  had  been  in  the  service ;  and, 
being  answered — nine  years — he  observed, 
that  surely,  is  a  long  time. — It  is,  indeed, 
said  Mr.  Smith,  but  part  of  it  was  passed  in  a 
French  prison  ;   and  I  was,  Sir,  at  Verdun, 


(    33    ) 

when  you  set  out  on  your  Russian  cam- 
paign." Napoleon  immediately  shrugged  up 
his  shoulders,  with  a  very  significant  smile, 
and  closed  the  conversation, 

— I  must  here  tell  you,  once  for  all,  if  I 
have  not  already  made  the  observation,  that 
he  seldom  or  ever  omitted  an  opportunity  of 
asking  a  question ;  and  it  was  about  this  time 
that  he  made  a  most  unexpected  enquiry  of 
our  Orthodox  Chaplain  : — whether  he  was 
not  a  Puritan  P  I  need  not  tell  you  what 
would  be  the  reply,  and  you  may  conjecture, 
probably,  what  might  be  the  feelings,  of  a 
gentleman  clothed  in  canonical  orders,  and 
firm  in  canonical  principles,  when  he  was  sa- 
luted with  such  an  interrogatory. 

He  wished  also  to  have  his  curiosity  gra- 
tified respecting  a  religious  community  in 
Scotland  called  Johnsonians^  who,  he  under- 
stood, were  a  very  active  sect  in  that  part  of 
Britain.  His  conversation,  at  all  times,  con- 
sisted of  questions,  which  never  fail  to  be  put 
m  such  a  way,  as  to  prohibit  a  return  of  them. 

D 


(    34    ) 

To  answer  one  qtiestion  by  another,  which 
frequently  happens  in  common  discourse,  was 
not  admissible  with  him.  I  can  Conceive  that 
he  was  habituated  to  this  kind  of  colloquy, 
when  he  sat  upon  such  a  throne  as  that  which 
supported  him,  and  before  which  no  one 
spoke  but  when  he  commanded  utterance: 
nor  does  he  seem  disposed  to  lay  it  aside 
when  he  sits  in  the  cabin,  stands  in  the  gang- 
way, orpatroles  the  deck,  of  a  ship,  where  he 
is  subject  to  the  controul  of  its  commander. 
The  foundation  of  this  singular  question, 
therefore,  was  not  attainable.  As  in  the  va- 
rious plans  he  had  laid  for  invading  our  tight 
little  Island,  as  the  song  has  it,  it  is  not  im- 
probable that  he  might  have  looked  towards 
the  Hebrides,  as  capable  of  favouring  his  de- 
sign ;  and,  if  so.  Doctor  Johnson's  Tour  thither 
might  have  been  curiously  consulted,  and  may 
I  not  deduce  these  Johnsonians  from  such 
a  combination  of  circumstances  ? — Many  a 
doubt  has  been  reconciled  by  more  vague 
conjectures  :  that  eminent  writer's  opinions, 
however,  as  you  w  ill  probably  suggest,  are  not 
altogether  calculated  to  form  a  sect  on  the 


(    35     ) 

olfier  side  of  the  Tweed.  But,  badinage  djmiH, 
r should  he  glad  to  know  the  origin  of  these 
Johnsonians;  and  if  we  should  he  tossed  and 
tumbled,  in  the  course  of  our  voyage,  into  a 
sufficient  degree  of  fanailiarity  for  me  to  ask  a 
question  of  the  Ex-emperor,  \  will  endeavour 
to  be  satJMted; 

"  — He  appeared  to  be  very-  much  stmck  by 
two  long-boats  (gigs)  placed  with  their  hoti 
torn  upwards  oti  our  launch!  oh 'the  bboms: 
their  singular  length  attrkted'  his  notice, 
Mobile  their  pai^ticular  use  krid'  applicati'ori 
produced  such  aj  succ^sion  of  enquiries  on  his 
part,'  as  almost  to  suggest  an  opinion,  that  h6 
entertained  a  suspiciofi  of  their  being  a  p^irt 
of  the  naval; apparatus  peiculiarly  provided 
to  prevent  his  escape  from  the  Island  to  which 
he  was  destined.  The  answer  he  received 
was  a  quiet  remark  as  to  their  general  em- 
ployment in  the  British  fleets;  to  which 
he  made  no  reply. 

— The  riame  of  Talleyrand  happening  to 
occur  in  the  course  of  conversation,  with  our 
p2 


(    36    ) 

French  shipmates,  the  high  opinion  enter» 
tained  of  his  talents  by  the  Buonapartists 
was  acknowledged,  without  reserve.  On  my 
asking  at  what  period  he  was  separated  from 
the  councils  and  confidence  of  Napoleon,  it  was 
replied,  at  the  invasion  of  Spain.  I  then  ob- 
served, that  the  reports  in  England,  respecting 
that  circumstance  were  correct  as  to  time,  and 
I  presumed  were  equally  so  as  to  the  cause ; — his 
unreserved  disapprobation  of  that  bold  and  ad- 
venturous enterprize.  This  met  with  an  instant 
contradiction  ;  which  was  follovTed  by  a  most 
decisive  assertion,  that  the  Prince  of  Benevento 
approved  of  the  Spanish  war,  and  founded  his 
recommendation  of  that  measure  on  his  unal- 
terable opinion,  which  he  boldly  communi- 
cated to  the  Emperor,  that  his  life  was  not 
secure  while  a  Bourbon  reigned  in  Europe. 

I  entered  further  on  this  subject  with 
Madame  Bertrand,  and  she  actually  and  most 
unequivocally  asserted,  that  Talleyrand  was 
in  secret  communication  with  Napoleon 
when  they  were  last  at  Paris,  and  that  he 
would  have  joined  them  in  a   month.     His 


(    37    ) 

proposed  departure  from  Vienna  to  take  the 
Waters  at  Aix  la  Chapel le  was  under  the 
cloak  of  indisposition,  to  conceal  his  duplicity. 
*'  Can  you  persuade  yourself,  Madame,'^  1 
said,  "  that  Talleyrand,  if  he  had  the  incli- 
nation, possessed  the  power  to  influence  the 
Court  of  Vienna  in  favour  of  the  Son-in-law." 
*'  The  court  of  Vienna!  she  exclaimed,  "  O 
yes,  yes :  he  has  the  capacity  to  influence  all 
the  courts  of  Europe! — If  he  had  but  joined 
the  Emperor,  we  should,  as  this  instant,  have 
been  in  Paris,  and  France  would  never  more 

have  changed  its  Master." Of  this  man's 

virtues  I  heard  no  eulogium:  but  you  will 
now  be  a  competent  judge  how  his  political 
talents  were  appreciated  in  the  French  circle 
on  board  the  Northumberland. 

— On  my  asking  Count  Bertrand  which  of 
the  French  Generals  had  amassed  the  greatest 
portion  of  wealth  ;  He,  without  the  least  hesi- 
sitation,  mentioned  Massena ;  though,  he 
added,  they  have  all  made  very  considerable 
fortunes.  Macdonald,  Duke  of  Tarentum,  he 
appeared  to  think  had  made  less  than  any 


(     3B     ) 

other.  Of  Davoust,  Duke  D'Eckmuhl,  he 
spoke,  to  our  extreme  astonishrueot,  in  an 
animated  sti-ain  of  panegyric,  v^hich  was  in- 
stantly met  ivvith  an  outcry  from  all  who  heard 
it,  respecting  the  conduct  of  that  officer,  at 
Hamburgh,  which  we  represented  as  atrocious 
beyond  example.  This  he  would  not  allow  ; 
on  the  contrary,  he  describied  him  as  a 
zealous,  correct,  and  faithful  commander ; 
aa4  far  from  being  destitute  of  humanity  ;  as 
notwithstanding-  liis  notions  of  military  obe- 
diencej  which  were  known  to  be  of  the  most 
rigid  kind,  he  did  not  act  up  to  the  severity  of 
his  instructions.  As  for  his  taking  a  bribe, 
Bertrand  declared  him  to  be  incapable  of 
such  baseness;  and  asserted,  from  his  own 
knowledge,  that  a  very  large  sum  had  been 
offered  him,  to  connive  at  the  sailing  of  some 
ships  from  Hamburgh  in  the  night,  which  he 
refused  with  the  disdain  of  a  faithful  soldier 
and  an  honourable  man. 

Count  de  las  Cases,  also  took  up  the  sub- 
ject of  the  marshals  of  France,  and  spoke  of 
them  with  rery  Httle  reserve.     He  described 


(    39    ) 

Massena  as  having  been  originally  d  Fencing 
Master  ;  but,  that,  previous  to  his  campaign 
in  the  Peninsula,  he  was  considered  by  the 
French  nation  as  equal,  if  not  superior,  to 
Buonaparte  in  his  military  capacity.  From 
that  period  the  Count  represented  him  as 
having  dwindled  into  absolute  insignificance. 
He  is  avaricious,  he  said,  in  the  extreme, 
though  he  has  only  one  child,  a  daughter,  to 
inherit  his  enormous  wealth.  He  then  pro- 
ceeded to  relate  the  following  circumstance 
of  the  Marshal,  as  the  accidental  topic  of  the 
moment. 

"  The  preservation  of  the  Army,  on 
crossing  the  Danube,  was  boldly  attributed 
by  the  soldiers  who  composed  it,  and  con- 
sequently re-echoed  as  the  opinion  of  the 
nation,  to  the  superior  skill,  and  persever- 
ing  courage  of  Massena.  It  appears,  that 
a  sudden  and  impetuous  inundation  of  the 
river  had  destroyed  all  possible  communica- 
tion between  its  right  and  left  bank,  when 
half  the  French  force  had  passed  it.     The  re- 


(     40    ) 

maining  half  were  without  ammunition,  when 
Massena  threw  himself  into  the  village  of 
Estling,  where  he  withstood  fifteen  repeated 
attacks  of  the  Austrians,  and  effected  the  es- 
cape of  that  part  of  the  French  Army  from 
the  destruction  which  threatened  it.  The 
eulogiums  which  the  army  and  the  nation  la- 
vished on  Massena,for  his  conduct  and  thesuc- 
cess  which  crowned  it,  partook  of  that  clamor- 
ous character  which  implied  no  inconsiderable 
degree  of  blame  and  censure  on  Buonaparte 
himself,  who  was  supposed  to  have  felt  it. 
But  he  contrived,  nevertheless,  to  dissipate 
the  opinion,  by  conferring  the  title  of  Prince 
of  Estling  on  Massena,  as  the  merited  reward, 
and  magnanimous  acknowledgment  of  a  ser- 
vice on  which  depended,  for  the  moment,  the 
success  and  honourable  issue  of  the  campaign. 
Soult,  he  said,  is  an  excellent  officer,  and  Ney^ 
brave  to  a  fault ;  but  Suchet  possesses  a  more 
powerful  intellect,  with  more  enlarged  infor- 
mation, and  political  sagacity,  as  well  as  more 
conciliatory  manners,  than  any  of  the  Mar- 
shals  of  France/' 


(    41     ) 

He  then  mentioned  Admiral  Ganthaume, 
and  asked  what  character  was  assigned,  in  the 
English  News-papers,  to  that  naval  officer.  I 
replied,  that  they  gave  him  no  small  credit 
for  his  spirit  in  advancing  out  of  Port,  and 
his  success  in  getting  back  again.  "  Yes,"  he 
answered,  with  a  significant  look  and  tone, 
•'  good  at  hide  and  seek/' — He  was  the  friend 
of  Louis,  and  then  of  Napoleon,  and  then 
of  Louis  again  :  he  is,  in  fact,  what  you  call 

the  Vicar  of .     1  assisted  him  in 

completing  the  proverbial  expression,  by 
adding  the  word — Bray  ;  which  he  imme- 
diately caught,  and  exclaimed, — "  Aye,  aye, 
He  is  the  Vicar  of  Bray. — He  is  an  old  man," 
the  Count  added,  "  but  his  indiscretions," 
which,  however,  he  did  not  particularize, 
•'  were  rather  of  a  juvenile  character." 

— In  the  afternoon  our  chief  Passenger 
continued  longer  on  deck  than  he  had  done 
before,  and  his  countenance  denoted  a  feel- 
ing of  disquietude.  His  questions  all  re- 
lated to  the  state  of  our  progress,  and 
marked  an  impatience  to  arrive  at  the  ter- 


(     42     ) 

mi  nation  of  his  voyage.  He  probably  expe- 
rienced some  degree  of  inconvenience  from 
his  confined  situation,  having  been  long  ac- 
customed to  exercise  that  bordered  upon  vio- 
lence. His  appearance,  I  understand,  was 
rather  meagre,  till  about  the  time  tiiat  he 
became  First  Consul.  If  he  had  been  other- 
wise, his  campaigns  in  Egypt  were  sufficient  to 
have  reduced  him  :  but  though  his  exertions 
both  mental  and  corporeal  have  since  been 
such  as  to  destroy  any  constitution  but  his  own, 
which  must  have  been  of  an  extracrdinary 
internal  texture,  to  have  enabled  him  to  sus- 
tain them,  his  health  has  rather  been  improved 
than  impaired  ;  and,  during  the  last  ten  years, 
he  has  gradually  advanced  into  corpulence. 

— It  is  a  singular  circumstance  that  Count 
Montholon,  whom  I  have  already  mentioned 
as  one  of  the  Imperial  Aides-de-Camp,  is  the 
son  of  a  General  officer  of  that  name,  whom 
Buonaparte  served  in  the  same  capacity  dur- 
ing the  Uevolutionary  War,— All  the  family, 
except  his  father  and  himself,  hate  been  de- 
cided Royalists,  and  are  possessed  of  large 


(    43    ) 

property  :  but  the  General  is  dead,  while  the 
son  has  sacrificed  fortune,  and  abandoned  his 
family,  to  share,  with  his  wife  and  child,  the 
exiled  state  of  his  former  Sovereign  ;  whom  it 
is  his  pride  still  to  love  and  serve  under  that 
title,  and  with  all  the  feelings  of  duty  and 
loyalty  which  his  enthusiastic  fidelity  attaches 
to  it. 

— I  give  you  Madame  Bertrand's  descrip- 
tion of  young  Napoleon,  as  very  beautiful,  in 
order  to  introduce  his  father's  laconic  English 
account  of  him.  The  boy,  he  says,  resembles 
him  only  in  the  upper  part  of  his  form.  ''  He 
has  one  grand,  big  head." — The  same  Lady, 
speaking  of  the  Buonaparte  family,  represents 
the  female  part  in  terms  of  no  common  ad- 
miration. With  the  exception  of  the  Frincess 
Piombina  she  describes  the  sisters  as  pos- 
sessed of  extraordinary  beauty  :  with  t!iese 
charming  women,  therefore,  and  to  use  the  ex- 
pression of  the  grand,  big  head  of  them  all,  I 
shall  conclude  my  second  grand ^  big  Letter. 

&G.  &c.  &c. 

W.  W. 


(    44    ) 

At  Sea, 


MY    DEAR 


I  have  already,  I  believe,  mentioned 
to  you  that  it  was  thought  a  becoming  atten- 
tion to  the  feelings  of  the  French  party  to 
withhold  from  them  the  sight  of  the  News- 
papers, which  were  sent  off  to  us  before  we 
sailed. 

Count  Bertrand  took  an  opportunity  to 
ask  me  if  I  had  perused  them ;  and,  on  my 
replying,  as  you  may  suppose,  in  the  affirma- 
tive, he  proceeded  to  question  me  as  to  their 
contents.  I  accordingly  informed  him,  that 
they  had  observed  on  the  secret  visit  he  was 
believed  to  have  made  to  Paris,  previous  to 
Napoleon's  return  to  France.  His  countenance 
on  my  communicating  this  circumstance,  in- 
stantly indicated  a  strong  feeling  of  resent- 
ment ;  and  it  was  evidently  disclosed  by  the 
manner  in  which  he  replied. — "  I  well  know'* 
he  said,  "  that  the  English  Newspapers  have 
accused  me  of  visiting  Paris  in  disguise,  some 
months  before  the  Emperor's  departure  from 


(    45    ) 

Elba.  But  I  solemnly  declare  that  I  never 
set  my  foot  in  France  in  the  way  that  has 
been  attributed  to  me.  I  might  have  gone  to 
Italy,  if  I  had  pleased,  but  I  did  not  quit  Elba 
for  a  moment  till  my  Emperor  quitted  it. — It 
has  also  been  asserted  on  similar  authority, 
That  1  had  taken  an  Oath  of  Fidelity  to  the 
King:— an  assertion  that  is  equally  ground- 
less  ;  for,  1  never  once  beheld  a  single  indi- 
vidual of  the  Bourbon  Family  of  France/' 

— I  give  you  the  account  of  Buonaparte's 
return  to  France,  as  it  was  casually  and  briefly 
related  to  me, — ''  The  Duke  de  Bassano  was 
the  chief  actor.  Individuals  had  gone  from 
several  departments  in  France  to  Elba,  and 
the  then  Emperor  had  been  induced  to  sus- 
pect that  the  allies  determined  to  send  him  to 
the  Island  to  which  he  is  now  destined.  On 
whM  authority  this  apprehension  was  ground- 
ed, not  the  most  distant  idea  was  communis 
cated.  It  is  certain,  however,  that  he  enter- 
tained it  with  such  seriousness,  as  to  induce 
him  tomake  the  resolute  attempt  in  meditation, 
before  the  connecting  plot  was  ripe  for  overt 


(    46    ) 

measures  ih  France.  Even  after  his  little 
army  was  embarked^  a  dispatch  arrived  from 
his  friends,  which,  contained  the  most  earnest 
entreaties  to  postpone  his  enterprize,  if  it  were 
only  for  one  month.— Whether,  if  he  had  re- 
ceived them  before  he  had  quitted  the  Island, 
they  would  have  been  sufficient  to  check  his 
impatience  and  quiet  his  alarms,  was  not  a 
subject  of  conjecture  :  but  be  that  as  it  may, 
whatever  the  counsels  were j  they  arrived  too 
late  to  be  followed  ; — the  die  was  cast/' 

— rA  circumstance  occurred  to-day  which, 
as.  you  may  well  imagine,  created  no  small 
degree  of  interest  among  our  passengers,  as 
well  as  a  busy  scene  of  interrogation  . — a 
French  brig,  with  the  white  flag  flying,  bore 
us  company. 

— General  Gourgon  amused  us  with  a  variety 
of  details  respecting  the  campaigns  in  Russia 
and  the  Peninsula,  which  he  himself  witnessed: 
Of  these  1  shall  only  select  two  or  three  :  for 
recitals  which  will  enliven  the  monotony  of  a 
quarter-deck,  may  not  be  w^orth  communicat- 


(    47    ) 

ing.to  those  who  are  siirrounded  with  the  va^. 
rieties  that  are  jto  be  hourly  found  in  the  large 
circle  of  sfOQial;  life.— -ille  d.qscrib^d  the  :inr 
tenseness.qf  the  frost  in  Rusaiat»with  a  degree 
of  astpnii^hment  that  afforded  us  aonie  amuse* 
meht.  YoU.  iitiay  easi  l.y  guess .  the  wonderful 
contrast  of  feitiiat ion,  when  a  Frenchman,  the 
native  bf.soi  fiitie  a  climatevand  who  had  been 
seitving;  in  Spain,  found  liiimself  transferred 
to  a  part  of  t|ie  globe  where  the  tears  became 
glphules  of  ice  on  his  cheeks  ;  and  where  the 
soldiers,  stupified  as  it  were  by.  the  cold,  in 
the  act  of  shaking  themselves,  to  recover  their 
fee^Mng,  would  frequently  fall  down  and  Jifi^ 
stantly  expire^ 

-^He  also  mentioned  the  following  curious 
circumstance  at  the  siege  of  Saragossa.— The 
French  had  mined  a  Convent,  where  a  body 
of  Spaniards  had  taken  refuge.  The  besiegers 
had  no  intention  to  destroy  the  buildings 
but  merely,  to  blow  up  a  wall,  in  order  to 
frighten  the  besieged  into,  a  surreDder.  The 
explosion,  however,  extended  further  than 
was  expected,  and  a  considerable  destructioia 


(    48     ) 

of  the  Spaniards  took  place,  but  sixteen  of 
them  were  described  to  escape,  as  you  will 
acknowledge,  in  a  most  extraordinary  manner. 
They,  it  seems,  ascended  the  spire  of  the 
church,  taking  with  them  an  ample  supply  of 
arms  and  ammunition,  with  which,  notwith- 
standing the  utmost  efforts  of  the  French, 
they  defended  themselves  with  admirable  gal- 
lantry and  resolution  for  three  days.  But  this 
is  not  all :  at  the  end  of  that  period  it  was 
discovered  that  they  had  made  their  escape 
from  the  perilous  situation,  to  the  extreme 
astonishment  of  the  besieging  party ;  who, 
as  pious  Catholics,  might  be  justified  in  attri- 
buting it  to  the  saving  interposition  of  the 
Guardian  Saint  of  the  Convent.  The  means, 
however,  which  they  employed  were  of  mortal 
contrivance.  By  the  aid  of  packthread  which 
had  been  conveyed  to  them  from  an  adjoining 
building,  they  contrived  to  draw  up  a  suffi- 
cient quantity  of  ropes,  with  which  they  let 
themselves  down  from  the  elevated  fortress, 
and  effected  their  preservation.  1  his,  I  think, 
may  be  added  to  the  numerous  histories  of 
Castles  in  the  Air  :  or,  if  I  dare  venture  any 


(    49    ) 

tiling  like  a   Pun  to  you,    of  Chateaux  en 
Espagne. 

During  the  evening  Napoleon  addressed 
hisenquiries  to  Captain  Beatty  of  the  Marines, 
who  speaks  French  with  great  fluency.  They 
related  to  the  regulations  and  discipline  of  the 
Marine  troops,  6fc,  6fc,  Nor  could  he  have 
chosen  an  officer  who  was  better  qualified  to 
gratify  his  military  curiosity  on  the  subject 
which  at  this  time  employed  it. — Captain 
Beatty  had  served  with  Sir  Sidney  Smith  in  the 
East,  and  was  at  the  Siege  of  Acre  ;  an  event 
that  is  not  among  Buonaparte's  most  pleasing 
recollections.  When,  however,  he  was  in- 
formed of  this  circumstance,  he  treated  it 
with  great  good  humour,  and  seizing  the 
Captain  by  the  ear,  exclaimed  in  a  jocular 
tone,  "  Ah,  you  rogue,  you  rogue  ;  were  you 
there  ?" — He  then  asked  what  was  become  of 
Sir  Sidney  Smith  :  when  he  was  told  that  the 
gallant  Knight  was  at  this  time  on  the 
Continent,  and  had  submitted  a  proposi- 
tion to  the  Congress  at  Vienna  to  destroy 
the  Corsairs  on  the   Coast  of  Barbary,  an 

E 


(    50    ) 

instant  reply  was  given,  '*  That  it  was,  at 
it  had  long  been,  most  disgraceful  to  the 
European  powers,  to  permit  the  existence  of 
such  a  nest  of  miscreants/'  This  opinion  con- 
firms, in  some  degree,  what  has  been  sug- 
gested respecting  a  proposition  that  Andreossi 
is  said  to  have  been  instructed  to  make  to  out 
Government,  during  the  short  peace  with 
Consular  France.  In  this  interval  of  hostili- 
ties, a  notion  is  entertained  that  the  First 
Consul  proposed  a  co-operating  expedition 
between  the  two  powers  to  destroy,  root  and 
branch,  the  piratical  States  of  Barbary  ;  on 
which  occasion,  as  the  story  goes,  he  offered 
to  supply  the  military  force,  if  England  would 
engage  to  furnish  all  the  naval  implements, 
necessary  to  give  effect  to  an  enterprize  so 
honourable  to  them  both. — If  such  proposi- 
tions were  actually  made  ,  there  can  be  no 
doubt  that  sufficient  reasons  then  predomi- 
nated for  hesitating  in  the  acceptance  of  them ; 
and  the  hasty  renewal  of  the  war  put  an  eiad 
to  all  further  deliberations,  if  any  had  ever 
existed,  on  the  subject. 

— The  next  enquiries  which  Napoleon  made, 


(     51     ) 

were  respecting  the  British  Artillery  service  : 
they  ^vere  addressed  to  the  Captain  of  Artillery 
on  board,  whom  he  found  completely  qualified 
to  answer  the  numerous  questions  which  he 
addressed  to  him.  1  understand  that  his  first 
entrance  into  the  Army  was  in  the  Artillery 
Corps,  and  the  subject  was  consequently  the 
more  interesting,  and  a  very  few  weeks  only 
had  passed  away  since  he  had  fully  experienced 
our  field  tactics  in  that  l)rancli  of  warfare. — 
He  descended  into  all  the  minutee  of  the  ser- 
vice, and  enquired  into  the  state  and  disci- 
pline of  the  non-commissioned  Ofiicers,  Bom- 
bad  iers.  Miners,  and  Privates  of  every  cha- 
racter. The  education  of  the  Cadets  was 
also  scrutinized,  and  he  particularly  asked,  if 
they  were  instructed  by  Professors  in  Mathe- 
matics, Natural  Philosophy,  Chemistry,  &c. — 
and  in  order  that  there  might  be  a  clear  un- 
derstanding as  to  the  specific  terms  of  art,  he 
called  the  Count  de  las  Cases  to  assist  in  this 
scientific  conversation.  The  only  observa- 
tions be  made  were  those  of  surprize  at  our 
bringing  twelve-pounders  into  the  field,  and 
the  strength,  as  well  as  perfection,  of  this 
e2 


(    52    ) 

branch  of  the  British  military  force,  of  which 
be  seemed  not  to  have  entertained  an  adequate 
comprehension. 

I  premised,  at  the  outset  of  my  Epistolary 
Narrative,  that  you  were  to  expect  sudden 
transitions  to  very  unconnected  objects  ;  and 
I  now  give  you  an  almost  laughable  example, 
by  passing  from  the  artillery  of  England  to 
the  crown  jewels  of  France,  of  which  Buon- 
aparte recovered,  as  I  understand,  but  one 
article,  which  was  a  Diamond  Cross,  whose 
value  was  estimated  at  Twelve  thousand 
pounds  sterling.  1  am  also  informed,  that 
when  Grouchy  telegraphed  the  capture  of  the 
Duke  D'Angoulesme  in  the  South  of  France, 
an  order  was  instantly  returned,  that  w  hat- 
ever  property  was  found  in  his  possession, 
should  be  instantly  restored  to  him. 

You  may  probably  have  observed  that  our 
chief  Passenger  does  not  make  his  enquiries 
at  random. — indeed,  He  always  addresses 
them  to  such  persons  as,  from  their  official 
characters,  are  particularly  qualified  to  give 


(    53    ) 

explanatory  answers  :  or,  which  may  be  the 
most  probable  circumstance,  the  official  ap- 
pearance of  persons  whom  he  accidentally  en- 
counters suggests  the  subject  of  his  interro- 
gations, as  his  curiosity  directs  itself  to  the 
apparent  departments  of  those  with  whom 
He  at  any  time  converses.  He  might,  there- 
fore, be  induced  to  take  me  in  my  own  way, 
when  I  was  an  object  of  his  notice ;  and 
Physic  seems  to  be  no  unpalatable  subject 
with  him.  He  thinks  very  highly  of  exercise 
on  horseback,  as  more  conducive  than  any 
other  to  the  preservation  of  health  ;  and  I 
have  been  informed  that  during  his  passage 
in  the  Bellerophon,  and  confident  in  the  ex- 
pectation that  he  should  be  received  by  our 
Government,  he  frequently  anticipated  his 
enjoyment  of  the  field-sports  in  England. 

— Every  one  remembers  the  threatened  in- 
vasion of  England  in  1805,  and  the  various 
conjectures  which  were  formed  on  this  mo- 
mentous subject.  It  was  not,  according  to 
my  recollection,  by  any  means,  generally  con- 
sidered as  practicable  ;  nor  did  any  very  great 


(    54    ) 

great  apprehensions  prevail  that  it  \^  ouki  he 
attempted.     I  will,  however,  give  you  my  au- 
thority for  the  actual  intention  of  carrying  it 
into  execution. — Buonaparte  positively  avers 
it.    He  says,  that  he  had  two  hundred  thousand 
men   on    the   Coast   of  France    opposite   to 
England,  and  that  it  was  his  determination 
to   head    them  in  person.     The  attempt  he 
acknowledged  to  be  very  hazardous,  and  the 
issue  equally  doubtrul.     His  mind,  however, 
was  bent  on  the  enterprize,  and  every  possi- 
ble arrangment  was  made   to   give   effect  to 
its  operations. — It  was  hinted  to  him,   how- 
ever, that  his  Flotilla  w^as  altogether  insuffi- 
cient ;  and  that  such  a  ship  as  the  Northum- 
berland would  run  down  fifty  of  them.     This 
he  readily  admitted  :  but  he  stated    that  bis 
plan  was  to  rid  the  Channel  of  English  men 
of  war  ;  and  for  that  purpose  he  had  directed 
Admiral  Villeneuve,  with  the  combined  fleets 
of  France  and  Spain,  to  sail  apparently   for 
Martinique,  for  the  express  purpose   of  dis- 
tracting our   naval  force,  by   drawing  after 
him  a  large  portion,  if  not  all,  of  our  best 
ships.    Other  Squadrons  of  Observation  would 


{    55     ) 

follow  ;  and  England  might,  by  these  man- 
oeuvres, be  left  sufficiently  defenceless  for  his 
purpose.  Admiral  Villeneuve  was  directed, 
oij  gaining  a  certain  latitude,  to  take  a  baffling 
course  back  to  Europe,  and,  having  eluded  the 
vigilance  oi' Nelson,  to  enter  the  English  Chan- 
nel. The  Flotilla  would  then  have  sallied  forth 
from  Ostend,  Dunkirk,  Boulogne,  and  the  ad- 
joining ports.  The  intention  was  to  have 
dashed  at  the  Capital,  by  the  way  of  Chatham. 
He  well  knew,  he  added,  that  he  should 
have  had  to  encounter  many  difficulties  ;  the 
object,  however,  was  so  great  as  to  justify 
him  in  making  the  attempt.  But  Villeneuve 
was  met  on  his  return  by  Sir  Robert  Calder  ; 
and,  having  suffered  a  defeat,  took  refuge  in 
Ferrol.  From  that  Harbour  he  was  peremp- 
torily ordered  to  Sea,  according  to  his  original 
instructions  ;  but,  contrary  to  their  most  impe- 
rative and  explicit  intent,  he  steered  his  course 
for  Cadiz.  "  He  might  as  well,"'  exclaimed 
Napoleon — raising  his  voice,  and  encreasing 
his  impetuosity,  "  he  might  as  well  have  gone 
to  the  East  Indies." Two  days  after  Vil- 
leneuve  had    quitted    his  anchorage  before 


(    56    ) 

Cadiz,  a  Naval  Officer  arrived  there  to  super- 
sede him.  The  glorious  Victory  of  Trafalgar 
soon  followed,  and  the  French  Admiral  died 
a  few  days  after  his  arrival  in  France :  Report 
says— by  his  own  hand. 

— Having  given  such  a  specimen  of  hi* 
active  spirit,  I  am  about  to  surprise  you,  per- 
haps, by  the  information  that  this  man,  who, 
in  the  course  of  his  career,  seems  scarcely  to 
have  allow  ed  himself  time  to  sleep,  while  he, 
for  so  many  years  kept  the  w  orld  awake,  is 
now  become  the  most  decided  sleeper  on 
board  the  Northumberland,  —  During  the 
greater  part  of  the  day  he  reclines  on  a  sofa, 
quits  the  card-table  at  an  early  hour  in  the 
evening,  is  seldom  visible  before  eleven  in  the 
morning,  and  not  unfrequently  takes  his 
breakfast  in  bed.  But  he  has  nothing  to  do, 
and  a  Novel  will  sometimes  amuse  him. 

— It  had  been  a  favourite  conjecture,  in 
several  of  the  Newspapers,  that  Buonaparte, 
who  had  risqued  Death  in  so  many  forms  in 
the  Field  of  Battle,  and  whose  courage  can- 


(    57     ) 

not,  I  should  suppose,  be  liable  to  suspicion, 
would,  nevertheless,  play  the  Coward  at  last, 
and  put  an  end  to  his  life,  rather  than  suffer 
the  disgrace  of  being  sent  a  banished  man 
and  a  captive  to  St.  Helena.  The  prevalence 
of  such  an  opinion  reached  the  ear  of  the  ob- 
ject of  it,  who  calmly  replied, — "  No,  no,  I 
have  not  enough  of  the  Roman  in  me  to  de- 
stroy myself." 

The  subject  was  continued  in  consequence 
of  the  incidental  mention  of  Mr.  Whitbread's 
name,  and  the  unhappy  termination  of  his  life. 
That  circumstance,  as  well  as  the  political 
character  of  Mr.  \^hitbread,  was  not  altoge- 
ther unknown  to  Napoleon.  After  having 
described  him  as  a  faithful  and  active  friend 
to  his  country,  but  who  never  betrayed  any 
illiberal  or  local  prejudices  against  the  ene- 
mies of  it,  he  seemed  disposed  to  attribute 
the  lamentable  event  to  the  moisture  of  our 
climate.  He  was  not  ignorant  of  the  effects 
ascribed  to  our  gloomy  month  of  November, 
and  multiplied  his  questions  as  to  the  preva- 


(    58    ) 

lence  of  fogs  in  our  island,  and  their  supposed 
effects  on  the  physical  system  of  its  inhabit- 
ants, so  as  to  produce  those  hypocondriac 
disorders  and  the  tcediam  vitce^  to  which  seif- 
destruction  is  frequently  imputed,  lie  rea- 
soned for  some  time  with  no  common  inge- 
nuity on  the  unexpected  topic,  and  concluded 
with  this  decisive  opinion: — "  Suicide  is  a 
crime  the  most  revolting  to  my  feelings  ;  nor 
does  any  reason  present  itself  to  my  under- 
standing by  which  it  can  be  justified.  It  cer- 
tainly originates  in  that  species  of  fear  which 
we  denominate  cow  ardice,  (Poltronerie).  For 
what  claim  can  that  man  have  to  courage  who 
trembles  at  the  frowns  of  fortune. — True  he- 
roism consists  in  becoming  superior  to  the 
ills  of  life,  in  whatever  shape  they  may  chal- 
lenge him  to  the  combat." 

— General  Montholon  is  of  a  very  cheer- 
ful, lively  disposition ;  but  Madame,  sa  ires 
chere  femme,  is  in  continual  application  to 
medical  assistance. — Her  emperor  on  ejiQuir- 
ing  of  Mr.  O'Meara  the  state  of  her  health,  re- 


(    59    ) 

peated  the  question  of  Macbeth,  in  the  fol- 
lowing manner : — 

"  Can  a  physician  minister  to  a  mind  diseased, 
**  Or  pluck  from  memory  a  rooted  evil. 

Madame  Montholon,"  he  continued,  "  is 
alarmed  at  the  idea  of  St.  Helena.  She  is 
destitute  of  that  firmness  so  necessary  to  her  si- 
tuation, and  irresolution  is  a  weakness  that  is 
unpardonable  even  in  a  woman*/' — It  is,  in- 
deed, very  evident,  that  we  are  indebted  for 
the  company  of  the  ladies  in  our  voyage,  to 
the  romantic  devotion  of  the  gentlemen  their 
husbands  to  the  object  for  which  it  was  un- 
dertaken. Madame  Bertrand  could  not  even 
persuade  her  femine  de  chambre  to  quit  Paris, 
till  she  had  obtained  permission  for  the  wo- 
man's husband  and  son  to  accompany  the 
suite. 

*  Mr.  O'Mearavvas  Surgeon  on  board  the  Belleroplion ; 
and,  when  Buonaparte's  medical  attendant  declined  a 
continuance  of  his  professional  duties,  he  volunteered  his 
services  ;  a  circumstance  highly  approved  of  by  the  Com- 
mander of  the  Channel  fleet. — Nor  should  I  be  satisfied 
with  myself  if  I  did  not  bear  testimony  to  his  superior  skill 
in  his  profession,  to  the  honour  of  his  character,  and  the 
virtues  of  his  heart. 


(    60    ) 

— I  shall  now  proceed  to  give  the  account  of 
an  interesting  conversation  which  I  had  with 
the  Count  de  las  Cases  on  the  final  resolution 
of  Napoleon  to  throw  himself  on  the  genero- 
sity of  the  English  Government.  He  prefaced 
his  narrative  with  this  assurance  ;  "No  page 
of  Ancient  History  will  give  you  a  more  faith- 
ful detail  of  any  extraordinary  event,  than  I  am 
about  to  offer  of  our  departure  from  France, 
and  the  circumstances  connected  with  it.  The 
future  Historian  will  certainly  attempt  to 
describe  it ;  and  you  will  then  be  able  to  judge 
of  the  authenticity  of  his  materials  and  the 
correctness  of  his  narration. 

"  From  the  time  the  Emperor  quitted  the 
capital,  it  was  his  fixed  determination  to  pro- 
ceed to  America,  and  establish  himself  on  the 
banks  of  one  of  its  great  rivers,  where,  he 
had  no  doubt,  a  number  of  his  friends 
from  France  would  gather  round  him  ;  and, 
as  he  had  been  finally  baffled  in  the  career 
of  his  ambition,  he  determined  to  retire  from 
the  world,  and  beneath  the  branches  of  his 
ownfig-tree,  in  that  sequestered  spot,tranquilly 


(    61    ) 

and  philosophically  observe  the  agitations  of 
Europe." — On  my  observing  that  the  good 
people  of  Washington  might  entertain  very 
different  notions  of  his  philosophy,  and  rather 
contemplate  with  apprehension  such  a  colony 
as  he  would  establish,  Las  Cases  replied, 
"  Oh,  no  ;  the  career  of  Napoleon's  ambition 
is  terminated/' — —He  then  proceeded. 

"  On  our  arrival  at  Rochfort,  the  difficulty 
of  reaching  the  Land  of  Promise  appeared  to 
be  much  greater  than  had  been  conjectured. 
Every  enquiry  was  made,  and  various  projects 
proposed  ;  but,  after  all,  no  very  practicable 
scheme  offered  itself  to  our  acceptance.  At 
length,  as  a  dernier  resort^  two  chasse-marees, 
(small  one-masted  vessels)  were  procured; 
and  it  was  in  actual  contemplation  to  attempt 
a  voyage  across  the  Atlantic  in  them.  Six- 
teen Midshipmen  engaged  most  willingly  to 
direct  their  course;  and,  during  the  night, 
it  was  thought  that  they  might  effect  the 
meditated  escape, — We  met,''  continued  Las 
Cases,  "  in  a  small  room,  to  discuss  and  come 
to  a  final  determination  on  this  momentous 


(     62    ) 

subject;  nor  shall  I  attempt  to  describe  the 
anxiety  visible  on  the  countenances  of  our 
small  assembly. — The  Emperor  alone  retained 
an  unembarrassed  look,  when  he  calmly  de- 
manded the  opinions  of  his  chosen  band  of 
followers,  as  to  his  future  conduct.  The  ma- 
jority were  in  favour  of  his  returning  to  the 
army,  as  in  the  South  of  France  his  cause  still 
appeared  to  wear  a  favourable  aspect. — This 
proposition  the  Emperor  instantly  rejected, 
with  a  declaration,  delivered  in  a  most  decided 
tone  and  with  a  peremptory  gesture, — That 
he  never  would  be  the  instrument  of  a  Civil 
War  in  France. — He  declared,  in  the  words 
which  he  had  for  some  time  frequently  repeat- 
ed, that  his  political  career  was  terminated  ; 
and  he  only  wished  for  the  secure  asylum 
which  he  had  promised  himself  in  America, 
and,  till  that  hour,  had  no  doubt  of  attain- 
ing.— He  then  asked  me,  as  a  Naval  Officer, 
whether  I  thought  that  a  voyage  across 
the  Atlantic  was  practicable  in  the  small 
vessels,  in  which  alone  it  then  appeared  that 
the  attempt  could  be  made. — I  had  my 
doubts,"  added  Las  Cases,  "  and  1  had  my 


(    63     ) 

wishes:  The  latter  urged  me  to  efticourag^ 
the  enterprize  ;  and  the  former  made  me  Ire- 
sitate  ill  engaging  for  th€  probability  of  its 
being  crowned  with  success. — My  reply  indi- 
t-ated  the  influence  of  them  both. — I  answered, 
that  I  had  long  quitted  the  Maritime  pro- 
fession, and  was  altogether  unacquainted  with 
the  kind  of  vessels  in  question,  as  to  their 
strengtii  and  capacity  for  such  a  navigation 
as  was  proposed  to  be  undertaken  in  them  ; 
but  as  the  young  Midshipmen  who  had  vo- 
lunteered their  services,  must  be  competent 
judges  of  the  subject,  and  had  offered  to  risque 
their  lives  in  navigating  these  vessels,  no 
small  coniidence,  I  thought,  might  be  placed 
in  their  probable  security.- — This  project 
however,  was  soon  abandoned,  and  no  alter- 
native appeared  but  to  throw  ourseflves  on  the 
generosity  of  England." 

"  In  the  midst  of  this  midnight  Council, 
but,  without  the  least  appearance  of  dejec- 
tion at  the  varying  and  rather  irresolute  opi- 
nions of  his  friends,  Napoleon  ordered  one 
•f  them  to  act  as  Secretary,  and  a  Letter  to 


(    64     ) 

the  Prince  Regent  of  England  was  dictated. 
— On  the  following  day,  I  was  employed  in 
making  the  necessary  arrangements  with 
Captain  Maitland  on  board  the  Bellerophon, 
That  Officer  conducted  himself  with  the  ut- 
most politeness  and  gentlemanly  courtesy, 
but  would  not  enter  into  any  engagements  on 
the  part  of  his  Government  ;  and,  with  the 
exception  of  Lieutenant  Colonel  Planat, 
every  person  in  the  suite  of  Buonaparte 
buoyed  themselves  up  with  the  hopes  that 
they  should  receive  at  least,  the  same  treat- 
ment which  had  been  manifested  to  Lucien 
Buonaparte  in  your  country  ;  and  with  that 
consolatory  expectation  we  arrived  off'  the 
coast  of  England/* 

— The  performance  of  Divine  Service,  as 
is  usual  on  board  His  Majesty^s  ships,  to  dis- 
tinguish and  offer  due  honour  to  the  Sabbath 
Day,  happened  to  introduce  a  discourse  on 
the  subject  of  Religion  with  the  principal  per- 
sons of  the  suite ;  when  we  were  generally  in- 
formed that  their  chief  had  thought  proper,after 
dinner,  to  speak  on  the  subject  of  Religious 


(    65    ) 

Faith:  his  opinions  it  was  not  deemed  ne- 
cessary to  comnnniicate  any  further,  than 
that  they  were  generally  of  the  most  liberal 
and  tolerating  character. — One  circumstance, 
however,  it  was  thought  proper  to  assert,  as 
from  his  own  instant  authority — That  his  pro- 
fession of  the  Faith  of  Mahomet,  and  avowed 
devotion  to  the  Crescent,  in  Egypt,  was  a  mere 
act  of  policy  to  serve  the  purpose  of  the  mo- 
ment.— This  fact  appeared  to  be  asserted  with 
particular  energy,  from  the  knowledge  pos- 
sessed by  the  party  communicating  it,  of  the 
abhorrence  which  Buonaparte's  having  de- 
clared himself  a  Mussulman,  excited  in  Eng- 
land. But  the  zeal  of  the  moment  was  not 
calculated  to  throw  any  new  light  upon  the 
manoeuvre,  or  to  soften  the  original  opinion 
entertained  of  it.— Indeed,  I  ought  to  have 
told  you  before,  in  order  to  account  for  any 
apparent  knowledge  of  the  opinions  generally 
prevailing  in  England,  respecting  the  French 
Revolution  and  the  leading  characters  in  it, 
previous  to  the  Peace  of  Amiens,  if  allusions 
should  have  been  made  to  them,— that  the 
Count  de  las  Cases  had  resided  amonii'  us  a^ 
Hn  Emigrant,  till  that  event. 


(    66    ) 

— I  shall  here  observe,  that  whenever  an 
opportunity  offered,  the  zealous  attendants  of 
Napoleon,  never  failed  to  represent  him  in  a 
manner,  that  might  lessen  any  unfavourable 
impressions,  which  they  supposed  the  English 
entertained  respecting  him,  whether  personal 
or  political.  The  impetuosity  of  his  temper 
being  mentioned,  it  was  not  denied  ;  but  his 
frequent  and  even  habitual  correction  of  it 
was  illustrated  by  these  two  anecdotes,  which 
De  las  Cases  related  as  facts,  among  many 
others,  known  to  himself.  He  related  them 
in  the  following  manner : 

*'  I  was  at  St.  Cloud,  when  Captain  Mieu- 
lieuse  waited  upon  the  Emperor  on  his  return 
from  England. — He  had  been  taken  in  the 
Didon,  by  an  English  frigate,  the  Phoenix, 
commanded  by  Captain  Baker*.     On  my  in- 

*  A  short  time  previous  to  the  battle  of  Trafalgar,  the 
Didon  was  sent  from  Ferrol  by  Admiral  Villeneuve  to  as- 
certain what  English  ships  were  off  the  Coast.  This  Fri- 
gate, carrying  44  guns,  and  330  men,  had  instructions  to 
avoid  fighting  ;  but  falling  in  with  the  Phoenix  of  36  guns 
and  254  men,  commanded  by  Captain  Baker,  her  small  size 
seemed  to  justify  the  French  Captain  in  disobeying  his  or- 
ders :  he  backed  his  main-top-sail  and  lay-to  till  the  Phoenix 


(    67    ) 

troclucinghim,his  Majestysaid,ina  very  harsh 
tone  of  voice,  "  So,  Sir,  you  surrendered  your 
colours  to  an  enemy  of  inferior  force  :  how  can 
you  answer  for  your  conduct  ?" — "  Sire,"  re- 
plied Mieuliuse,  "  1  did  my  utmost ;  my  men 
would  fight  no  longer." — ''  If  so,"  answered 
the  Emperor,  "  when  an  Officer  is  disobeyed 
by  his  men,  he  should  cease  to  command  ; 
Therefore,  begone."  About  six  months  after 
this  mortifying  reception,  and  when  his  con- 
duct had  been  inquired  into,  he  was  appointed 
to  the  command  of  a  squadron  at  Venice. 

— "  The  Emperor  had  a  confidential  se- 
cretary, a  man  of  superior  talents,  who  was 
blessed  with  a  disposition  so  mild,  and  a  tem- 
per so  smooth,  that  it  was  almost  impossible 
to  trouble  the  one,  or  to  ruffle  the  other.  The 
impetuosity   of  his   Imperial    Master,    with 

ranged  up  along-side,  and  commenced  the  action  ;  when^ 
aftera  most  determined  conflict  of  three  hours,  part  of  whicli 
time  they  were  on  board  each  other,  the  Didon  struck,  beino- 
a  complete  wreck.  I  was  at  that  time  Surgeon  of  the 
Phoenix,  and  can  therefore  bear  testimony  to  the  admirable 
conduct  and  bravery  of  Captain  Baker,  his  Officers  and 
Crew,  on  this  memorable  occasion. 
F   2 


(    68    ) 

the  uncertain  and  unreasonable  hours  when 
he   was  frequently   summoned  to  his  duty, 
and  the  calm  preparation  in  which  he  was 
ever  found  to  perform  it,  sufficiently  proves 
the  character  that  has  been  given  of  him. — 
Napoleon  seldom  took  a  pen  into  his  hand  ; 
his  general  practice  was  to  dictate  to  others, 
which  he  did  with  the  rapidity  of  thought : 
and  if  an  idea  struck  him  in  the  middle  of  the 
night,  the  secretary  in  waiting  was  instantly 
summoned  to  transmit  it  to  paper.     This  offi- 
cer had  happened,  on  one  of  these  hasty  oc- 
casions, to  have  mistaken  an  expression  as  it 
was  dictated  to  him,  and,  for  this  accidental 
mistake,  was  dismissed  from  the  presence  in 
terms  of  the  severest  displeasure.     The  next 
morning  the  Emperor  sent  for  his  secretary  ; 
and  when  the  latter  entered  the  saloon  with 
his  usual  placid  and  undisturbed  countenance, 
the  Emperor,  with  rather  an  angry  look,  de- 
manded of  him  if  he  had  slept  the  preceding 
night?  and,  on  being  informed  that  he  had 
enjoyed  his  usual  hours  of  comfortable  repose, 
this  reply  was  given  :— '  then  you  have  been 
i»ore  fortunate  than  me ;  so  take  your  pen  ;* 


(    69    ) 

and  a  decree  for  a  very  liberal  pension  to  the 
secretary  was  instantly  dictated." 

It  was  wished,  also,  to  counteract  a  notion 
which  was  imagined  to  prevail  among  us, 
that  Napoleon  did  not  possess  the  active 
spirit  of  gallantry  towards  the  Ladies,  without 
which  a  Frenchman  does  not  believe  that  any 
generous,  noble,  or  heroic  virtue  can  exist. — 
Such  an  opinion,  if  it  prevailed,  was  consi- 
dered by  his  zealous  champions  as  a  most  foul 
and  groundless  assertion.  Among  other  proofs 
of  his  more  tender  nature,  it  was  said,  that  he 
was  sincerely  attached  to  Maria  Louisa ;  and 
it  was  added,  a  fond  look  from  her  eye  would 
command  any  thing  from  his  heart. — (Re- 
member, it  is  a  Frenchman  who  speaks.)  At 
the  same  time  it  was  avowed,  that  though  she 
might  possess  his  more  permanent  affection, 
her  Majesty  was  known  to  suspect  the  pos- 
sibility of  his  straying  into  an  occasional 
infidelity. 

It   is    indeed  very   well   known,  that  the 
English  ladies  whom  he  saw  from  the  gang*- 


(     70     ) 

way  of  the  Belleropbonj,  drew  from  him  very 
animated  expressions  bf  admiration.  Miss 
Brown,  a  daughter  of  General  Brown,  is  said 
to  have  fixed,  his  exclusive  attention^  .while 
she  was  in  a  situation  to  remain  an  object 
whose  features  could  be  distinguished. 

—^You^fiay  remember,  perhaps,  that  some 
years  si nice^  when  the  Marquis  of  Wellesley 
was  Sect»6tary  of  State  for  the  Foreign  De- 
partment, that  Sir  George,  then  Captain 
Cockburn,  who  commanded  the  Implacable, 
was  particularly  chosen  to  conduct  a  secret 
enterpi'ize  with  Baron  de  Colai,  a  Pole^  to  res- 
cue and  secure  the  escape  of  Ferdinand  Vl J. 
t)f  Spain,  Svho  wa«  at  that  time  confined  in 
the  Castle  of  Valen^^ay, — I  have  now  the  means 
of  throwing  some  light  upon  that  interesting 
transaction,  by  the  communications  of  those 
who  were  well  acquainted  with  what  I  must 
ieonsider  as  the  unfortunate  conclusion  of  it. 

All  that  could  be  done  by  the  active,  pa- 
tient, and  unremitting  vigilance  of  Captain 
Cockburn,  to  whom  so  important  a  part  of 


(    71    ) 

this  secret  design  had  been  entrusted,  was 
accomplished  ;  and  it  need  not  be  added, 
that  the  officers  under  his  command,  shared 
his  persevering  spirit.  They,  in  due  time, 
arrived  at  the  spot,  where  the  Baron  was  to 
enter  upon  the  part  assigned  him  in  the  bold 
and  dangerous  stratagem ;  and,  as  an  essential 
accompaniment  of  it,  money  and  jewels  were 
artfully  concealed  in  different  parts  of  his 
dress.  He  hoped  to  return  in  about  a  month, 
and  all  the  necessary  signals  were  arranged 
in  order  to  secure  his  retreat  with  his  royal 
prize  to  the  ship.  Nothing  more,  however, 
was  heard  of  the  Baron  ;  and  the  Implacable 
after  a  long-continued,  tedious,  and  ever- 
watchful  cruize,  returned  to  port. 

The  enterprizing  Pole  now  became  the 
subject  of  various  conjectures.  He  was  suc- 
cessively considered  as  having  betrayed  his 
trust,  or  seized  as  a  spy,  and  put  to  death  ; 
or  that  the  weak,  infatuated  Prince,  for  whose 
deliverance  the  enterprizing  Baron  had  de- 
voted himself  to  so  much  danger,  had  betrayed 
the  plot,  and  involved  his  romantic  adherent 


(     7 


0! 


ill  the  fatal  consequence  of  such  a  discovery. 
But  the  mystery  of  the  poor  Baron's  fate  was 
now  to  be  unfolded.  The  necessary  wit- 
nesses for  the  purpose  were  in  Court :  Sa- 
vary,  who  was  minister  of  the  Police  of 
Paris,  at  the  time  of  this  secret  expedition, 
was  in  the  suite  of  Napoleon,  and  could  have 
no  objection  to  tell  all  that  he  knew  of  the 
business,  while  his  master  was  on  the  spot  to 
confirm  or  correct  the  statement.  There  was 
no  difficulty,  therefore,  for  Sir  George  Cock- 
burn,  in  his  present  high  official  character,  to 
become  acquainted  with  the  finale  of  the  bold 
Baron's  adventures ;  concerning  which,  it 
maybe  presumed,  his  generous  nature  felt 
something  more  than  curiosity. 

The  Baron,  it  seems,  had  arrived  in  safety 
at  the  point  to  which  he  was  destined,  but 
Almighty  Love  appears  to  have  demanded 
his  first  attentions.  A  lady,  to  whom  he  was 
ardently  attached  in  Paris,  was  an  irresisti- 
ble object  of  attraction,  and  to  that  city  he 
bent  his  first  steps  :  but  he  had  not  been  two 
hours  within  its  walls  before  some  of  Savary's 


(  n  ) 

myrmidons  seized  the  unfortunate  and  impru- 
dent Pole,  stripped  off  his  cloaths,  with  their 
valuable  concealments,  and  consigned  him  to 
a  prison.     So  far  the  stratagem  failed  of  suc- 
cess :  but  Buonaparte  wished  to  know  whe- 
ther  the  imprisoned  monarch  was  privy  to  it. 
— A  proper  person  was  therefore  selected  to 
personate  the  Baron,  and  with  all  his  false 
passports  and  rich  clothes,  introduced  himself 
to  Ferdinand  ;  but  though  the  guards  were 
purposely  withdrawn,  to  give  all  possible  fa- 
cility  for  his  escape,  the  imprisoned  King  dared 
not  encounter  the  danger  of  the  attempt. 

— On  our  approach  to  Madeira,  the  hazy 
state  of  the  atmosphere  precluded  the  possi- 
bibty  of  seeing  the  Island,  until  we  got  close 
between  Puerto  Santo  and  the  Deserts.  The 
latter  rocky  island  is  almost  perpendicular  ; 
and  has  some  slight  resemblance  to  St.  Helena. 
This  circumstance  I  mentioned  to  De  las  Cas- 
ses,  and  he  instantly  communicated  it  to 
Napoleon,  who  had  quitted  the  dinner-table 
sooner  than  usual,  and  joined  a  few  of  us  on 
the  poop :  but  the  comparison  of  what  he  now 


(     74    ) 

saw,  with  his  gloomy  notions  of  the  place 
where  he  was  shortly  to  abide,  produced  not 
a  single  word.  He  gave  an  energetic  shrug, 
and  a  kind  of  contemptuous  smile  ;  and  that 
was  all. — The  sloping  front  and  luxuriant 
aspect  of  the  island  of  Madeira  could  noi  but 
excite  an  unpleasant  sensation,  when  contrast- 
ed with  the  idea  he  had  entertained  of  the 
huge  black  rock  of  St.  Helena. — I  had  pre- 
sented Johnson^s  Work  on  the  Influence  of 
Tropical  Climates  on  European  Constitutions 
to  his  perusal.  That  \^riter  has  been  very 
lavish  of  his  encomiums^on  St.  Helena  ;  but 
he  acknowledges  that  he  only  lay  at  anchor 
off  it  for  three  days  ;  and  its  acute  reader  ridi- 
culed the  glowing  descriptions  which  were 
founded  on  such  a  transient  and  imperfect 
view  of  the  place. 

A  Sirocco  wind  had  blown  for  forty-eight 
hours  previous  to  our  arrival  at  the  Madeiras, 
and  had  done  considerable  damage  to  the 
vines  of  the  Island. — This  circumstance  will 
be  indubitably  attributed  by  the  superstitious 
inhabitants    to    the    malign    appearance   of 


(  7&  ) 

Buonaparte  on  their  coast ;  and  all  the  saints 
were  probably  invoked  to  hasten  our  de- 
parture. 

With  the  fine  landscape  of  the  rich  and 
fruitful  spot  before  us,  I  conclude  this  Letter. 
— My  next  may,  perhaps,  inform  you  of  our 
arrival  at  the  barren  and  rocky  scene  of  St. 
Helena.  But,  wherever  1  may  be,  you  well 
know,  I  trust,  with  what  truth, 


I  am,  &c.  &c. 


w.  w: 


At  Sea, 


MY  DEAR , 

OUR  great  man  seldom  suffered  a 
day  to  pass  without  making  particular  en- 
quiries respecting  the  health  of  the  crew  ; 
and  the  nature  of  such  diseases  as  then  pre- 
vailed among  them,  with  the  particular 
mode  of  treatment.  The  complaints  then 
prevalent  on  board  the  Northumberland  re- 
quired a  free  use  of  the  lancet.  We  had  a 
young,  healthy,  florid  crew,  on  our  quitting 


(    76    ) 

England,  with  constitutions  liable  to  be  in- 
fluenced with  increase  of  temperature.  He 
seemed  to  entertain  a  very  strong*  prejudice 
against  bleeding,  which  he  called  the  San- 
grado  practice,  nor  did  he  fail  to  treat  our 
first  conversations  on  the  subject  with  a  de- 
gree of  humour  and  pleasantry,  which  proved 
that  the  great  events  of  his  life  had  not  driven 
from  his  recollection  the  solemn  satire  of  Le 
Sage.  He  urged  the  propriety  of  sparing 
the  precious  fluid,  under  an  apprehension 
of  its  deficiency,  when,  as  he  conceived,  the 
food  on  board  a  ship  was  not  sufficiently  nu- 
tritious to  restore  it.  A  Fienchman,  he  ex- 
claimed, would  never  submit  to  ii»ie  discipline 
of  the  Spanish  Doctor.  And  on  my  observing 
that  the  French  did  not  eat  quite  so  much  beef 
as  Englishmen,  he  peremptorily  denied  the 
fact ; — "  to  the  full  as  much,"  he  said,  "  but 
they  cook  it  differently.'" — He  was,  however, 
open  to  conviction  ;  and  when  he  had  been 
made  to  understand  the  general  health  of  our 
fleet,  and  had  witnessed  the  good  effects  of 
the  practice  which  he  had  so  forcibly  repro- 
bated and  ridiculed,   he  no  longer  argued 


(    77    ) 

against  it ;  but  always  mentioned  it  with 
some  facetious  observation.  On  meeting  me, 
he  would  apply  his  fingers  to  the  bend  of  the 
opposite  arm,  and  ask — "  well,  how  many 
have  you  bled  to-day  ?'*  Nor  did  he  fail  to 
exclaim,  when  any  of  his  own  people  were 
indisposed — "  O  bleed  him,  bleed  him !  To 
the  powerful  lancet   with    him  :    that's    the 

infallible    remedy/' He    had,    however, 

seen  the  good  effects  on  Madame  Bertrand. 
That  lady  was  attacked  with  an  inflamma- 
tory Fever,  when  she  submitted  to  lose  two 
pounds  of  blood,  as  well  as  to  abstain  from 
wine  and  all  animal  food  :  but  the  Sangrado 
{system  effected  her  cure,  and  confirmed  the 
proselytism  of  her  Emperor  to  the  practice. 

Of  his  own  state  of  health  he  has  good  rea- 
son to  boast :  and  when  it  is  considered  to 
how  many  various  climates  he  has  exposed 
himself,  and  what  a  succession  of  toil  he  has 
vmdergone  during  the  last  twenty-five  years, 
the  excellent  health  he  has  enjoyed,  and  still 
enjoys,  is  altogether  astonishing. — He  de- 
clares that  he  has  been  but  twice,  throughout 


(    78    ) 

his  life,  in  such  a  state  as  to  demand  medical 
aid.  He  took  a  dose  of  physic  for  the  first 
complaint ;  and  tlie  second,  being  a  pulmonic 
affection,  required  a  blister.  Mr.  O'Meara, 
his  own  surgeon,  speaks  with  admiration  of 
his  temperament,  and  says,  that  his  pulse 
never  exceeds  sixty-two.  His  own  spontane- 
ous account  of  himself  is,  that  he  is  very  pas- 
sionate ;  but  that  the  violence  of  his  disposi- 
tion soon  subsides,  not  only  into  tranquillity, 
but  into  coldness  and  indifference. — I  have 
never  heard  that,  in  speaking  of  his  constitu- 
tion and  uncommon  state  of  health,  he  ever 
hinted  at  the  advances  of  age,  or  calculated 
the  probabilities  of  his  enjoying  length  of  life. 
— He  has  indeed  been  known  to  say,  and  to 
repeat  the  opinion,  that  he  ought  to  have  died 
on  the  day  when  he  entered  Moscow  ;  as  he 
then  had  arrived  at  the  summit  of  his  mili- 
tary glory.  It  has  been  even  said  by  some  of 
his  few  surrounding  friends,  that  he  should 
himself  have  determined  not  to  survive  it. 

— I  must  beg  leave  to  return  to  the  subject 
of  blood-letting,  as  a  conversation  took  place 


(    79    ) 

which  had  escaped  me,  and  is  an  additional 
proof  of  his  curiosity  or  anxiety ,  or  perhaps 
both  of  them,  respecting  it, — He  called  me  to 
him  on  the  quarter-deck,  and  asked  the  follow- 
ing professional  questions  : — "  Can  a  person, 
labouring  under  a  tropical  disease,  requiring 
what  you  call  the  free  use  of  the  lancet,  promise 
himself  an  equal  share  of  health,  eighteen 
months  after,  as  he  had  before  the  system  of 

depletion  ?" '"  How  long  are  the  vessels 

filling  after  being  partially  emptied  of  blood  ; 
and  what  quantity  can  the  human  body  lose 
without  producing  death  ?" — After  reasoning 
for  some  time  on  the  subject  of  these  questions, 
1  surprized  him  with  the  account  of  a  very 
extraordinary  case  then  subject  to  my  treat- 
ment.  A  seaman  was  put  on  the  sick  list  ; 

the  disease  an  inflammation  of  the  stomach. 
On  the  second  day  the  pulse  beat  150  in  the 
minute,  and  not  an  article  of  food  or  of  me- 
dicine was  retained  by  the  stomach  for  two 
minutes.  In  the  course  of  three  days  the  pa- 
tient lost  fifteen  pounds  of  blood  ;  when  the 
pulse,  though  still  full,  was  reduced  to  87 
beats.     Nothing  solid  remained  on  his  sto- 


(    80    ) 

mach  for  three  months,  nevertheless  the  man 
recovered.  This  you  will  say  was  a  case 
in  point ;  and  enough  to  make  any  one  a 
convert  to  the  application  of  the  lancet.  He 
described  to  me  a  pulmonic  complaint  with 
which  he  was  aifected  on  his  return  from 
Egypt ;  and  asked  me  what  treatment  1  should 
have  adopted  in  his  case.  "  Would  you  have 
done  as  Covisart  did  ?  he  blistered  me  twice." 
I  replied  that,  most  probably,  I  should  have 
bled  previous  to  the  application  of  a  blister, 
as  in  the  commencement  of  pectoral  affections, 
they  are  generally  attended  with  inflammation. 
The  conversation  afforded  me,  as  I  thought, 
rather  a  fair  opportunity  of  asking  him,  if  his 
sleep  was  generally  sound  ;  I  felt  at  the  time, 
that  it wasan adventurous  question ;  nor  would 
it  have  surprized  me,  if  he  had  turned  away 
without  giving  me  an  answer  ;  but,  with  a 
look  more  expressive  of  sorrow  than  displea- 
sure, he  replied,  ''  No  :  — from  my  cradle,  I 
have  been  an  indifferent  sleeper.'' 

Adieu,  &c.  &c. 


(    81     ) 


At  Sea, 


MY    DEAR 


1  shall  begin  this  Letter,  by  intro- 
ducing a  very  interesting  person  to  your  at- 
tention ;  and  who,  in  our  various  quarter- 
deck conversations,  had  not  been  hitherto 
mentioned.  It  was  the  Empress  Josephine. — 
Her  name  happening  to  occur,  she  became 
the  spontaneous  subject  of  very  animated 
eulogiums  ;  when  she  was  representad  as  pos- 
sessing a  sweetness  of  disposition,  an  ele- 
gance of  manners,  and  a  certain  melody  of 
voice  that  irresistibly  charmed  every  one, 
without  any  exception  as  to  situation  or  capa- 
city, who  were  admitted  to  her  presence. — 
The  sudden  death  of  this  excellent  Lady  was 
very  generally  lamented,  and  is  attributed  to 
a  very  extraordinary  circumstance,  and  a  very 
exalted  personage.  I  will  relate  the  event 
to  you  in  the  words,  as  far  as  memory  serves, 
in  which  the  Count  de  las  Cases  conveyed 
it  as  an  undeniable  fact  to  me.— Josephine,  it 
seems,  had  so  far  won  the   admiration  and 

G 


(    82 

high  esteem  of  the  Emperor  Alexander,  that 
his  Imperial  Majesty  used  to  dedicate  many 
of  his  leisure  hours  to  the  pleasure  of  her  fas- 
cinating conversation.  His  visits  were  not 
only  frequent  but  continual  during  his  stay 
at  Paris. — Her  state  of  health  was  but  indif- 
ferent, and  on  some  particular  occasion,  her 
physician  had  prescribed  medicines  of  a 
nature  that  required  the  utmost  care  and 
precaution,  and  an  absulute  confinement  to 
her  chamber  :  but,  at  this  time,  the  Emperor 
paid  one  of  his  visits,  when  her  respect  for 
him  rendered  her  incautious,  and  she  received 
the  Imperial  guest  in  the  usual  manner.  They 
walked,  during  the  time  of  his  stay,  in  the 
gardens  of  Mal-Maison  ;  and  the  consequence 
of  this  promenade  was  fatal : — she  was  seized 
with  a  violent  inflammation  in  the  lungs, 
which  defied  all  medical  assistance,  and  in  a 
few  days  she  was  no  more. 

— From  the  same  authority  I  give  you  an 
account  of  her  marriage  with  Napoleon,  which 
certainly  differs  as  far  as  my  recollection  serves, 
from  the  credited  histories  of  that  event :  it  is 


(    83    ) 

not,  however,  for  me  to  attempt  a  reconcilia- 
tion of  opposing  narratives ;  but  to  relate,  for 
your  amusement,  what  I  have  heard,  and  the 
author  of  my  information  :  it  is  as  follows. — 

An  order  which  was  issued  by  the  Conven^- 
TiON  to  disarm  the  citizens,  occasioned  the  in- 
troduction of  Buonaparte,  then  a  General,  and 
high  m  military  command,  to  Josephine.  Her 
husband,  was  said  to  have  suffered  eighteen 
months  before  the  circumstance  about  to  be 
mentioned.  He  had  left  a  son  Eugene  Beau- 
harnois,  at  this  time  a  most  interesting  youth, 
who  took  an  opportunity  to  address  the  Ge- 
neral on  the  Parade,  and  solicit  his  father's 
sword  ;  which,  according  to  the  late  order, 
had  been  removed  from  his  mother's  residence. 
Buonaparte,  charmed  by  the  request,  and  the 
animated  modesty  with  which  it  was  made, 
instantly  granted  it.  The  mother  wrote  a 
letter  the  following  day  to  thank  the  General 
for  his  kindness  to  her  son.  This  grateful 
attention  produced  a  visit  on  his  part,  and  the 
Lady  not  being  at  home,  she  sent  a  note  of 
apology  and  particular  invitation.  An  inter- 
g2 


(    84    ) 

view  of  course  followed:  He  was  instantly 
captivated,  and  in  six  weeks  they  were  mar- 
ried.— It  has  been  generally  thought,  I  believe, 
that  the  second  marriage  did  not  obliterate 
his  regard  for  her:  and  it  is  here  asserted,  by 
those  who  were  quahfied  to  form  a  correct 
opinion  of  the  matter,  that  he  would  have 
given  more  evident  proofs  of  his  regard,  if 
the  jealousy  of  the  second  Empress  had  not 
interposed  to  prevent  them. 

— Having  induced  you,  perhaps,  to  suppose 
that  Napoleon  was  susceptible  of  love,  I  shall 
introduce  Madame  Bertrand  to  persuade  you, 
that  he  is  not  without  a  capacity  for  friend- 
ship.— She  related,  in  a  very  impressive  man- 
ner to  us,  the  last  interview  with  Duroc,  Duke 
of  Frieuli,  and  his  afflicted  Sovereign. 

That  officer,  who,  as  it  will  appear,  stood 
high  in  his  iMaster's  regard  and  confidence, 
was  struck  by  a  cannon-ball,  as  he  was  recon- 
noitring the  position  for  a  night  encampment 
of  the  army,  and  his  bowels  fell  to  the  ground  ; 
when  he  had  the  extraordinary  resolution  to 


(    85    ) 

collect  and  replace  them  with  his  own  hands, 
on  the  spot.  In  this  hopeless  state  he  was 
removed  to  a  neighbouring  cottage,  where  he 
survived  twenty-four  hours. — A  mortification 
soon  took  place,  and  a  very  offensive  smell  be- 
gan to  issue  from  his  body,  which  continued  to 
increase.  After  he  had  been  some  time  in 
this  state,  the  Emperor  came  to  visit  and  con- 
sole him.  The  dying  man,  after  expressing 
his  acknowledgements  to  his  Master  for  this 
gracious  act  of  kindness,  which  he  accompa- 
nied with  sentiments  of  the  utmost  loyalty 
and  devotion,  recommended  his  wife  and 
daughter  to  the  Imperial  protection  ;  and 
then  entreated  him  to  depart,  lest  the  effluvia 
proceeding  from  him  might  be  attended  with 
infection. — She  represented  Napoleon's  grief 
as  perfectly  romantic,  and  stated  as  a  fact, 
that  he  lay,  for  it  is  not  to  be  supposed  that 
he  slept,  a  whole  night  on  the  stone  which 
covered  the  grave  of  his  friend. 

— She  also  mentioned  that  he  possessed 
an  equal  attachment  to  Lasnes,  Duke  of 
Montebello,  who  was  killed  at  the  battle  of 


(    86    ) 

Esling,  when  a  similar  scene  of  affliction  and 
regard  took  place. — 1  hat  brave  officer  had 
been  obliged  to  submit  to  the  amputation  of 
one  leg  just  below  the  knee,  and  the  other 
just  above  the  ancle.  Buonaparte  and  Ber- 
trand  visited  him  in  this  unhappy  condition, 
on  the  left  bank  of  the  Danube.  Bertrand  was 
endeavouring  to  console  him  by  comparing  his 
situation  to  that  of  the  brave  Caffarelli,  when 
he,  with  a  certain  eagerness  of  expression, 
thus  interrupted  him  : — "  The  attachment  of 
CafFarelli  to  the  Emperor  was  cold,  when 
compared  with  the  affection  which  I  feel." 

— It  was  on  a  Sunday,  at  the  Admiral's 
table,  that  Buonaparte  catechised  the  Chap- 
lain of  the  Northumberland  in  the  following 
curious  and  unexpected  manner  :  though  the 
learned  Divine  is  well  qualified  to  have  an- 
swered a  far  more  profound  enquiry  respect- 
ing the  Faith  which  he  teaches,  and  the  things 
that  belong  to  it. 

— How  many  Sacraments  does  the  Church 
of  England  acknowledge } 


(    87    ) 

Two — Baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper. 

— Does  not  the  Church  of  England  con- 
sider Marriage  as  a  Sacrament  ? 

No. 

— What  are  the  Tenets  of  the  Church  of 
England? 

The  Tenets  of  the  Church  of  England  are 
Lutheran,  or  Episcopal  Protestant. 

— How  often  is  the  Sacrament  of  the  Lord's 
Supper  administered  ? 

In  the  churches  of  the  metropolis,  and  other 
cities  and  large  towns,  the  Eucharist  is  ob- 
served monthly ;  but  in  the  country  churches, 
where  the  population  is  not  so  large,  quarterly. 
The  Festivals  of  the  Nativity  of  our  Saviour, 
or  Christmas  Day ;  of  the  Resurrection,  or 
Easter  Sunday;  the  Descent  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  or  Whit-sunday  ;  and  the  Feast  of 
St.  Michael,  are  the  quarterly  observations  of 
the  Eucharist. 

— Do  all  the  communicants  drink  out  of 
the  same  cup  ? — They  do. 

— Is  the  bread  made  use  of  in  the  Sacra- 
ment common  bread  ? 


(     88     ) 

The  bread  is  of  wheat,  and  the  best  that 
can  be  conveniently  procured. 

— Supposing  that  wine  could  not  be  pro- 
cured in  the  Administration  of  the  Sacrament, 
would  any  other  liquid  be  allowed  as  Its  sub- 
stitute ? 

It  is  not  at  all  probable  that  a  case  of  this 
kind  ever  occurred :  wine  being  to  be  pro- 
cured in  every  part  of  the  kingdom. 

— Do  the  bishops  frequently  preach  ? 

Seldom  but  on  extraordinary  occasions, 

— Do  they  w  ear  the  mitre  ? 

I  believe  I  may  venture  to  say — never. 
Though  I  cannot  affirm  whether  the  arch- 
bishops do  or  do  not  wear  the  mitre,  when 
they  crown  the  King. 

— Have  not  the  bishops  a  seat  in  the  House 
of  Peers  ? 

They  have. 

•*— How  long  is  it  requisite  for  persons  who 
are  candidates  for  Holy  Orders  at  the  Univer- 
sity, to  have  resided  there  ? 

Four  years  : — but  previous  to  their  be- 
coming members  of  the  University,  they  are 


(    89    ) 

generally  seven  or  eight  years  at  a  classical 
school. 

— Of  how  long  standing  must  a  person  be 
in  the  University,  before  the  degree  of  a 
Doctor  of  Divinity  ? 

Nineteen  years  from  the  time  of  his  matri- 
culation. 

— Which  are  the  most  approved  places  of 
education  for  the  candidates  for  Holy  Orders  ?    - 
The  universities  of  Oxford  and  Cambridge. 
— Are  there  many  Puritans  (meaning  Pres- 
byterians) in  England } 
There  are  a  great  many. 
— What   are    the  religious  tenets  of  the 
Church  of  Scotland  ? 

The  tenets  of  that  Church  are  Calvinistic. 
They  do  not  allow  episcopacy  or  the  gcvern- 
ment  by  bishops.  They  are  Presbyterians, 
because  they  hold  the  government  of  priests, 
and  presbyters  or  elders. 

—To  whose  custody  are  the  registers  of 
baptisms,  marriages,  and  deaths  committed  ? 
They  are  generally  entrusted  to  the  care 
of  the  minister  ;  but  it  is  a  more  regular  pro- 
ceeding to  keep  them  in  a  strong  chest  which 


{    90    ) 

remains  in  the  vestry-room  of  the  parish 
church.  This  chest  is  guarded  by  three  locks 
of  different  construction  ;  so  that  it  cannot, 
or  at  least  ought  not,  to  be  opened,  without 
the  concurrence  of  three  persons — the  minis- 
ter, and  ihe  two  church-wardens  ;  who,  each 
of  them,  possess  their  official  and  separate 
key. — The  idea  of  keys  and  locking  up, 
might  not  excite  sensations  altogether  pleas- 
ing to  the  extraordinary  Captive,  for  here  he 
closed  his  enquiries. 

It  may  be  said  that  every  thing  is  possible, 
if  it  should  please  God  ;  as  was  observed, 
according  to  the  story,  by  a  Dutcli  burgo- 
master, when  a  man  was  brought  before 
him  who  was  accused  of  having  bit  off  his  own 
nose.  But  at  all  events,  it  may  be  considered 
as  a  very  striking  article  of  the  chapter  of  im- 
probabilities, in  any  preceding  part  of  Buona- 
parte's life,  that  he  should  ever  be  found  ca- 
techizing the  chaplain  on  board  an  English 
man  of  war  bound  for  St.  Helena,  respecting 
the  forms,  ceremonies,  tenets,  &c.  of  the  An- 
glican church. 


(    91     ) 

—The  ceremony  of  crossing  the  line,  a  day 
of  jubilee  to  the  voyagers  of  every  maritime 
nation,  is  so  well  known,  that  it  would  be  su- 
perfluous to  give  a  minute  description  of  it ; 
though  more  than  usual  ceremony  was  dis- 
played on  the  present  occasion  :  and  it  must 
be  acknowledged  that  the  French  party  sub- 
mitted with  the  best  grace,  that  is  to  say, 
with  the  most  perfect  good  humour,  to  the 
novel  freedoms  of  the  marine  Saturnalia: — 
Nor  had  the  Neptune  and  Amphitrite  of  the 
day  any  cause  of  complaint.  They  were 
seated  in  a  boat  filled  with  water,  the  throne 
a  match-tub,  and  the  sceptre  a  painter's  brush. 
They  were  surrounded  by  their  Tritons,  con- 
sisting of  fifty  or  sixty  of  the  most  athletic 
men  in  the  ship,  naked  to  the  waist,  and 
bedaubed  with  various  colours,  each  bearing 
a  pail  of  salt  water,  to  drench,  more  or  less,  the 
subjects  of  the  briny  god.  The  licence  of 
the  pastime  may  be  imagined,  when  Captain 
Ross,  who  commanded  the  ship,  received 
the  contents  of  one  of  them  with  perfect  plea- 
santry. 


(    92    ) 

— Bertrand,  Montholon,  Gourgond,  aud 
De  las  Cases,  with  all  the  domestics,  presented 
themselves  to  the  temporary,  but  potent 
Neptune,  and  received,  with  the  necessary 
cheerfulness,  their  share  of  his  ablutions. 
The  two  former  led  their  children  forward, 
each  of  them  presenting,  from  their  extended 
little  hands,  a  double  Napoleon  as  their  offer- 
ing to  the  presiding  deity  of  the  deep.  A  sea- 
boy  sung  tiie  song  of*  The  snug  little  Island,'' 
some  of  whose  lines  were  not  very  compli- 
mentary to  the  enemies  of  Great  Britain,  but 
not  an  unpleasant  look  was  produced  by  them. 
1  he  ladies  viewed  the  scene  from  an  elevated 
position,  and  appeared  to  be  equally  amused 
and  astonished  at  the  festivities  of  it.  Nep- 
tune was  rather  disappointed  that  Napoleon 
did  not  make  his  appearance,  though  he  ac- 
knowledged the  sovereign  dignity  by  sendijjg 
his  tribute. — In  short,  harmony  prevailed  to 
the  close  of  this  festive  medley. 

— You,  my  dear  friend,  ^vho  have  af- 
forded a  vigilant  attention  to  every  part  of 
Napoleon's  extraordinary  career,  and  to  sa- 


(     93     ) 

tisfy  whose  prevailing  curiosity  concerning 
him,  I  have  become  a  writer  of  biography,  such 
as  it  may  prove  ;  you,  i  say,  may  remember, 
though  it  does  not  occur  to  me,  that  a  rumour 
prevailed  after  the  Treaty  of  Tilsit,  of  a 
projected  marriage  between  the  Emperor  of 
France  and  a  Russian  princess. — This  cir- 
cumstance seems  to  be  acknowledged  here ; 
and  it  is  said,  moreover,  that  the  failure  of 
this  negociation  arose  from  the  bigotry  of  the 
lady^s  royal  mother,  who  insisted  on  the  esta- 
blishment of  a  Greek  church  in  the  palace  of 
the  Thuilleries. — 1  merely  state  it  as  a  little 
article  of  our  political  chit-chat,  for  your  po- 
litical amusement. 

—I  recur  once  more  to  the  person  of  this 
object  of  your  inquisitive  spirit,  as  it  leads  to 
circumstances  (i  know  they  will  not  be  thought 
trifling  by  you,)  which  are  connected  with 
this  additional  description  of  it.  He  has  an 
uncommon  face ;  large,  full  and  pale,  but  not 
sickly.  In  conversation,  the  muscles  suiffer 
little  or  no  exertion :  with  the  excepticm  of 
those  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  mouth, 


(     94     ) 

the  whole  seemed  fixed,  and  the  forehead  per- 
fectly smooth.  That  of  a  Frenchman  is  ge- 
nerally wrinkled,  from  the  habitual,  muscular 
exertion  of  the  countenance,  which  we  deno- 
minate grimace :  but  however  earnest  Napo- 
leon may  be  in  conversation,  he  discovers  no 
distortion  of  feature.  When  he  wishes  to 
enforce  a  question,  he  sometimes  employs  his 
hand,  but  that  alone  :  and  were  I  describing 
a  Petit  Miiitre,  I  might  attribute  the  display 
to  its  uncommon  handsomeness. — He  some- 
times smiles,  but  1  believe  he  seldom  laughs. — 
I  have  never  observed,  when  laughter  has 
prevailed  around  him,  that  he  has  caught  the 
pleasant  infection.  The  interesting  children 
on  board,  who  amuse  every  body,  do  not  at- 
tract his  attention.  There  is  a  large,  good- 
tempered  Newfoundland  dog'  who  is  a  fre- 
quent and  rather  a  rude  play-fellow  of  these 
urchins ;  and  in  a  situation  where  no  active 
entertainments  are  exhibited,  the  interludes  of 
these  performers  afford  no  small  degree  of 
amusement  to  those  around  them.  But  they 
have  never  won  a  smile,  that  I  have  observed, 
from    the    Ex-imperial  spectator. Once, 


(    95    ) 

indeed,  when  Beiirand  was  in  conversation 
with  his  Master,  the  Count's  llltJe  girl,  in- 
truded upon  it,  with  a  story  which  all  her  fa- 
ther's prohibitions  could  not  silence.  On 
this  occasion  Napoleon  took  her  by  the  hand, 
heard  out  her  little  tale,  and  at  the  conclu- 
sion kissed  her.  But  this  very  uncommon 
attention  was  probably  paid  to  the  child  as 
the  only  mode  of  getting  rid  of  her,  which 
might  not  have  been  painful  to  the  feelings 
of  the  father. 

— You  will  say,  perhaps,  when  you  have 
read  a  little  further,  that  we  are  very  much 
in  want  of  amusements  on  board  a  ship, 
which  we  certainly  know  as  well  as  you,  and 
that  we  are  pleased  with  little  things  ;  how- 
ever,  as  you  are  the  father  of  children,  I  will 
tell  you  something  which  I  think  will  amuse 
you, — Frequent  attempts  are  made  on  the 
loyalty  of  the  little  Bertrands,  by  courting 

them,   in    very  seducing  ways,    to    say 

Vive  le  Moi,  and  Vive  Louis  dix  huit.  But 
^he  two  eldest  are  loyal  children,  and  true, 
and  never  fail  to  reply  with,   Vive  LEmpe- 


(    96    ) 

reur, — The  youngest  of  the  three  was  how- 
ever, at  length,  bribed  by  irresistible  sweet- 
meats, to  say Vive  Louis  dix  huit ;  for  he, 

like  other  cautious  politicians,  could  not  be 
persuaded  to*  go  all  lengths,  and  add — Vive  le 
Roi,  But  tliis  daring'  defection  never  failed  to 
be  followed  by  the  reproaches  of  his  uncor- 
ruptible brother  and  sister. — This  charming 
boy  is  said  to  bear  a  strong  resemblance  to  the 
young  Napoleon,  and  has  acquired  the  title 
among  u^  of  John  Bull,  which  he  triumphantly 
retains  ;  and  if  asked  who  he  is, — appears 
pleased  to  exclaim — Jean  BoolL 

— You  have  known  me  long,  and  have 
been  acquainted  with  my  general  views  in 
life  :  but  who  can  foresee  what  he  may  come 
to  ! — and  could  you  suppose  that  I  should  ever 
be  a  teacher  of  the  English  language,  and  to 
the  la,te  Grand  Marshal  of  the  Palace  of  the 
Thuilleries  ;  though  I  have  reason  to  be  proud 
of  my  scholar  for  his  amiable  disposition, 
soldier-like  frankness,  and  cultivated  mind. 
He  speaks  English  intelligibly,  but  with  a 
very  French  accent.     This  he  wished  to  im- 


(    97    ) 

prove,  and  I  undertook  to  read  with  him. 
Such  has  been  my  task  for  an  hour  or  twO 
every  day  during  the  last  fortnight.  We  have 
got  through  the  Vicar  of  Wakefield  with  great 
success  ;  Roderic  Random,  the  never-failing 
novel  of  a  seaman,  now  occupies  us.  The 
sea  terms  and  the  seaman's  language  are  ra- 
ther perplexing,  as  my  persevering  scholar 
will  not  suffer  a  single  sentence  to  pass  by 
without  the  best  explanation  that  I  can  find. 
The  Tour  of  Doctor  Syntax  yet  remains,  and 
will  probably  last  us  to  St.  Helena. 

— As  you  have  desired  me  to  omit  nothing, 
however  trifling,  that  relates  to,  or  is  authen- 
tically related  of,  our  chief  Passenger,  I  shall 
just  mention  that  Count  Bertrand,  in  the  his- 
tory which  he  gave  of  the  German  campaign 
in  1807,  took  occasion  to  observe  that  Buon- 
aparte had  very  seldom  employed  spies. — 
He  appeared,  in  the  course  of  his  warfare,  to 
know  but  one  instance  of  a  person  being 
engaged  by  his  master  in  that  capacity,  which 
was  in  Italy  ;  at  the  same  time  he  acknow- 
ledged that  the  services  performed  by  him 


(    98    ) 

were  of  considerable  importance. — In  speak- 
ing also  of  Napoleon's  talents,  for  which  he 
uniformly  avows  the  most  profound  admira- 
tion, he  expressed  himself  to  the  following 
effect  : — "  When  I  was  first  admitted  to  the 
Emperor's  confidence,  he  employed  me  on  a 
particular  service,  and  no  zeal  was  wanting, 
on  my  part,  to  execute  it ;  but  1  found  it,  as 
I  thought,  to  be  impracticable  ;  and  I  did 
not  hesitate  to  submit  my  opinion  to  him  that 
it  was  so.  It  may  be  so  to  you,  he  replied, 
but  in  what  manner  did  you  proceed  ?  I  ac- 
cordingly explained  the  means  I  had  pursued. 
You  have  failed,  he  said,  in  following  your 
plans  :  now  see  what  success  you  will  have  in 
pursuing  mine.  These  he  explained — I  ad- 
hered to  them  of  course,  and  succeeded.— — 
I  then  determined  never  again  to  suppose 
that  any  commands  of  his  could  fail  of 
being  fulfilled  ;  and  in  any  future  operations 
which  he  entrusted  to  me,  the  idea  of  im- 
possibility never  occurred  to  my  thoughts 
in  the  performance  of  my  duty,  or  was  forced 
upon  me  by  my  experience  in  the  failure 
of  it/' 


(    99    ) 

— I  have  observed,  that  at  cards,  our  extra- 
ordinary man  plays  rather  a  negligent  game, 
and  loses  his  money  with  great  good  humour. 
Nay,  he  is  frequently  inaccurate  in  reckoning 
his  points,  Sfc. ;  but  as  often,  most  assuredly^ 
to  his  loss  as  his  gain.  At  chess,  indeed, 
which  is  a  scientific  game,  independent  of 
fortune,  and  considered  as  being  connected 
with  a  leading  branch  of  military  tactics,  he 
may  not  possess,  perhaps,  the  same  indiffer- 
ence. However  that  may  be,  I  shrewdly 
suspect  that  Montholon,  when  he  plays  with 
him,  takes  care  to  be  the  loser. — I  have  read, 
though  I  know  not  where,  that  some  great 
commander,  on  being  beat  at  chess  by  one 
of  his  officers,  was  so  infuriated  by  the  jea- 
lousy of  the  moment,  that  he  drew  forth  a 
pistol  and  dispatched  his  conqueror. — I  won- 
der whether  the  Aide-de-Camp  has  ever  heard 
this  story ! 

— Having  crossed   the   I^ine,    the  South- 
West  winds  occasioned  our  making  a  sweep 
off  the  Gulph  of  Guinea,  before  we  were  en- 
abled to  shape  a  course  for  our  destined  port* 
H  2 


(    100    ) 

The  declining  sun  of  the  14th  of  October, 
1815,  shot  out  a  parting  ray  e'er  it  sunk  be- 
neath the  horizon.  Under  this  small  illumined 
space,  was  obscurely  perceived  the  lofty  Peak 
of  Saint  Helena.— The  memorable  morning 
soon  dawned  which  was  to  usher  in  the  com- 
mencement of  Napoleon^s  exile.  This  new 
feature  in  his  history  will  be  the  subject  of 
my  next  Letter. 

&c.  &c.  &c. 

W.  W. 


St.  Helena, 


MY  DEAR , 

THE  sensation  excited  in  the  little 
iiiteresting  Colony  of  St.  Helena,  on  the  ar- 
rival of  this  extraordinary  Gue.^t,  may  be  more 
easily  imagined  than  described.  Curiosity, 
astonishment,  and  interest  combined  to  rouse 
the  inhabitants  from  their  habitual  tranquil- 
lity, into  a  state  of  busy  activity  and  inquisi- 
tive solicitude. 


(     101    ) 

Napoleon  did  not  leave  his  cabin  for  a 
full  hour  after  the  ship  had  anchored  in  the 
bay ;  however,  when  the  deck  became  clear, 
he  made  his  appearance,  and  ascended  the 
poop  ladder,  from  which  he  could  examine 
every  g-un  that  bristles  at  the  mo-uth  of  James 
Valley,  in  the  centre  of  which  the  town  of 
that  name,  and  the  only  one  in  the  Island, 
is  situate. — While  he  stood  there,  I  watched 
his  countenance  with  the  most  observant  at- 
tention, and  it  betrayed  no  particular  sensa- 
tion :  He  looked  as  any  other  man  would  look 
at  a  place  which  he  beheld  for  the  first  time. 
—I  shall  also  take  this  opportunity  to  mention 
that,  during  the  whole  voyage,  from  the  mo- 
ment the  Northumberland  set  sail  from  Eng- 
land, to  its  arrival  at  St.  Helena,  I  never  saw 
any  change  in  the  placid  countenance  and  un- 
assuming manners  of  our  distinguished  ship- 
mate ;  nor  did  I  hear  of  a  discontented  look, 
or  a  peevish  exprtssion,   being  remarked  by 
any  other  person  in  the  ship.     The  Ladies, 
indeed,  discovered  some  distress  on  the  first 
view  of  their  rocky  cage;  but  their  general 
conduct  on  the  occasion,  displayed  a  degree 


(    102    ) 

of  self-possession  which  was  not  expected  of 
them. 


The  first  object  of  the  Admiral  was  to 
make  the  necessary  arrangements  for  the  ac- 
commodation of  Napoleon  and  his  Suite  ; 
and  the  Lieutenant-Governor's  house  was 
appropriated  for  that  purpose,  till  a  proper 
place  could  be  prepared  for  his  fixed  residence. 
It  was  notj  therefore,  till  the  17th,  that  they 
disembarked. — ^ After  sun-set,  on  that  day, 
when  the  inhabitants  of  the  town,  wearied  out 
in  waiting  for  the  spectacle  of  Buonaparte's 
landing,  had  retired  to  their  homes,  he,  ac- 
cording to  the  wish  he  had  expressed,  passed 
unobserved  to  the  house  where  he  was  to 
pass  the  first  night  as  an  inhabitant  of  St. 
Helena. 

— At  an  early  hour  of  the  following  morn- 
ing, the  General  was  on  horseback,  accompa- 
nied by  Sir  George  Cockburn.  They  as- 
cended the  mountain  to  Longwood,  which 
was  to  be  the  tranquil  residence  of  a  man, 
on  an  isolated  rock  in  Africa,  who  had  pos- 


(     103    ) 

sessed  gororeons  palaces  in  so  many  of  the 
splendia  cities  of  Europe. 

About  a  mile  from  the  town,  and  midway 
up  the  mountain,  stands  the  country-house  of 
a  most  respectable  man  and  a  merchant  of  the 
Island,  Mr.Balcombe :  It  is  named  TheBriars, 
and  is  situated  on  a  level  spot,  which  might 
almtjst  be  imagined  to  have  been  formed  by 
art  in  the  steep  ascent.     It  occupies  about 
two  acres,  and  is  bountifully  supplied  with 
water,  by  whose  irrigating  influence  a  pleas- 
ing" and  contrasted  scene  of  vegetation,  en- 
riched  by  fruit-trees,  has  been  produced  ;  and 
seems,  as  it  were,   suspended    between  the 
heights  above  and  the  depths  below.— Here 
Napoleon,  on  his   descent  from  Longwood, 
was  induced  to  call ;  and  such  was  the  hos- 
pitable importunity  of  the  amiable  master  of 
the  mansion,   that  he   relinquished   his   in» 
tention  of  returning  to  the  valley,  and  thereby 
avoided  the  public  gaze  that  was  waiting  his 
appearance. 

On  an  elevated  mound,  about  fifty  yards 


(    104    ) 

from  the  house,  is  a  Gothic  building,  having 
one  room  below,  and  tvio  small  apartments 
above.  This  Masonette  Napoleon  chose 
for  his  residence,  till  Longwood  could  be 
completed.  There  was  no  choice  in  the  ar- 
rangement of  this  confined  abode  :  the  ground- 
floor  was,  of  course,  occupied  by  him,  while 
De  las  Cases,  with  his  son,  who  was  a  page, 
and  the  valet  in  waiting  were  to  possess  the 
upper  story, 

A  few  days  after  he  had  fixed  his  residence 
at  the  Briars^  I  called  to  pay  him  a  compli- 
mentary visit,  when  I  found  him  reclining 
upon  a  sofa,  apparently  incommoded  by  the 
beat.  He  had  been,  he  said,  amusing  himself 
with  a  Walk  in  the  garden  ;  but  that  towards 
noon  he  found  it  necessary  to  shelter  himself 
from  the  sun,  beneath  his  little  roof.  He  ap- 
peared to  be  in  very  good  spirits,  and  ex- 
pressed himself  with  great  civility  to  me,  as 
well  as  in  his  enquiry  after  the  officers  of  the 
Northumberland. — After  some  general  ques- 
tions respecting  the  restrictions  on  visiting 
him,  he  said,  ''  I  find  there  is  a  considerable 


(    105    ) 

force  on  the  Island,  full  as  many  as  the 
produce  of  the  place  is  capable  of  maintain- 
ing. What  could  induce  your  government 
to  send  out  the  fifty -third  regiment?  There 
was,  surely,  a  sufficient  force  before  for  my 
security  ;  but  this  is  the  way  that  you  Eng- 
lish people  get  rid  of  your  money." -To 

this  observation  I  did  not  hesitate  to  reply. — 
"When  a  measure  is  once  resolved  upon,  you, 
General,  will  acknowledge  it  to  be  the  best 
policy  to  employ  all  the  means  that  may  se- 
cure its  being  carried  into  complete  effect."' — 
You,  my  friend,  may  think,  that  I  hazarded 
his  displeasure  by  my  answer  ;  but  the  manner 
in  which  he  received  it,  convinced  me  that  he 
was  better  pleased  with  my  frankness,  than  if 
I  had  hammered  out  a  compliment,  in  which 
manufactory  you  well  know  that  I  am  but  an 
unskilful  workman.  I  now  took  my  leave, 
and  strolled  down  with  Count  Bertrand  to 
dinner. 

It  was  not  till  some  time  in  November, 
that  I  paid  a  second  visit  to  the  Briars,  whi- 
ther an  invitation  to  dine  with  Mr.  Balcombe 


(    106    ) 

had  called  me.  As  I  reached  the  spot  some 
time  before  the  dinner-hour,  I  proposed  to 
amuse  myself  in  examining  the  cultivated 
spots,  attached  to  the  domain.  I  accident- 
ally took  the  path  which  leads  to  the  gardens, 
and  at  the  gate  where  it  terminates  there  is  a 
narrow  goats'  passage,  whose  sides  are  lined 
with  prickly  pear  bush.  At  the  angle  formed 
by  the  two  paths,  I  met  Napoleon  clattering 
down  from  among  the  rocks  in  his  heavy  mi- 
litary boots.  He  accosted  me  with  an  appa- 
rent mixture  of  satisfaction  and  surprise  ;  and 
reproached  me  in  terms  of  great  civility  for 
my  long  absence.  There  was  a  roiJgh  deal 
board  placed  as  a  seat  between  two  stones,  on 
which,  after  having  ]>rushed  away  the  dust 
with  his  hand,  he  sat  himself  down,  and  de- 
sired me  to  take  my  place  by  him. — Las  Cases 
soon  joined  us,forin  scrambling  through  these 
rocky  paths,  his  Master,  badly  as  he  walks, 
had  got  the  start  of  him.  On  all  sides  of  the 
spot  where  we  seated,  rocks  were  piled 
on  rocks  to  the  height  of  a  thousand  feet 
above  our  heads,  while  there  w  as  an  abyss  of 
equal  depth  at  our  feet.     Nature  seems  in  a 


(    107    ) 

sportive  mood  to  have  afforded  this  level  space 
for  a  semi-9erial  dwelling ;  and  while  I  was 
gazing  with  some  astonishment  on  the  barren 

wonders  of  the  scene  around  me "  Well," 

said  Napoleon,  with  a  smile,  "  what  say  you 
to  it  ? — and  can  you  think  that  your  country- 
men have  treated  me  kindly  ?" — 1  had  but  one 
answer  to  such  a  question  ;  and  that  was,  by 
not  giving  any  answer  at  all. — His  conver- 
sation then  turned  upon  the  state  and  charac- 
ter of  the  Island,  of  which,  he  observed,  all 
the  books  he  read  respecting  it,  during  the 
voyage,  had  given  a  very  partial  represen- 
tation, unless  there  were  parts  of  a  more  pleas- 
ing aspect  than  any  he  had  seen  in  his  rides 
to  Longwood,  which  comprehended  the  ut- 
most extent  of  his  observation.  His  conver- 
sation was,  on  this  occasion,  as  on  all  others 
when  I  have  been  with  him— easy,  good- 
humoured,  and  familiar,  without  the  least 
taint  of  his  former  greatness  :  and,  whenever 
the  topic  would  admit  of  it,  he  never  failed  to 
give  an  air  of  cheerfulness  to  his  remarks.  On 
my  mentioning  the  activity  of  the  Admiral  in 
superintending  the  repairs  at  Long  wood,  and 


(    108    ) 

that  it  would  probably  be  ready  to  receive 
him  in  the  course  of  a  month ; — Ke  replied, 
your  Admiral  knows,  I  doubt  not,  to  a 
moment,  in  what  time  a  ship  may  be  got 
ready,  but  as  an  architect,  I  think  his  calcu- 
lations will  fail. — 1  maintained,  however,  that 
w^hether  it  was  upon  land  or  sea.  Sir  George 
Cockburn  was  of  a  character  that  would 
ensure  success  in  whatever  he  might  be  call- 
ed upon  to  undertake. — I  added,  that  the 
officers  were  actually  employed  in  accompa- 
nying the  seamen  to  Longwood,  with  the 
materials  necessary  for  its  completion.  He 
then  enquired  after  those  gentlemen  whose 
names  he  endeavoured  to  recollect ;  and  ex- 
pressed a  wish  to  see  them  as  they  passed  ; 
"  If,"  said  he,  "  they  will  be  contented  to 
visit  me  as  you  now  do,  in  the  fields  ;  as  my 
present  habitation,  w  hich  serves  me  for  break- 
fast, dinner,  and  bed- room,  is  not  precisely 
calculated  to  receive  company.'* 

The  Briars  had  derived,  and  will  ever 
retain  a  certain  degree  of  celebrity,  from  its 
having  been  the  unexpected  residence  of  Na- 


(     109    ) 

poleon  ;  and  this  circumstance  will,  I  doubt 
not,  bring-  to  your  recollection,  the  various 
instances  where  remote  and  obscure  situa- 
tions, which  never  formed  the  smallest  speck 
on  a  map,  have,  by  accitlental  events,  become 
important  points  in  the  geography  of  the  bis- 
toriari.^ — r^apoleon  frequently  makes  one  of 
Mr.  ij^alcomhe's  family  parties,  where  he  is 
neither  troublesome  or  intrusive,  but  conducts 
himself  with  the  manners  of  a  gentleman,  and 
a  lively  demeanour  that  promotes  the  general 
vivacity  of  the  domestic  circle*. — i  have  not 
heard  of  any  instance  of  his  discontent  but  on 
the  following  occasion. — Since  he  has  been 
at  the  Briars^  an  officer  of  Captain's  rank  is 
constantly  in  attendance  there,  and  becomes 
answerable  for  his  person.  This,  I  under- 
stand, has  occasioned  remonstrances  to  the 
Admiral,  who  has  not  thought  proper  to 
answer  them  with  any  relaxation  of  this  duty. 


*  I  have  since  seen,  in  the  Ejtglisli  Newspapers,  accounts 
of  his  playipg  at  cards  for  siigar-plumhs,  being  impe- 
t.uous  with  a  child,  ar.d  engaging  in  something  like  mon- 
key tricks ;  for  wiucti  tLcre  is  not  the  least  foundation  of 
any  kind. 


(    110    ) 

— Napoleon  having  complained  of  the  in- 
trusion of  visitors,  during-  his  stay  at  the  Briars, 
it  afforded  the  Admiral  an  opportunity  of  ex- 
ecuting the  orders  transmitted  from  England 
with  a  degree  of  delicacy,  which,  whoever 
has  the  pleasure  of  knowing  him,  must  be  sa- 
tisfied that  he  would  prefer.  It  was  accord- 
ingly ordered,  that  no  one  should  be  per- 
mitted to  visit  Longtiwod,  without  a  passport 
from  the  Admiral  or  the  Governor. 

On  his  removal  thither,  certain  limits  were 
assigned  him  for  exercise,  around  which  at 
cordon  of  centinels  were  stationed.  While  he 
continues  w  ithin  the  circle  he  experiences  no 
additional  vigilance  ;  but  when  he  ventures 
beyond,  an  officer  is  on  duty  to  attend  him. 
The  latter  circumstance,  which  he  considers  as 
irksome,  disposes  him  to  confine  himself  in  a 
great  measure  to  the  grounds  of  his  mansion. 

The  indisposition  of  General  Gourgond 
occasioned  my  passing  much  of  my  time  at 
Longwood.  The  disease,  from  its  commence^' 
ment,  had  assumed  very  unfavourable  appear- 


(   in   ) 

ances ;  and  my  friend  Mr.  OWIeara,  whom  i 
have  already  introduced  to  you  as  the  Ex- 
Imperial  surgeon,  was  desirous  that  we  should 
be  together  during  the  treatment. 

My  first  visit,  on  this  occasion,  was  at- 
tended with  some  particulars,  which,  I  pre- 
sume, from  your  rivetted  attention  to  the 
principal  character  in  the  scene,  you  will  not 

think  unworthy  of  being  related. About 

six  in  the  evening  I  reached  Hutsgate,  a 
small  house  on  the  Longwood  Road,  about 
a  mile  from  the  prmcipal  residence,  and 
the  habitation  of  Count  Bertrand.  It  con- 
sists of  two  small  apartments  below,  and  the 
same  number  above  :  But  in  this  cottage, 
health  reigns,  the  children  are  charming,  and 
care  seems  to  be  banished  from  it. — A  volume 
might  be  filled  with  all  I  knew  of  this  family. 
Most  of  my  spare  hours  during*  the  voyage 
were  dedicated  to  reading  English  with  the 
Marshal ;  and,  in  return,  he  gave  an  history 
of  some  of  the  campaigns  in  which  he  had 
served.  He  would  often  say,  "  You  are  de 
bad  master :  you  will  hear  all,  and  speak  to 
me  none/*    iSapoleon,  when  enquiring  afte)r 


(    112    ) 

me,  during'  our  passage,   would  distinguish 

me  by  the  title   of  Bertrand's    Friend. 

Madame  insisted  upon  my  dismounting  from 
my  horse  and  accompanying  her  in  the  car- 
riage to  Longwood,  as  her  husband  had  gone 
on  before.  It  was  now  growing  dusk,  and  as 
we  approached  the  house,  we  saw  her  Em- 
peror, as  she  always  called  him,  and  Ber- 
trand  in  conversation  close  to  the  road-side. 
*•  Now,"'  said  the  Lady,  "  let  us  surprize 
them  :  shew  yourself  at  the  carriage  window 
as  we  pass ;  when  they  will  fancy  a  gallant, 
and  it  will  remind  them  of  Paris  tricks/' — 
We  passed  them  at  a  quick  pace  ;  1  obeyed 
my  instructions,  and,  having  handed  the 
Countess  from  the  carriage,  she  left  me  to  go 
and  explain  who  the  stranger  was. — In  a  few 
minutes  I  received  a  message  from  Napoleon 
himself,  with  an  invitation  to  dinner. — I  very 
readily  accepted  it,  as  you  may  imagine ; 
and  was  rather  pleasingly  surprized  at  it ;  as 
he  had  for  some  time  confined  his  guests  to 
his  own  suite.  I  had  no  means  of  presenting 
myself  but  in  my  riding  equipments,  and  in 
such  guise  1  made  my  entre.— General  Mon- 
tiiolon,  in  full  dress,  received  me  in  the  anti- 


(    113    ) 

chamber,  and  introduced  me  to  an  adjoining 
room,  where  Buonaparte  was  engaged  at 
Chess  with  the  Count  Bertrand.  He  received 
me  witli  the  common  salutations,  very  civilly 
expressed,  and,  on  my  taking  a  position  be- 
hind his  chair,  as  if  to  observe  the  game,  he 
continued  the  contest. — 1  here  was  little  con- 
versation among  the  party  in  the  room  ;  and 
that  was  carried  on  in  a  kind  of  respectful 
whisper,  which,  as  I  knew  not  how  to  adopt, 
was  interrupted  at  times  by  the  thorough- 
bass  of  my  answers  to  the  questions  which 
were  addressed  to  me. 

A  very  short  time  before  dinner  was  an- 
nounced, General  Montholon  whispered  in  my 
ear,  that  I  was  to  take  my  seat  at  table  be-  ^ 
tween  the  Emperor  and  the  Grand  Marshal. — 
Here  are  honours  for  you,  and  1  will  give  you 
leave  to  figure  your  plain,  humble,  unas- 
suming friend  in  his  elevated  station.  I  can- 
not say  that  my  situation  resembled  that  of 
Sancho  Pancha,  because  every  dish  was  at  my 
service  ;  but  a  piece  of  roast  beef  or  a  leg  of 
mutton  with  caper  sauce,  would  have  afforded 

I 


(    114    ) 

a  relief  to  my  appetite  which  has  never  been 
familiarised  with  ragouts  and  fricassees. — I 
had  Napoleon  on  my  right,  and  the  Marshal 
on  my  left  ;  and  there  was  a  vacant  chair, 
that  had  the  air  of  ceremonious  emptiness,  as 
a  reserved  seat  for  Maria  Louisa.  A  bottle 
of  claret  and  a  decanter  of  water  was  placed 
by  each  plate  :  but  there  was  no  drinking  to 
each  other  at  dinner  ;  and  if  you  did  not  help 
yourself  during  the  time  it  lasted,  the  oppor- 
tunity would  be  lost,  as  the  wine  vanished 
with  the  eatables.  The  service  of  porcelain 
far  exceeds  in  beauty  whatever  of  that  kind  I 
have  beheld.  The  silver  plate  is  massive,  and 
decorated  with  eagles  in  curious  abundance  ; 
the  gold  service  appeared  in  the  desert. — The 
entertainment  lasted  about  an  hour,  and  so 
frequent  were  the  questions  of  my  host,  that 
from  the  perplexity  I  suffered  in  conjuring  up 
answers  to  them,  I  scarce  knew  what  I  eat, 

or  what  1  drank. 1  will  endeavour  to  give 

you  a  general  specimen  of  his  convivial  en- 
quiries. 

— Have  you  visited  General  Gourgond? — 


(    115     ) 

Yes,  General,  I  came  to  Longwood  for  that 
purpose. — How  liave  you  found  him? — Ex- 
tremely ill. — What  is  his  disorder?— Dysen- 
try. — Where  is  its  seat?— In  the  intestines? — 
What  has  been  the  cause? — Heat  of  climate  on 
a  constitution  peculiarly  predisposed ;  but  re- 
move  the  cause  and  the  effect  will  cease.    Had 
he  been  bled  in  the  first  instance,  it  is  pro- 
bable that  the  disease  would  have  been  less 
violent. — What  remedy  is  now  proposed? — 
The  functions  of  the  liver  and  other  viscera 
are   deranged :    To  restore  them,   therefore, 
to  a  healthy  action,  it  will  be  necessary  to 
have  recourse  to  Mercury. — 1  hat  is  a  bad  me- 
dicine.    Experience  has  taught  me  the  con- 
trary,— Did  Hippocrates  n^e  it?  I  believe  not: 
He  had  great  faith  in  simples. — Yet,  he  is 
considered  as  among  the  first  physicians. — 
He  might,  nevertheless,  have  derived  great 
advantages  from  modern  discoveries. — Does 
not  Nature  endeavour  to  expel  morbific  mat- 
ter ;  and  may  not  the  present  painful  struggles 
be  an  effort  of  Nature  to  rid  herself  of  what  is 
obnoxious?     I  have  been  taught  to  assist 
Nature. — And  could  not  you  do  so  without 
i2 


(     116    ) 

having  recourse  to  this  dangerous  mineral  ? 
Experience  has  convinced  me  that  Mercury, 
provided  it  produces  salivation,  is  infallible. 
Then  go  on  with  your  Mercury. 

— Have  you  lost  many  men  on  board  the 
Northumberland?  We  have  had  the  misfor- 
tune to  lose  several. — Of  what  disease?  Dy- 
sentry  and  inflammation  of  the  liver. — Have 
you  examined  them  after  death  ? — Invariably. 
— What  was  the  appearance?  Extensive  sup- 
purations of  the  liver  in  the  one  disease,  and 
gangrene  of  the  intestines  in  the  other. — 
What  is  death,  or  how  do  you  define  death? 
A  suspension  of  the  vital  functions,  the  organs 
of  respiration,  and  the  action  of  the  heart. — 
When  does  the  soul  quit  tlie  body?  That  is 
a  question  I  do  not  presume  to  answer  with 
a  precision  which  would  satisfy  you:  for,  in 
cases  of  suspended  animation  and  in  syncope, 
man  is  to  all  appearance,  dead;  yet,  by  ar- 
tificial means,  resuscitation  is  produced  and 
life  preserved. — When  do  you  suppose  that 
the  soul  enters  the  body? — I  am  not  suffici- 
ently skilled  in  metaphysics  to  give  a  satisfac- 


(     117     ) 

tory  reply.  The  faculty  of  thought  appears 
to  be  the  dawning  of  the  soul:  aud  to  what- 
ever perfection  reason  attains,  then  the  soul  is 
most  perfect,  at  least  then  man  becomes  the 

most  responsible  for  his  actions. Here  the 

conversation  ended  to  my  great  satisfaction, 
as  it  seemed  to  be  taking  a  turn  too  profound 
for  my  philosophy:  you  will  say,  perhaps, 
that  part  of  it  was  not  calculated  to  whet  the 
stomach  of  any  one  at  dinner  but  a  medical 
man. — I  ^ancy, ho wever,  that,  to  your  appetite, 
it  will  prove  a  savoury  dish. 

Napoleon  now  rose,  and  was  followed  by 
his  party  into  a  card-room,  when  Whist  suc- 
ceeded. He  appears  to  be  master  of  the  game, 
but  plays  with  a  kind  of  carelessness,  and 
good  humour,  as  if  he  preferred  losing  his 
money.  He  sta\ed  half  an  hour  longer  this 
evening  than  was  usual  with  him,  and  during 
that  time,  he  walked  up  and  down  the  room, 
continuing  his  prevailing  habit  of  asking  ques- 
tions. On  his  taking  leave.  Las  Cases,  in  his 
good  humoured  way,  said,  "  Well,  this  has 
been  a  day  of  questions :  indeed,   I  fear  it 


(    118    ) 

must  be  a  punishment  for  you  to  dine  with 
us.  it  is  so  like  undergoing  an  examination: 
but  you  may  be  assured,  that  your  answers 
afford  satisfaction,  or  you  would  not  be 
troubled  with  so  many  questions." 

In  a  few  days  after,  the  arrival  of  a  ship 
from  England  induced  me  to  take  a  ride  to  the 
valley;  and,  on  my  return  in  the  evening, 
I  was  informed,  that  Napoleon  desired  to  see 
me  ih  General  Gourgond's  apartment  as  soon 
as  I  returned ;  and  there  I  found  him  waiting 
for  me.  On  my  entrance,  the  first  question 
related  to  the  progress  of  the  General's  dis- 
order: when  he  suddenly  changed  the  sub- 
ject.— "  You  have  been  at  the  Town;  and  is 
the  ship  just  arrived  from  England — if  so,  I 
§;npnose  she  brings  Letters  and  News-papers. 
— Certainly  ;  and  I  have  looked  over  a  file  of 
the  Courier, — Is  there  no  Motning  Chronicled 
— I  have  not  yet  seen  it.  The  other  papers 
which    I  just  had  a  glimpse  of,  were    The 

Times,  and  a  provincial  Paper. What  is 

the  ne^ls  from  France?  I  did  but  slightly 
glance  over  the  French  news. Be  that  as 


(    119    ) 

it  may,  you  remember,  I  suppose,  something 

of  what  you  read  ;  so  let  me  hear  it. 1 

saw  some  articles  respecting  you  ;  but  the 
principal  part  of  the  French  news  which  I 
had  the  opportunity  of  examining,  related 
to  the  trial  and  sentence  of  Marshal  Ney. 

Napoleon  now  advanced  a  step  nearer  to 
me,  but  without  the  least  change  of  counte- 
nance : — ''  What,"  said  he,  "  Marshal   Ney 

has  been  sentenced  to  be  shot/' 1  replied, 

"  It  was  even  so  :  he  addressed  the  ministers 
of  the  allied  sovereigns,  but  in  vain  :  he 
urged  in  his  defence,  the  Twelfth  Article  of 
the  Convention  :  he  pleaded  on  his  trial  that 
he  was  deceived  by  you  :  that  the  proclama- 
tion of  which  he  was  accused,  and  made  a 
part  of  the  charges,  against  him,  was  written 
by  Major  General  Bertrand  ;  and  that  he  was 
deceived  by  your  report  of  Austria  ami  Eng- 
land."  Count  Bertrand,  who  was  in  the 

room,  quietly  observed,  tliat  Marshal  Ney 
had  a  right  to  save  himself  if  he  could  ;  and 
if  fabricated  stories  would  answer  his  purpose,^ 
he  could  not  be  blamed  for  employing  them. 


(    120    ) 

But  he  added,  "  respecting  the  proclamation, 
it  was  an  assertion  equally  false  and  ridicu- 
lous :  Marshal  i\ey  could  write  himself,  and 
wanted  not  my  assistance." — Napoleon  made 
no  comments  on  the  account  which  had  been 
given  him. — One  solitary  expression,  indeed, 
broke  from  him,  and  that  was,  "  Marshal  ^ey 
was  a  brave  man." 

I  mentioned  a  report,  as  stated  in  one  of 
the  London  papers,  that  an  apprehension  was 
entertained  of  an  insurrection  in  Paris,  on  the 
event  of  Marshal  Ney's  sentence  being  car- 
ried into  execution. "  An  insurrection," 

said  Napoleon,  with  a  kind  of  contemptuous 
calmness,  "  pugh  !  get  the  troops  under  arms! 
— Has  the  Duke  of  Wellington  left  Paris  ? — 

I  really  do  not  know. Are  the  English 

and  allied  forces  still  in  the  vicinity  of  the 

capital  ? The  English,  I  believe,  are  still 

in  its  neighbourhood  ;  but  it  appears,  from 
the  papers,  that  the  Russians  and  Prussians 
have  retired  upon  the  Rhine.  That  disposi- 
tion of  them,  he  replied,  is  altogether  the  most 
proper. But  how  is  it,  he  continued,  that 


(    121    ) 

among  the  papers  which  are  sent  for  my  pe- 
rusal, I  so  seldom  see  the  Morning  Chronicle. 
That  was  a  question,  which  1  did  not  pretend 
to  answer.  1  thought  proper,  however,  to 
inform  him,  with  some  little  curiosity  to  see 
how  he  would  receive  the  intelligence,  trifling 
as  it  may  appear,  that,  according  to  the  pa- 
pers, a  Parisian  had  been  sentenced  to  pay  a 
fine  for  pubhshing  a  caricature  in  which  he 
was  represented.  He  permitted  me  to  de- 
scribe it,   which   I   did   in  the  language  of 

the  paragraph. "  On  one  side  of  the  print 

appeared  the  figure  of  Louis  XVII 1.  sur- 
rounded by  his  family,  with  the  inscription, 
'  This  is  well  /  and  on  the  other  side,  that  of 
Napoleon  attended  by  his  family,  with  the 

motto,   '   This  is  better.  " "  Pugh  !"  said 

he,  "  what  nonsense  !  but  such  trash  will  be 
propagated,  from  some  idle  motive  or  other  ;" 
and  with  this  observation  he  retired  to  his 
apartment. 

General  Gourgond's  disorder  assumed  a 
very  dangerous  appearance  ;  and  the  symp- 
toms seemed  to  announce  a  fatal  termination^ 


(    122    ) 

His  spirits,  indeed,  were  so  sunk,  that  he  re- 
fused to  take  the  only  medicine  that  promised 
the  least  chance  of  rehef ;  and  even  tiiough  it 
continued  to  be  administered  by  contrivance, 
and  subterfuge,  he  must  have  become  the 
prey  of  his  melancholy  apprehensions,  if  that 
voice,  which  he  dare  not  disobey,  had  not 
urged  a  sharp,  and  as  it  proved,  a  saving 
remonstrance. "  What  ridiculous  beha- 
viour is  this,"  said  Napoleon  to  him  ;  "  and 
what  are  these  silly  fears  of  your  own  crea- 
tion, and  which  you  appear  to  be  fond  of  in- 
dulging, by  refusing  the  means  of  dissipating 
them  -—How  often  have  you  faced  Death  in 
the  field  of  battle,  without  the  least  sensation 
of  fear ;,  and  now  you  are  resolved  to  yield 
to  his  power,  as  if  you  were  afraid  to  resist 
him. — What  a  childish  obstinacy  ! — Play  the 
fool  no  longer,  I  beg  of  you,  but  submit  to 
the  remedies  with  cheerfulness,  which  can 
alone  promote  your  restoration  to  health." 
This  reproach  softened  the  patient's  obsti- 
nacy, he  became  submissive  to  the  regimen 
prescribed,  and  recovered.  Some  short  time 
after.  Napoleon  said  to  me,   "  Well,  you 


(    123    ) 

Doctors  have  performed  wonders  with  Gour- 
gond  :  if,  however,  there  had  been  a  Priest  on 
the  Island,  he  would  have  discharged  you 
both,  and  trusted  alone  to  his  treatment :  but 
fortunately  for  him,  such  a  thing  as  a  Confessor 
was  not  to  be  found." 

I  am  about  to  vary  the  scene,  but  I  fol- 
low the  track  of  the  distinguished  Exile, 
whenever  I  have  the  opportunity  ;  and  I  now 
call  you  to  attend  him  among  the  Arcadians 
of  St.  Helena.  Wh^n  he  takes  his  exercise  on 
horseback,  he  generally  bends  his  way  thrqugh 
a  deep  ravine,  luxuriantly  covered  with  vege-» 
tation  and  used  for  pasture.  The  road  is 
narrow,  the  place  lonely  ;  and  he,  in  a  sen- 
timental or  poetical  moment,  had  named  it 
"  The  Valley  of  Silence  J**  On  ascending  this 
contracted  pass,  the  eye  is  greeted,  and  on  the 
first  occasion,  might  probably  be  surprised,  by 
the  residence  of  a  Farmer.  Here  the  confined 
Tourist,  on  his  first  excursion,  determined  to 
snatch  a  probableamusement, b^  paying  avisit. 
Fortunately  for  him,  the  family  were  taken  by 
surprise ;  for  the  apprehension  of  such  a  guest 


(     124    ) 

would  have  emptied  the  house  of  its  inhabit- 
ants. Master  Legg,  the  tenant  of  the  man- 
sion, a  plain  honest  eountryman,  met  him  at 
the  door,  when  the  extraordinary  visitor,  on 
the  invitation  which  he  received,  dismounted 
from  his  horse,  and  accompanied  by  the  Count 
Delas  Cases,  entered  the  house,  familiarl}  took 
his  seat,  and,  as  usual,  began  his  interrogatories. 

Have  you  a  wife  ?  Yes,  and  please  you, 
Sir  Emperor. — Have  you  any  children?  Six. 
— How  much  land  have  you  got  ?  A  hundred 
acres. — AH  capable  of  being  cultivated  ?  No, 
not  one  half. — What  profit  does  it  bring  you? 
Not  a  great  deal :  but  it  is  much  improved 
since  you,  Mr.  Emperor,  came  amongst  us. — 
Aye,  how  do  you  make  that  out  ?  Why,  you 
must  know,  Sir  Emperor,  we  do  not  grow 
corn  in  this  here  Island  ;  and  our  green  vege- 
tables require  a  ready  market.  We  have  ge- 
nerally had  to  wait  for  the  arrival  of  a  fleet ; 
and  then,  rat'em,  they  would  sometimes 
all  spoil :  but  now,  Sir  General,  we  have  a 
prime  sale  for  every  article. — Where  is  your 
wife?    Dang  it,  and  please  you,   I  believe 


{    125    ) 

she  is  scared  ;  for  I  see  my  children  have  all 
run  out. — Send  for  them,  and  let  me  be  in- 
troduced. Pray  have  you  any  good  water? 
Yes,  Sir  ;  and  wine  too,  such  as  is  to  be  had 
from  the  Cape. 

The  good  woman's  alarm  had  by  this 
time  subsided  ;  and  she'  was  persuaded  by 
her  husband  to  make  her  appearance,  and 
entered  with  every  mark  of  respect,  and  some 
astonishment.  Napoleon,  De  las  Cases,  the 
Farmer  and  his  wife,  forming  ^.partie  quarree, 
for  your  philosophic  and  profound  contempla- 
tion, sat  down  to  four  glasses  of  Cape  wine  ; 
and,  when  they  were  emptied,  the  visit  con- 
cluded. 

The  good  man  and  his  family  had  been 
placed  so  much  at  their  ease  by  the  courteous 
demeanour  of  their  unexpected  guests,  that  the 
subsequent  visits  laid  them  under  no  restraint ; 
and  even  the  little  children  used  frequently 
to  express  their  wishes  by  inquiring  of  their 
mother,  "  When  will  Boney  come  and  see 
us  again  ?'* — 


{    126    ) 

But  there  is  another  Farmer,  whose  name 
is  Robinson,  who,  like  his  neighbour  Legg, 
occupies  his  acres  of  garden  ground,  which 
are  divided  into  enclosures  b}  fences  of  earth 
enlivened  by  the  aloe  and  the  prickly  pear. 
Here,  as  in  the  former  humble  habitation,  the 
honest  simplicity  of  rural  life  appears  in  all 
its  native  colours  :  but  there  is  a  flower  of  no 
common  beaufy  that  adorns  the  spot ;  a  very 
pretty  girl  of  about  seventeen,  the  daughter 
of  the  owners  of  it.  She  is  what  we  should 
call  in  Scotland,  "  a  very  bonny  Lassie." — 
"Whether  it  was  the  primitive  sincerity  and 
innocent  manners  of  these  honest  people,  or 
the  native  charms  of  the  rustic  nymph,  or  the 
picture  of  contentment  that  they  presented  to 
their  visitor,  which  attracted  him,  I  shall  not 
pretend  to  determine ;  but  his  visits  became  so 
frequent,  that  the  relations  of  these  good 
people  in  the  town,  recommended  precaution 
respecting  their  daughter,  who  was  then  for- 
bidden to  make  her  appearance  whenever  the 
great  man  favoured  the  farm  with  his  visits : 
this  circumstance  he  soon  observed,  and  ac- 
cordingly ceased  to  continue  them. 


(    127    ) 

I  shall  not  wait  for  any  additional  occur- 
rences, which  are  uncertain,  with  a  view  to 
lengthen  my  Letter.  If  any  further  infor- 
mation occurs,  it  may  form  the  subject  of 
another  Epistle.  I  therefore  seize  the  present 
opportunity  of  assuring  you,  that 

I  am,  &c.  &c. 

W.  W. 


St.  Helena, 


MY    DEAR , 

I  began  to  think  that  my  last  Letter 
would  have  concluded  the  little  History  which 
I  have  compiled  from  the  living  documents 
around  me,  for  the  amusement  and  gratifica- 
tion of  your  anxious  curiosity.  If  it  has 
answered  that  purpose,  I  shall  be  satisfied  ; 
and  1  am  happy  to  continue  my  disjointed 
narrative,  with  some  unexpected  notices  that 
may  be  equally  interesting,  as  far  as  the  term 
can  be  applied  to  those  which  have  preceded 
them. 


{    128    ) 

It  is  near  six  weeks  since  I  have  visited 
Longwood,  or  have  had  any  communiccition 
with  tlie  inhabitants  of  it.  Chance,  ho\\ever, 
conducted  me  to  a  party  where  I  met  De  las 
Cases :  after  some  general  conversation  on 
the  arrival  of  the  new  Governor,  he  informed 
me  that  his  Master  had  made  frequent  en- 
quiries after  me;  and  had  even  expressed  his 
surprize  at  my  absence.  "  We  have  not 
seen  you,"  he  added,  "  since  }our  resuscitation 
of  General  Gourgond  ;  and  1  cannot  but  feel 
curious  to  know,  whether  your  acting  as  a 
stranger,  arises  from  any  disinclination  on 
your  part,  or  a  particular  prohibition  from 
the  Admiral  ?" — I  replied,  "  neither  the  one 
or  the  other :  but,  at  the  same  time,  I  thought 
it  became  me  to  attend  to  the  general  orders, 
and  I  could  not  justify  myself  in  requesting 
a  passport  to  Longwood  without  having  some 
ostensible  reason." — "But  I  wish,  very  much," 
he  answered,  "  to  consult  you  about  the 
health  of  my  son." — "  That  reason  is  suffi- 
cient ;  i  will  immediately  apply  to  the  Admi- 
ral, who  is  now  in  the  room,  and  have  no 
doubt  of  his  ready  acquiescence.'*     I  was  ac- 


(    129    ) 

eordingly  engaged  to  breakfast  with  Napo- 
leon on  the  following  morning  at  eleven 
o'clock.  The  violent  rains,  however,  disap- 
pointed me  ;  but  1  took  the  earliest  opportu- 
nity of  fulfilling  my  promise.  The  breakfast 
hour  was  passed  when  I  reached  Longwood, 
and  its  Master  had  been  invited  by  the  sere- 
nity of  the  day,  to  take  an  earlier  walk  in 
the  garden  than  was  his  general  custom.  I 
presume  that  he  had  observed  me  as  1 
approached  the  house,  while  he  was  screened 
from  me  by  an  intervening  hedge.  As  I  had 
exceeded  the  breakfast  hour,  after  which  he 
generally  retires  to  the  solitude  of  his  apart- 
ment, I  did  not  expect  to  see  him  ;  and  to 
say  the  truth,  unless  there  had  been  a  pros- 
pect of  obtaining  some  novelty,  my  dear 
friend,  for  your  entertainment,  1  should  rather 
have  felt  a  relief  in  the  idea  that  I  was  not  to 
be  exposed  to  one  of  his  rapid  examinations. 
— I  soon,  however,  met  the  Count  De  las 
Cases,  who,  presuming  that  the  great  f^an 
had  retired  for  the  day,  proposed  my  accom- 
panying him  to  his  apartment,  where,  he  said, 
after  you  have  seen  my  son,  we  will  take  a 

K 


(    130    ) 

few  peeps  into  our  History,  which  I  know 
will  interest  you,  as  the  Work  itself  will 
interest  the  whole  world,  if  we  have  perseve- 
rance to  get  through  with  it. 

I  do  not  recollect  whether,  in  any  of  my 
former  Letters  I  mentioned,  from  the  autho- 
rity of  this  gentleman,  who  is  the  Emanuensis 
of  the  Historian,  that  Buonaparte  was  seri- 
ously and  laboriously  engaged  in  writing  the 
Annals  of  his  Life.  I  had  already  been  in- 
formed by  the  same  person,  that  the  Cam- 
paigns of  Egypt  and  Italy,  and  what  he  styles 
Ml/  Reign  of  an  hundred  Days,  or  some  such 
title,  were  completed*;  and  that  the  interme- 
diate periods  were  in  a  progressive  state.  I 
therefore  was  looking  forward  to  a  very  curious 
morning,  and  hugging  myself  on  the  approach- 
ing view  of  such  manuscripts  as  were  to  be 
unfolded  to  me  :  but  this  expectation  was  dis- 
appointed by  a  message  from  Napoleon  to 
attend  him  in  his  room.     As  I  knew  that  my 

*  This  Work  includes  the  interval,  or  some  portion  of 
it,  between  the  abdication  of  Fontaiubleau  and  that  of 
Paris. 


(    131    ) 

Tisit  Would  not  be  one  of  mere  ceremony,  I 
prevailed  upon  my  companion  to  accompany 
me,  as  his  interpretations  are  always  given 
with  such  aptitude  and  perspicuity,  and  be- 
sides, afford  me  time  to  arrange  my  answers. 
There  was  some  little  finesse  employed  in 
making  this  arrangement,  as  the  forms  of  the 
Court  at  Longwood  are  most  respectfully  ob- 
served by  the  attendants  on  it. 

On  entering'  the  room  I  observed  the  back 
of  a  sofa  turned  towards  me ;  and  on  advancing 
I  saw  Napoleon  laying  at  full  length  on  it, 
with  his  left-arm  hanging  over  the  upper  part. 
The  glare  of  light  was  excluded  by  a  Vene- 
tian blind,  and  before  him  there  was  a  table 
covered  with  books.  I  could  distinguish 
among  them  some  fine  bound  volumes  on  the 
French  Revolution.  The  heat  of  the  day  had 
occasionedhimtodismantlehimselfofcoatand 
waistcoat.— The  moment  his  eye  met  mine,  he 
started  up,  and  exclaimed,  in  English,  in  a 
tone  of  good-humoured  vivacity,''  Ah,  Warden 
how  do  you  do  ?'^  I  bowed  in  return  ;  when 
he  stretched  out  his  hand,  saying, "  I  have  got 
k2 


(    132    ) 

a  fever.*'  I  immediately  applied  my  hand  to 
the  wrist,  and  observing,  both  from  tlie  regu- 
larity of  the  pulsation  and  the  jocular  expres- 
sion of  his  countenance,  that  he  was  ex- 
ercising a  little  of  his  pleasantry,  I  expressed 
my  wish  that  his  health  might  always  remain 
the  same.  He  then  gave  me  a  gentle  tap  on 
the  cheek,  with  the  back  of  his  hand  ;  and 
desired  me  to  go  into  the  middle  of  the  room 
as  he  had  something  to  say  to  me.  I  now 
congratulated  him  on  the  preservation  of  his 
Jiealth,  and  complimented  him  at  the  same 
time,  on  the  progress  he  appeared  to  have 
made  in  the  English  language.  ''  I  certainly 
enjoy/'  he  said,  "  a  very  good  slate  of  health, 
which  I  attribute  to  a  rigorous  observance  of 
regimen.  My  appetite  is  such  that  I  feel  as 
if  I  could  eat  at  any  time  of  the  day:  but  I  am 
regular  in  my  meals;  and  always  leave  off 
eating  w  ith  an  appetite  :  besides,  I  never,  as 
you  know,  drink  strong  wines. — With  respect 
to  the  English  language,'*  he  continued,  "  I 
have  been  very  diligent:  I  now  read  your  News- 
papers with  ease  ;  and  must  own,  that  they 
afford  me  no  inconsiderable  amusement.  They 


(    133    ) 

V 

are,  occasionally,  inconsistent,  and  sometimes 
abusive. — In  one  paper  I  am  called  a  Lear^  in 
another  a  Tyrant^  in  a  third  a  Monster^  and, 
in  one  of  them,  which  I  really  did  not  expect, 
I  am  described  as  a  Coimrd;  but  it  turned 
out,  after  all,  that  the  writer  did  not  accuse 
me  of  avoiding  danger  in  the  field  of  battle,  or 
flying  from  an  enemy,  or  fearing  to  look  at 
the  menaces  of  fate  and  fortune ;  it  did  not 
charge  me  with  wanting  presence  of  mind  in 
the  hurry  of  battle,  and  in  the  suspense  of  con- 
flicting armies. — No  such  thing;  I  wanted 
courage  it  seems,  because  I  did  not  coolly 
take  a  dose  of  poison,  or  throw  myself  into 
the  sea,  or  blow  out  my  brains. — The  Editor, 
most  certainly  misunderstands  me ;  I  hare,  at 
least,   too    much  courage   for  that. — ^Your 
papers  are  influenced  by  party  principles: 
what  one  praises  the  other  will  abuse ;  and 
so  vice  versa.     They  who  live  in  the  metro- 
polis where  they  are  published,  can  judge 
of  passing  events  and  transactions  for  them- 
selves ;  but  persons  living  at  a  distance  from 
the  capital,  and  particularly  foreigners,  must 
be  ala  loss  to  determine  upon  the  real  state  of 


(     134    ) 

things,  and  the  characters  of  public  men,  from 
the  perusal  of  your  Journals/' 

Napoleon  appearing  as  it  were,  to  be  speak- 
ing out,  and  in  a  humour  to  deliver  opinions, 
instead  of  confining  himself  to  asking  ques- 
tions, I  was  determined  to  speak  out  too; 
and  I  had  no  doubt  that  I  should  lead  him 
into  an  interesting  conversation,  or  induce 
him  to  wish  me  a  good  day. 

I  accordingly  replied,  "  I  really  think  that 
you  must  possess  more  patience  than  my  coun- 
trymen are  disposed  to  allow  3^ou5  if  you  really 
wade  through  all  the  columns  that  have  been 
filled  on  your  subject.  You  cannot,  General, 
suppose  for  a  moment,  that  the  extraordinary 
events  which  have  taken  place,  and  of  which 
you  have  formed  such  a  prominent  part, 
would  not  be  considered  and  observed  upon 
with  great  freedom  by  a  thinking  people  like 
the  English,  and  who  have  the  privilege, 
and  may  they  ever  possess  it,  of  speaking  and 
writing  what  they  think/'  I  was  proceeding 
in  full  swing  and  in  a  very  patriotic  way,  wheu 
he  thus  interrupted  me.     "  This  calling  of 


(    135    ) 

names,  and  these  scolding  epithets,  only  serve 
to  amuse  me  ;  but  there  are  observations  in 
your  papers,  which  produce  far  different  sen- 
sations. You  have  :**  he  continued,  "  a  writer 
whom  I  greatly  admire  ;  I  believe  he  is  of 
your  country,  a  Scotchman — Macpherson,  the 
author  of  Ossian.  There  is  also  a  person  of  the 
name  of  Belsham :  on  what  subjects  has  he 
written? — I  replied,  "  that  I  believed  he  had 
written  an  account  of  the  reign  of  our  ex- 
cellent Sovereign/' — ''  Yes,"  he  said,  "^your 
Laws  permit  you  to  writeof  kings,  of  ministers, 

of  measures,  and  of  one  another." "  Yes," 

I  replied,  "  such  is  the  privilege  of  English- 
men ;  and,  possessing  the  infirmities  of  human 
nature,  they  may  sometimes  abuse  it.  Mis- 
conception, party  spirit,  and  perhaps  factious 
minds,  may,  at  times,  tend  to  propagate  and 
support  erroneous,  and  even  violent  opinions; 
but  the  love  of  justice  and  of  truth,  forms  the 

genuine  character  of  an  Englishman." 

"  Nevertheless,"  he  observed,  "  you  appear 
to  handle  my  character  rather  roughly:  and 
more  so,  since  I  have  been  in  your  power." 
"  To  that  opinion,   General,^*  I  answered 


(     136    ) 

rather  quickly,  "  I  must  beg  leave  to  address 
a  direct  negative. — You  have  not  always  had 
the  leisure  to  examine  English  publications 
which  you  enjoy  at  present,  but  I  do  assure 
you,  that  from  the  time  of  your  becoming 
First  Consul  of  France,  to  the  moment  when 
you  set  your  foot  on  the  deck  of  the  Bellero- 
phon,  the  English  press  has  never  ceased  to 
fulminate  its  displeasure  against  you  ;  and 
this  without  exception,  for  the  parties  who 
differed  in  every  thing  besides,  expressed  but 
one  and  the  same  opinion  oi  you.     This,  I 
presume,  you  must  have  known  at  the  time, 
though  the  vast  projects  that  have  occupied 
your  mind,  may  have  prevented  your  memory 
from  retaining  a  detail  of  our  literary  offences  : 
your  official  papers,  however,  marked  their 
perfect   acquaintance   with   the   hostility   of 
our  journals,  and  returned  their  paragraphic 
missiles  in  every  direction.    You  were  rather 
angry  with  Old  England,  when  you  ordered 
the  Moniteur  to  call  us  a  '  Nation  of  Shop- 
keepers :' — A   great  commercial   nation   we 
certainly  are,  and  may  we  ever  remain  so  : 
for  it  is  that  commerce  which  has  proved  a 


(    137    ) 

fountain  of  resources,  whose  failure  would 
have  prevented  even  the  native  and  irre- 
sistible bravery  of  Englishmen  from  making 
the  late  immortal  additions  to  our  national 
glory.  But  we  are  also  a  most  noble-minded, 
magnanimous  and  generous  people ;  and  were 
never  known  to  insult  a  conquered  enemy ; 
nay,  how  often  has  it  happened  that  both  our 
sailors  and  our  soldiers  have  risqued  their  lives 
to  save  a  fallen  foe.  Even  when  you  had 
thrown  away  one  of  the  brightest  diadems  in 
Europe,  and  had  accepted  a  slender  Sceptre  in 
Elba,  you  were  instantly  treated  with  compa- 
rative mildness  by  the  more  prevailing  public 
opinions  in  England.  And  now,  that  you  are, 
as  you  chuse  to  term  it,  in  our  power,  a  general 
feeling  of  a  generous  nature  is  known  to  be  ex- 
cited :  Yes,  Sir,  there  are  numbers  who  would 
have  rejoiced  to  hear  that  you  had  bit  the 
ground  on  the  field  of  battle,  who  are  now  dis- 
posed to  wish  you  every  comfort  that  can  be 
safely  allowed  in  your  present  situation. — If 
the  Northumberland  had  overtaken  you  in  a 
French  man-of-war,  endeavouring  to  make 
your  medi  tated  escape  to  America,  every  officer. 


(     138    ) 

and  every  sailor  and  soldier  would  have  been 
bravely  engaged  in  the  attempt  to  take,  burn, 
sink,  or  destroy  the  ship  that  bore  you  ;  yet, 
as    you    have    readily    acknowledged,    you 
were  treated  by  them,  daring  the  whole  of 
the  voyage,  with  every  gentle,  manly,  and 
polite  attention.     And,  if  I  may  venture  to 
speak  of  myself,  I  shall  beg  leave  to  add,  that 
I  was  bred  up  in  the  hatred  of  you  :  nay,  that 
no  proofs  of  Holy  Writ  were  more  strongly 
imprinted  in  my  mind,  than  the  truth  of  the 
then  universally  prevailing  opinions  concern- 
ing you ;  nevertheless,  I  am  ready  to  shew 
you  every  personal  courtesy,  to  be  thankful 
for  the  civilities  I  have  received  from  you, 
and  to  offer  you  such  service  as  I  am  per- 
mitted by  the  benevolence  of  the  Government 
which  I  serve,  and  may  be  consistent  with 
those  regulations  which  its  political  wisdom 
has  thought  necessary  to  provide,  for  the  safe- 
guard  and  ultimate  security  of  your  person/* 

I  was  resolved  to  speak  my  sentiments  with 
freedom,  and  you  may  now  think  my  good 
friend,  that  I  did  not  balk  my  resolution,    I 


(    139    ) 

could  not,  indeed,  forbear  to  defend  the  ge- 
nerous temper  of  Englishmen,  when  it  received 
such  an  attack.  My  candid  sentiments  and 
unreserved  language  appeared,  however,  to 
meet  my  auditor's  approbation,  and  he  asked 
me,  to  my  great  surprise,  if  I  remembered  the 

history   of  Captain  Wright. 1  answered, 

"  Perfectly  well ;  and  it  is  a  prevailing  opi- 
nion in  England,  that  you  ordered  him  to  be 
murdered  in  the  Temple.'* — With  the  utmost 
rapidity  of  speech,  he  replied,  "  For  what  ob- 
ject ?  Of  all  men  he  was  the  person  whom  I 
should  have  most  desired  to  live.  Whence 
could  I  have  procured  so  valuable  an  evidence 
as  he  would  have  proved  on  the  trial  of  the 
conspirators  in  and  about  Paris.  The  Heads 
of  it  he  himself  had  landed  on  the  French 
coast."'  My  curiosity  was  at  this  moment  such 
as  to  be  betrayed  in  my  looks. — "  Listen,''  con- 
tinued Napoleon,  "  and  you  shall  hear.  The 
English  brig  of  war,  commanded  by  Captain 
Wright,  was  employed  by  your  government 
in  landing  traitors  and  spies  on  the  West 
coast  of  France.  Seventy  of  the  number  had 
actually  reached  Paris;  and,  so  mysterious 


(    140    ) 

were  their  proceedings,  so  veiled  in  impene- 
trable concealment,  that  although  General 
Ryal,  of  the  Police,  gave  me  this  information, 
the  name  or  place  of  their  resort  could  not  be 
discovered.  I  received  daily  assurances  that 
my  life  would  be  attempted,  and  though  I  did 
not  give  entire  credit  to  them,  I  took  every 
precaution  for  my  preservation.  The  Brig 
was  afterwards  taken  near  L'Orient,  with 
Captain  Wright,  its  commander,  who  was 
carried  before  the  Prefect  of  the  Department 
of  Morbeau,  at  Vannes:  General  Julian, 
then  Prefect,  had  accompanied  me  in  the 
expedition  to  Egypt,  and  recognised  Captain 
Wright  on  tlie  first  view  of  him.  Intelligence 
of  this  circumstance  was  instantly  trans- 
mitted to  Paris ;  and  instructions  were  ex- 
peditiously returned  to  interrogate  the  crew, 
separately,  and  transfer  their  testimonies  to 
the  Minister  of  PoUce.  The  purport  of  their 
examination  was  at  first  very  unsatisfactory  ; 
but,  at  length,  on  the  examination  of  one  of 
the  crew,  some  light  was  thrown  on  the  sub- 
ject. He  stated  that  the  Brig  had  landed 
several  Frenchmen,  and  among  them  he  parti* 


(    HI    ) 

cularly  remembered  one,  a  very  merry  felloir, 
who  was  called  Pichegru,  Thus  a  clue  was 
found  that  led  to  the  discovery  of  a  plot, 
which,  had  it  succeeded,  would  have  thrown 
the  French  nation,  a  second  time,  into  a  state 
of  revolution. — Captain  Wright  was  accord- 
ingly conveyed  to  Paris,  and  confined  in  the 
Temple  ;  there  to  remain  till  it  was  found  con- 
venient to  bring  the  formidable  accessaries  of 
this  treasonable  design  to  trial.  The  law  of 
France  would  have  subjected  Wright  to  the 
punishment  of  death :  but  he  was  of  minor  con- 
sideration. My  grand  object  was  to  secure 
the  principals,  and  I  considered  the  English 
Captain's  evidence  ofthe  utmost  consequence 
towards  completing  my  object.'* — He  again 
and  again,  most  solemnly  asserted,  that  Captain 
Wright  died  in  the  Temple,  by  his  own  hand, 
as  described  in  the  Moniteur,  and  at  a  much 
earlier  period  than  has  been  generally  believed, 
— At  the  same  time,  he  stated,  that  his  asser- 
tion was  founded  on  documents  which  he  had 
since  examined.  The  cause  of  this  enquiry 
arose  from  the  visit,  I  think,  he  said,  of  Lord 
Ebrington  to  Elba,  and  he  added,    "  That 


(    142    ) 

nobleman  appeared  to  be  perfectly  satisfied 
with  the  account  which  vras  given  him  of  this 
mysterious  business. 

I  was  so  far  encouraged  by  the  easy,  com- 
municative manner  of  the  Ex-emperor,  that  I 
continued  my  observations  without  reserve  : 
I,  therefore,  did  not  hesitate  to  express  my 
doubts  respecting  the  time  that  Capt.  Wright 
remained  in  the  Temple  previous  to  his  death. 
To  satisfy  me  in  this  particular,  Napoleon 
turned  over  a  long  succession  of  pages  in' a  late 
publication  of  Mr.  Goldsmith's,  which  had 
been  brought  him  by  Sir  Hudson  Lowe.  I  do 
not  recollect  the  title,  which  is  probably  fami- 
liar to  you,  who  have  suffered  nothing  that 
relates  to  the  government  of  France  to  have 
escaped  you,  but  I  could  perceive,  that  it 
consisted  of  Extracts  from  the  Moniteur,  6fc. 
during  the  Imperial  reign. — As  he  referred  to 
the  index  he  frequently  pointed  out  the  name 
oi  Wright,  spelled,  Right,  and  with  a  con- 
fident expectation,  as  it  certainly  appeared  to 
me,  of  finding  some  document  that  v/ou Id 
confirm  his  account.     The  Author^  however, 


(    143    ) 

either  had  not  been  able  to  discover  any  written 
testimony,  to  mark  the  precise  time  of  Captain 
Wright's  death,  or  had  intentionally  withheld 
it ;  and  the  latter  Buonaparte  repeatedly  and 
firmly  insisted  must  have  been  the  cause  of 
any  doubt  remaining  as  to  the  truth  of  his 
assertion. 

As  he  turned  over  the  leaves  of  this  volume, 
he  acknowledged  that  many  of  the  reports 
were  genuine,  but  with  frequent  inaccuracies 
and  mistatements ;  and  if  my  memory  is  cor- 
rect, he  particularised  that  which  was  given 
of  the  battle  of  Marengo.  But  he  did  not 
stop  here ;  and  continually  desired  to  know 
whether  I  perfectly  comprehended  his  mean- 
ing, as  that  was  his  most  earnest  wish.  And 
now,  to  my  utter  astonishment,  he  entered  upon 
the  event  of  the  Duke  D'Enghieii's  death. 
This  was  a  topic  that  could  not  be  expected  ; 
and  particularly  by  me,  as  there  appeared 
even  among  his  followers,  who  were  always 
on  tip-toe  to  be  his  apologists,  an  evasive 
silence  or  contradictory  statements,  when- 
ever this  afflicting  event  became  the  subject 


(    144    ) 

of  enquiry,  which  had  occasionally  happened^ 
during  the  course  of  our  voyage.  Here  Na- 
poleon became  very  animated,  and  often  raised 
himself  on  the  sofa  where  he  had  hitherto  re- 
mained in  a  reclining  posture.  The  interest 
attached  to  the  subject,  and  the  energy  of 
his  delivery,  combined  to  impress  the  tenor 
of  his  narrative  so  strongly  on  my  mind,  that 
you  need  not  doubt  the  accuracy  of  this  re- 
petition of  it. He  began  as  follows  : — 

"  At  this  eventful  period  of  my  life,  I  had 
"  succeeded  in  restoring  order  and  tranquillity 
•*  to  a  kingdom  torn  asunder  by  faction,  and 
*'  deluged  in  blood.  That  nation  had  placed  me 
*'  at  their  head.  I  came  not  as  your  Cromwell 
*'  did,  or  your  Third  Richard.  No  such  thing. 
"  — I  found  a  crown  in  the  kennel ;  I  cleansed 
"  it  from  its  filth,  and  placed  it  on  my  head. 
*'  My  safety  now  became  necessary,  to  pre- 
*'  serve  that  tranquillity  so  recently  restored  ; 
"  and,  hitherto,  so  satisfactorily  preserved,  as 
"  the  leading  characters  of  the  nation  well 
"  know.  At  the  same  time,  reports  were  every 
"  night  brought  me*'  (I  think,  he  said,  by 
General  Ryal,)   "  that  conspiracies  were  in 


(     145    ) 

*'  agitation ;  that  meetings  were  held  in  par- 
"  ticular  houses  in  Paris,  and  names  even 
*'  were  mentioned  ;  at  the  same  time,  no  sa- 
"  tisfactory  proofs  could  be  obtained,  and  the 
"  utmost  vigilance  and  ceaseless  pursuit  of 
"  the  Police  was  evaded.  General  Moreau, 
"  indeed,  became  suspected,  and  1  was  seri- 
"  ously  importuned  to  issue  an  order  for  his 
"  arrest ;  but  his  character  was  such,  his  name 
"  stood  so  high,  and  the  estimation  of  him  so 
*'  great  in  the  public  mind,  that,  as  it  ap- 
"  peared  to  me,  he  had  nothing  to  gain,  and 
"  every  thing  to  lose,  by  becoming  a  conspi- 
'•  rator  against  me:  I,  therefore,  could  not  but 
"  exonerate  him  from  such  a  suspicion. — I 
''  accordingly  refused  an  order  for  the  pro- 
"  posed  arrest,  by  the  following  intimation  to 
"  the  Minister  of  Police.  '  You  have  named 
"  Pichegru,  Georges,  and  Moreau :  convince 
"  me  that  the  former  is  in  Paris,  and  I  will 
"  immediately  cause  the  latter  to  be  arrested.' 
«i  — Another  and  a  very  singular  circumstance 
"  led  to  the  developement  of  the  plot.  One 
"  night,  as  I  lay  agitated  and  wakeful,  I  rose 
"  from  my  bed,  and  examined  the  list  of  sus 

L 


(    146    ) 

"  pected  traitors  ;  and  Chance,  which  rules 
"  the  world,  occasioned  my  stumbling,  as  it 
"  were,  on  the  name  of  a  surgeon,  who  had 
^'  lately  returned  from  an  English  prison.  This 
"  man's  age,    education,  and   experience  in 
"  life,  induced  me  to  believe,  that  his  conduct 
"  must  be  attributed  to  any  other  motive  than 
"  that  of  youthful  fanaticism  in  favour  of  a 
"  Bourbon  :  as  far  as  circumstances  qualified 
"  me  to  judge,  money  appeared    to    be  his 
"  object. — I  accordingly  gave  orders  for  this 
''  man  to  be  arrested  ;  when  a  summary  mock 
"  trial  was  instituted,  by  which  he  was  found 
"  guilty ,  sentenced  to  die,  and  informed  he  had 
"  but  six  hours  to  live.     This  stratagem  had 
"  the  desired  effect :  he  was  terrified  into  con- 
"  fession.     It  was  now  known  that  Pichegru 
*'  had  a  brother,  a  monastic  Priest,  then  re- 
"  siding  in  Paris.     I  ordered  a  party  of  Gens 
*'  d' Amies  to  visit  this  man,  and  if  he  had 
"  quitted  his  house,  I  conceived  there  would 
"  be  good  ground  for  suspicion.     The  old 
*'  Monk  was  secured,  and,  in  the  act  of  his 
"  arrest,  his  fears  betrayed  what  I  most  wanted 
*'  to  know. — '  Is  it,'  he  exclaimed,  '  because 


(     147     ) 

"  I  afforded  shelter  to  a  brother  that  I  am 

"  thus  treated/ The  object  of  the  plot  was 

"  to  destroy  me  ;  and  the  success  of  it  would, 

*'  of  course,  have  been  my  destruction.     It 

*'  emanated  from  the  capital  of  your  country, 

"  withtheCountd'Artoisatthehead  of  it.  To 

^'  the  \V^est  he  sent  the  Duke  de  Berri,  and  to 

'■'  the  East  the  Duke  D'Enghein.     To  France 

"  your  vessels  conveyed  underlings   of  the 

"  plot,  and  Moreau  became  a  convert  to  the 

*'  cause.     The  moment  was  big  with  evil  :  I 

"  felt  myself  on  a  tottering  eminence,  and,  I 

"  resolved  to  hurl  the  thunder  back  upon  the 

"  Bourbons   even  in   the  metropolis   of  the 

"  British  empire.     My  Minisser  veliemently 

«'  urged  the  seizure  of  the  Duke  though  in  a 

*'  neutral  territory.     But  I  still  hesitated,  and 

"  Prince  Benevento  brought  the  order  twice, 

"  and  uroed  the  measure  with  all  his  powers 

"  of  persuasion:  It  was  not,  however,  till  I  was 

"  fully  convinced  of  its  necessity,  that  I  sanc- 

'■'  tioned  it  by  my  signature.  The  matter  could 

''  be  easily  arranged  between  me  and  the  Duke 

"  of  Baden.     Why,  indeed,  should  1  suffer  a 

"  man  residing  on  the  very  confines  of  my 
L  2 


(    148    ) 

''  kingdom,  to  commit  a  crime  which,  within 
*'  the  distance  of  a  mile,  by  the  ordinary 
"  course  of  law,  Justice  herself  would  coa- 
"  demn  to  the  scaffold.  And  now  answer 
*'  me  ; — Did  I  do  more  than  adopt  the  prin- 
"  ciple  of  your  government,  when  it  ordered 
"  the  capture  of  the  Danish  fleet,  which  was 
"  thought  to  threaten  mischief  to  your  coun- 
"  try  ?  It  had  been  urged  to  me  again  and 
"  again,  as  a  sound  political  opinion,  that  the 
"  new  dynasty  could  not  be  secure,  while  the 
"  Bourbons  remained.  Talleyrand  never de- 
*'  viated  from  this  principle  :  it  was  a  fixed, 
*'  unchangeable  article  in  his  political  creed. 
"  — But  1  did  not  become  a  ready  or  a  wil- 
•'  ling  convert.  I  examined  the  opinion  with 
"  care  and  with  caution :  and  the  result  was 
"•  a  perfect  conviction  of  its  necessity. — The 
*'  Duke  D'Enghein  was  accessary  to  the  Con- 
"  federacy  ;  and  although  the  resident  of  a 
"  neutral  territory,  the  urgency  of  the  case,  in 
*'  which  my  safety  and  the  public  tranquillity, 
"  to  use  no  stronger  expression,  were  involved, 
"  justified  the  proceeding.  I  accordingly  or- 
*'  dered  him  to  be  seized  and  tried:  He  was 


(     149    ) 

"  found  guilty,  and  sentenced  to  be  shot. — 
"  The  sentence  was  immediately  executed ; 
"  and  the  same  fate  would  have  followed  had 
*'  it  been  Louis  the  Eighteenth,  For  I  again 
"  declare  that  I  found  it  necessary  to  roll  the 
"  thunder  back  on  the  metropolis  of  England, 
"  as  from  thence,  with  the  Count  d'Artois 
«'  at  their  head,  did  the  assasins  assail  me. 

"  Your  country   also   accuses   me  of  the 

*'  death  of  Pichegru" 1  replied,   "  It  is 

"  most    certainly    and    universally   believed 

"  throughout  the  whole  British  empire,  that 

*'  he  was  strangled  in  prison  by  your  orders/' 

He  rapidly   answered,    "  What    idle,  disen- 

*'  genuous  folly  !  a  fine  proof,  how  prejudice 

"  can  destroy  the  boasted  reasoning  faculties 

"  of  Englishmen  !     Why,  I  ask  }ou,  should 

"  that  life  be  taken  away  in  secret  which  the 

"  laws  consigned  to  the  hands  of  a  public 

"  executioner.     The  matter  would  have  been 

"  different  with  respect  to  Moreau.     Had  he 

"  died  in  a  dungeon,  there  might  have  been 

"  grounds  to  justify  the  suspicion  that  he  had 

"  not  been  guilty  of  suicide.     He  was  a  very 


(    150    ) 

"  popular  character,  as  well  as  much  be- 
*'  loved  by  the  army  ;  and  I  should  never 
"  have  lost  the  odium,  however  guiltless  I 
"  might  have  been,  if  the  justice  of  his  death, 
"  supposing  his  life  to  have  been  forfeited 
"  by  the  laws,  had  not  been  made  apparent 
"  by  the  most  public  execution/' 

Here  he  paused ;  and  I  replied. — ''  There 
"  may,  perhaps  be  persons  in  England,  who 
"  are  disposed  to  acknowledge  the  necessity  of 
"  rigorous  measures  at  this  important  period 
"  of}  our  history;  but  none,  1  believe,areto  be 
"  found  who  would  attempt  to  justify  the  pre- 
"  cipitate  manner  in  which  the  young  Prince 
"  was  seized,  tried,  sentenced,  and  shot." — 
He  instantly  answered,  "  1  was  justified  in 
"  my  own  mind  ;  and  I  repeat  the  declaration 
"  which  I  have  already  made,  that  I  would 
"  have  ordered  the  execution  of  Louis  the 
"  Eighteenth.  At  the  same  time,  1  solemnly 
*'  affirm,  that  no  message  or  letter  from  the 
*'  Duke  reached  me  after  sentence  of  death 
*'  had  been  passed  upon  him/' 

Talleyrand,   however,  was  said   to  be  in 


(    151     ) 

possession  of  a  Letter  from  the  Royal  Prisoner, 
addressed  to  Napoleon,  which  they  who  are 
well  qualified  to  know,  declared  he  took  upon 
himself  not  to  deliver,  till  it  was  too  late  to  be 
of  any  service  to  the  writer.  I  saw  a  copy  of 
this  Letter  in  possession  of  Count  de  las  Cases, 
which  he  calmly  represented  to  me  as  one  of 
the  mass  of  documents,  formed  or  collected  to 
authenticate  and  justify  certain  mysterious 
parts  of  the  history  which  he  was  occasionally 
employed  in  writing,  under  the  dictation  of 
the  hero  of  it.  Do  not  startle — the  Letter  was 
to  beg  his  Life  ;  and  to  this  effect. — It  stated 
his  opinion  that  the  Bourbon  dynasty  was  ter- 
minated. That  was  the  settled  opinion  of 
his  mind,  and  he  was  about  to  prove  the  sin- 
cerity of  it.  He  now  considered  France  no 
otherwise  than  as  his  country,  which  he  loved 
with  the  most  patriotic  ardor,  but  merely  as 
a  private  citizen.  The  crown  was  no  longer 
in  his  view  :  it  was  now  beyond  the  possibiHty 
of  recovery:  it  would  not,  it  could  not  be  re- 
stored. He  therefore  requested  to  be  allowed 
to  live  and  devote  his  life  and  services  to 
France,  merely  as  a  native  of  it.  He  was  ready 


(    152    ) 

to  take  any  command  or  any  rank  in  the  French 
army,  to  become  a  brave  and  loyal  Soldier, 
su[>ject  to  the  will  and  orders  of  the  Govern- 
ment, in  whose  hands  soever  it  might  be,  to 
which  he  was  ready  to  swear  fealty  ;  and  that, 
if  his  life  were  spared,  he  would  devote  it  with 
the  utmost  courage  and  fidelity  to  support 
France  against  all  its  enemies.  Such  was  the 
Letter  which,  as  it  was  represented  to  me, 
Talleyrand  took  care  not  to  deliver  till  the 
hand  that  wrote  it  was  unnerved  by  death. 

— Napoleon  continued  to  speak  of  the 
Bourbon  Family — "  Had  I,"  he  said,  "  been 
"  anxious  to  get  any,  or  all  the  Bourbons  into 
"  my  possession,  I  could  have  accomplished 
"  the  object.  Your  Smugglers  offered  me  a 
''  Bourbon  for  a  stated  sum  (I  think  he  named 
40,000  francs)but,on  coming  to  a  more  precise 
"  explanation,  they  entertained  a  doubt  of  ful- 
"  filling  the  engagement  as  it  was  originally 
"  proposed.  They  would  not  undertake  to 
*'  possess  themselves  of  any  of  the  Bourbon 
"  family  absolutely  alive  :  though,  with  the 
"  alternative,  alioe  or  dead,  they  had  no  doubt 


(    153    ) 

'  of  completing  it. — But  it  was  not  my  wish 
*'  merely  to  deprive  them  of  life.  Besides, 
*'  circumstances  had  taken  a  turn  which  then 
"  fixed  me  without  fear  of  change  or  chance 
^'  on  the  throne  I  possessed. — 1  felt  my  se- 
"  curity,  and  left  the  ^o?^r6o/is  undisturbed. — 
*'  Wanton,  useless  murder,  whatever  has  been 
"  said  and  thought  of  me  in  England,  has 
"  never  been  my  practice  :  to  what  end  or 
"  purpose  could  I  have  indulged  the  horrible 
"  propensity. — When  Sir  George  Rumbold 
*'  and  Mr.  Drake,  who  had  beencarr}ingon 
"  a  correspondence  with  conspirators  in  Paris, 
*'  were  seized,  they  were  not  murdered.*" 

Here  he  ceased  to  speak ;  and  as  I  was 
determined  to  gratify  my  curiosity  as  far  as 
his  present  communicative  spirit  would  allow, 
I  was  determined  to  continue  the  conversation. 
— I  accordingly  observed,  "  that  of  all  the 
undertakings  which  composed  his  wonderful 


*  In  iookiug  over  these  Letters,  for  the  press,  1  felt  a 
doubt  whether  this  observation  respecting  Sir  George  Rum- 
bold  was  made  at  this  time,  or  at  some  other  ;  or  whether  it 
proceeded  from  Buonaparte,  or  Count  de  !as  Cases  :  but 
I  am  positive  that  it  was  made  by  one  or  the  other. 


(    154    ) 

career,  no  circumstance  had  excited  such 
astonishment  in  England,  as  his  expedition  to 
Russia,  before  he  bad  brought  the  Peninsular 
war  to  a  termination,  which,  at  that  time,  ap- 
peared to  be  an  attainable  object."  i  paused, 
expecting  a  rep] 3^  on  the  subject . — however, 
he  gaTC  none  ;  but,  as  if  he  had  not  heard  my 
observation,  proceeded  to  a  renewal,  in  some 
degree,  of  the  former  topics. 

"  Your  country,"  he  said,  "  has  accused 
*'  me  of  having  murdered  the  sick  and  wound- 
"  ed  of  my  army  at  Jaffa.  Be  assured  that 
"  if  1  had  committed  such  a  horrid  act,  my 
"  very  soldiers  themselves  would  have  exe- 
"  crated  me  ;  and  I  might  have  looked  to 
"  their  ceasing  to  obey  me.  There  is  no  oc- 
"  currence  of  life  to  which  I  gave  more  pub- 
"  licity  than  this.  You  have  an  officer,  a  Sir 
'^  Robert  Wilson,  who  has  written  yery  co- 
"  piously  on  the  subject  of  my  campaign  in 
"  Egypt."  As  he  repeated  the  last  sentence, 
he  assumed  an  air  and  tone  of  sarcastic  jocu- 
larity ;  and  then  asked  me,  if  I  had  read  Sir 
Robert's  publication.    I  replied  in  the  affir- 


(     155    ) 

mative  : — ''  It  is  possible,"  he  said,  "  that  he 
wrote  from  the  testimon)^  of  other  people 
equally  prone  to  error  as  himself:  he  caiiuot 
pretend  to  have  done  it  from  his  own  observa- 
tion.— Can  you  tell  me,*'  continued  Napoleon, 
"  whether  Sir  Sydney  Smith,  in  any  official 
communications  to  yourg-overnment,  attesnpt- 
ed,  in  any  way,  to  corroborate  the  testim*>ny 
of  Sir  Robert  Wilson/'  I  coald  not,  at  the 
moment,  sufficiently  recollect  the  purport  of 
his  dispatches,  to  determine  the  point,  btit  I 
replied,  as  1  felt,  "  I  hat  he  had  not."  T  his 
reply  however,  indecisive  as  it  was,  appeared 
to  afford  him  considerable  satisfaction,  as  he 

instantly  repeated "  1  believe  so:  for  Sir 

Sydney  Smith  is  a  brave  and  just  man." — I 
here  observed  that  "  There  are  many  in  Eng^ 
land  who  imagine  your  jealousy  and  hatred  of 
Sir  Sydney  Smith  influenced  your  conduct 
towards  Captain  Wright" — Me  smiled  with 

astonishment  at  such  an  idea ihe  thought 

of  coupling  the  two  names  appeared  never  to 
have  entered  his  imagination.  "  Ridiculous  I 
nonsense  1"  was  his  reply.  He  then  entered 
on  the  following  narrative. 


(    156    ) 

''  On  raising  the  siege  of  St.  Jean  de  Acre, 
the  army  retired  upon  Jaffa.  It  had  become 
a  matter  of  urgent  necessity.  The  occupation 
of  this  town  for  any  length  of  time  was  totally 
impracticable,  from  the  force  that  Jezza  Pacha 
was  enabled  to  bring  forward.  The  sick  and 
wounded  were  numerous  ;  and  their  removal 
was  my  first  consideration.  Carriages,  the 
most  convenient  that  could  be  formed,  were 
appropriated  to  the  purpose.  Some  of  them 
were  sent  by  water  to  Damietta,  and  the  rest 
were  accommodated,  in  the  best  possible 
manner,  to  accompany  their  comrades  in  their 
march  through  the  Desart.  Seven  men,  how- 
ever, occupied  a  quarantine  hospital,  who 
were  infected  with  the  plague  ;  whose  report 
was  made  me  by  the  chief  of  the  medical 
staff;  (Ithink  it  was  Degenette).  He  further 
added,  that  the  disease  had  gained  such  a 
stage  of  malignancy,  there  was  not  the  least 
probability  of  their  continuing  alive  beyond 
forty-eight  hours.'' — I  here  exclaimed  in  a 
dubious  tone,  the  word — seven?  and  imme- 
diately asked  whether  I  was  to  understand 
that  there  were  no  more  than  seven- — ''  I 


(    157    ) 

perceive/^  he  replied,  "  that  you  have  heard 
a  different  account/' — "  Most  assuredly,  Ge- 
neral :  Sir  Robert  Wilson  states  fifty-seven  or 
seventy-seven  ;  and  speaking  more  collec- 
tively— your  whole  sick  and  wounded/'     He 

then  proceeded "  The  Turks   were  nu- 

''  merous  and  powerful,  and  their  cruelty 
"  proverbial  throughout  the  army.  Their 
'*  practice  of  mutilating  and  barbarously  treat- 
*'  ing  their  Christian  prisoners,  in  particular, 
"  was  well  known  among  my  troops,  and  had 
"  a  preservative  influence  on  my  mind  and 
"  conduct ;  and  1  do  affirm,  that  there  were 
"  only  seven  men  whom  circumstances  com- 
"  pelled  me  to  leave  as  short-lived  suff*erers 
"  at  Jaffa.  They  were  in  that  stage  of  the 
"  disease  which  rendered  their  removal  ut- 
"  terly  impracticable,  exclusive  of  the  disse.- 
"  mination  of  the  disease  among  the  healthy 
"  troops.  Situated  as  I  was,  I  could  not  place 
"  them  under  the  protection  of  the  English  ; 
"  I,  therefore,  desired  to  see  the  senior  medical 
"  officer,  and  observing  to  him,  that  the  af- 
"  flictions  of  their  disease  would  be  cruelly 
"  aggravated  by  the  conduct  of  the  Turks  to- 
*'  wards  them ;  and  that  it  was  impossible  to 


(    138    ) 

^*  continue  in  possession  of  tbe  Town,  I  de- 

"  sired  liim  to  give  me  his  best  advice  on  the 

"  occasion.    I  said,  tell  nie  what  is  to  be  done  ! 

"  He  hesitated  for  some  time,  and  then  re- 

*'  peated,  that  these  men,  who  were  the  ob- 

"  jects  of  my  very  painful  solicitude,  could 

"  not   survive  forty-eight    hours. — I  accord- 

"  ingly  suggested,  (what  appeared  to  be  his 

^'  opinion,   though   he    might    not   chuse  to 

"  declare  it,  but  wait  with  the  trembling  hope 

"  to  receive  it  from  me ;)  the  propriety,  be- 

"  cause  I  felt  it  would  behumanity,  to  shorten 

"  the  sufferings  of  these  seven  men  by  admi- 

"  nistering  Opium,     Such  a  relief,  I  added, 

*'  in  a  similar  occasion,  1  should  anxiously 

^'  solicit  for  myself. — But,  rather  contrary  to 

"  my  expectation,  the  proposition  was   op- 

"  posed,    and    consequently    abandoned.      I 

"  therefore  halted  the  army  one  day  longer 

"  than  1  intended  ;  and,  on  my  quitting  Jaffa, 

"  left  a  strong  rear-guard,  whoconrinued  in 

"  that  city  till  the  third  day.    At  the  expiration 

"  of  that  period,  an  officer's   report  reached 

"  me,  that  the  men  were  dead.'' "Then 

General,*'  1  could  not  resist  exclaiming,  "no 
Opium  was  given,"    The  emphatic  answer  I 


(    159    ) 

received  was — "  No  :  none  ! — A  report  was 
"  brought  me  that  the  men  died  before  the 
"  rear-guard  had  evacuated  the  city/' 

I  again  interrupted  him  by  mentioning  that 
Sir  Sydney  Smith,  when  he  afterwards  entered 
Jaffa,  found  one  or  two  Frenchmen  alive.— 
''  Well,"  he  answered,  "  that,  after  all,  may 
be  possible  1" — It  was,  I  think,  at  this  period 
of  the  conversation,  that  he  stated  his  being  in 
possession  of  a  Letter  from  Sir  Sydney  Smith, 
written  in  very  complimentary  language, 
which  expressed  the  writer's  astonishment,  as 
well  as  praise,  on  the  accommodations  whicih 
were  contrived  and  executed  to  transport  the 
French  sick  and  wounded  from  Acre  to  Jaffa, 
and  thence  across  the  Desart. 

1  here  took  occasion  to  observe,  "that  a 
late  English  traveller,  a  distinguished  scholar 
and  learned  professor  of  the  University  of 
Cambridge,  had  excited  a  very  general  doubt 
respecting  the  accuracy  of  this  partici'i^ar  part 
of  Sir  Robert  Wilson's  narrative.  Dr.  Clark, 
the  person  to  whom  I  alluded,  had'M  said, 
"  travelled  through  Turkey,  nnd  as  I  believed, 
by  the  route  of  Aleppo  and  Damascus  to  Je- 


(    160    ) 

rusalem,  and  from  thence  to  Jaffa,  where  he 
remained  some  time.  J  his  gentleman,  whose 
character  stands  high  in  the  world,  may  be 
said  to  contradict  the  testimony  of  his  coun- 
tryman Sir  Robert,  respecting  the  charge 
which  the  former  may  be  said  to  have  brought 
forward  against  you.  Though  he  merely  states 
that  he  never  heard  of  the  cruel  transaction; 
but  very  naturally  observes,  that  if  such  an 
extraordinary  event  had  occurred  as  the  mur- 
der of  such  a  number  of  Frenchmen  by  their 
own  General,  some  traces  or  recollection  of  so 
horrid  an  event,  and  of  such  recent  occur- 
rence, must  have  transpired  and  been  com- 
municated to  him  during  his  residence  there." 
A  question  instantaneously  followed. — "  Has 
this  traveller  said  any  thing  of  El  Arish  !" — 
My  memory  did  not  serve  me  sufficiently  to 
give  an  answer.  "  Well,"  he  continued, 
"  you  shall  also  hear  the  particulars  of  El 
Arish  and  the  garrison  of  Jaffa..  You  have 
read  without  doubt,  of  my  having  ordered  the 
Turks  to  be  shot  at  Jaffa,"  "  Ves,  indeed," 
I  replied,  "  I  have  often  heard  of  that  mas- 
sacre in  England  :  it  was  a  general  topic  at 
the  time,  and  treated  as  a  B»  'hsh  mind  never 
fails  to  consider  subjects  of  thatdescription." — 


(    161    ) 

He  then  proceeded. "  At  the  period  in 

"  question,  General  Desaix  was  left  in  Upper 
"  Etjrypt ;  and  Kleber  in  the  vicinity  of  Da- 
"  mietta.  I  left  Cairo  and  traversed  the  Ara^ 
"  bian  Desart,  in  order  to  unite  my  force  with 
"  that  of  the  latter  at  El  Arish.  The  town 
"  was  attacked,  and  a  capitulation  succeeded. 
*'  Many  of  the  prisoners  were  found,  on  exa- 
"  mination,  to  be  natives  of  the  Mountains, 
"  and  inhabitants  of  Mount-Tabor,  but  chiefly 
"  from  Nazareth.  They  were  immediately  re* 
"  leased,  on  their  engaging  to  return  quietly 
"  to  their  homes,  children,  and  wives  :  at  the 
"  same  time,  they  were  recommended  to  ac- 
"  quaint  their  countrymen,  the  Napolese,  that 
"  the  French  were  no  longer  their  enemies, 
"  unless  they  were  found  in  arms  assisting  the 
"  Pacha.  When  this  ceremony  was  concluded, 
*'  the  army  proceeded  on  its  march  towards 
'*  Jaffa.  Gaza  surrendered  on  the  route. — 
"  That  city,  on  the  first  view  of  it,  bore  a  for- 
"  midable  appearance,  and  the  garrison  was 
"  considerable.  It  was  summoned  to  sur- 
"  render:  when  the  officer,  who  bore  my  flag 
"  of  truce,  no  sooner  passed  the  city  wall, 

m 


(    162    ) 

'*  than  liis  liead  was  inhumanly  struck  off, 
"  instantly  fixed  upon  a  pole,  and  insultingly 
"  exposed  to  the  view  of  the  French  army. 
"  At  the  sight  of  this  horrid  and  unexpected 
"  object,  the  indignation  of  the  soldiers  knew 
"  no  bounds  :  they  were  perfectly  infuriated ; 
"  and,  with  the  most  eager  impatience,  de- 
"  manded  to  be  led  on  to  the  storm.     I  did 
"  not  hesitate,  under  such  circumstances,  to 
"  command  it.     The  attack  was  dreadful  ; 
*'  and  the  carnage  exceeded  any  action  I  had 
"  then  witnessed.     We  carried  the  place,  and 
*'  it  required  all  my  efforts  and  influence  to 
"  restrain  the  fury  of  the  enraged  soldiers.  At 
"  length,  I  succeeded,  and  night  closed  the 
"  sanguinary  scene.     At  the  dawn  of  the  fol- 
"  lowing  morning,  a  report  was  brought  me, 
"  that  five  hundred  men,  chiefly  Napolese, 
"  who  had  lately  formed  a  part  of  the  garrison 
"  of  El  Arish,  and  to  whom  I  had  a  few 
''  days  before  given  liberty,  on  condition  that 
"  they  should  return  to  their  homes,  were 
"  actually  found  and  recognised  amongst  the 
"  prisoners.     On  this  fact  being  indubitably 
"  ascertained,  I  ordered  the  five  hundred  men 


(    163    ) 

"  to  be  drawn  out  and  instantly  shot/' 

In  the  course  of  our  conversation,  his  anxiety 
appeared  to  be  extreme,  that  I  should  be 
satisfied  of  the  truth  of  every  part  of  his  nar- 
rative, and  he  continually  interrupted  it,  by 
asking  me  if  I  perfectly  comprehended  him. 
He  was,  however,  Patience  itself,  when  I 
made  any  observations  exp^^essive  of  doubts 
I  had  previously  entertained  respecting  any 
part  of  the  subjects  agitated  between  us,  or 
any  unfavourable  opinion  entertained  or  pro- 
pagated in  England.  Whenever  I  appeared 
embarrassed  for  an  answer,  he  gave  me  time 
to  reflect :  and  I  could  not  but  lament  that 
I  had  not  made  myself  better  acquainted  with 
the  events  of  the  period  under  consideration, 
as  it  might  have  drawn  him  into  a  more  en- 
larged history  of  them. 

He  now  returned  to  the  subject  of  Sir 
Robert  Wilson,  and  asked  me  if  I  knew  any 
thing  of  his  military  character,  and  the  ten- 
dency of  his  writings ;  and  if  the  latter  had 
added  to  his  fortune.— I  replied,  that  I  could 
not  speak  upon  either,  from  my  own  know- 
M  2 


(     164    )  ' 

ledge ;  but  1  was  induced  to  suppose  from 
the  services  in  which  he  had  been  engaged, 
he  must  have  stood  high  in  the  opmion  of 
those  who  employed  him  ;  and  I  had  also  un- 
derstood that  lis  w  >rks  were  considered  as 
having  been  very  honourable  to  him  both  as 
a  writer  and  a  soldier. — "  Pray  can  you  tell 
me"  he  continued,  "  from  what  motive  this 
officer  has  acted  in  the  escape  of  La  Valette, 
the  decided  and  avowed  triend  of  the  man 
whom  he  has  so  wantonly  calum.niated  ? — 
I  was  here,  as  it  may  be  supposed,  rather  em- 
barrassed for  an  immediate  reply,  but  he  gave 
me  full  time  to  collect  myself;  and  I  answered, 
"  That  I  had  no  doubt  they  were  such  as  did 
honour  to  his  heart ;  whatever  imputation 
may  have  been  passed  up«in  his  judgment 
and  his  discretion.  Somewhat  of  an  adven- 
turous and  romantic  spirit  might  have  go- 
verned him  :  but  it  never  was  imagined  by 
any  one,  that  he  was  influenced  by  sordid  or 
pecuniary  motives :  that  idea  never  seems 
to  have  occurred,  when  the  transaction  was 
the  subject  of  universal  consideration  and 
enquiry.    There  was  not,  I  thought,  a  per- 


(    165    ) 

son  in  England  who  received  hira  or  his 
companions,  with  a  diminution  of  their  regard 
for  the  part  they  had  taken  in  this  mysterious 
business/'  In  an  instant  he  observed,  "  I 
"  believe  every  word  you  have  said,  at  the 
"  same  time  you  may  be  assured,  that  moriey 
"  would  not  have  been  wanting  to  save  La 
"  Valette. — I  desire  you  also  to  give  your 
"  particular  attention  to  my  opinion,  uhich 
"  is  a  decided  one.  That  this  act  of  Sir 
"  Robert  Wilson,  for  the  preservation  of  La 
"  Valette,  is  the  commencement  of  his  recant- 
"  ationof  what  he  has  written  against  me*." — 
It  is  a  coincidence,  perhaps,  not  worth  men- 
tioning, but  is  a  singular  circumstance,  that 
we  had  a  son  of  Sir  Robert  Wilson,  at  this 
time  a  midshipman  on  board  the  Northum- 
berland. 


*  La  Va'tttt^  ^  beUeve,  wa«  a^reut  favou  ile  of  ius  iate 
Emperor;  and  1  w-?i  knov/,  thnt  every  o.^e  ofllie  suite  ex- 
pressed the  greatesc  joy  at  his  escape.  I  vemeniber  ^.eaving 
General  Eertrai-d  say,  that  during  the  whole  time  I.a 
Valette  was  in  the  Post-OfFiCe,  not  a  single  instance  of  un- 
necessary rigour  was  k)iown  lo  have  taken  place;  aor  was 
the  peace  of  a  privatt  family  ever  disturbed  in  the  slightest 
degree. 


(    166    ) 

My  curiosity  now  grew  bold,  and  I  was 
determined  to  try  whether  I  could  induce  Na- 
poleon to  satisfy  me  as  to  the  particulars  of  a 
conversation  between  him  and  Mr.  Fox,  rela- 
tive to  the  infernal  machine,  which  I  had 
heard  related  by  the  honourable  Mr.  Bennet, 
who  took  passage  witli  Lord  W.  Stuart,  in 
the  Lavinia,  from  Lisbon  to  England,  in  the 
year  1807. 

I  prefaced  my  enquiry  by  observing,  that 
an  account  had  been  published,  and  was  very 
generally  believed  in  England,  stating  a  con- 
versation between  him  and  Mr.  Charles  Fox, 
at  St.  Cloud :  that  to  myself  it  was  very  inter- 
esting; and  as  I  heard  it  related  by  a  gentle- 
man of  rank,  talent  and  high  character,  I  had 
entertained  no  doubt  of  the  general  fact  as  he 
stated  it.  Napoleon,  in  a  most  good-humoured 
way,  said,  "  Repeat  it — I  shall  remember." 
1  then  proceeded. 

''  The  account.  General,  is  as  follows. — As 
you  were  one  evening  going  to  the  Theatre, 
you  encountered  great  danger  of  your  life 


(    167    ) 

by   the   explosion   of  a  machine,    to  Avhich 
the  title  oi  infernal  was  afterwards  applied. 
This  eiigfine  of  destruction  was  said  to  have 
been  placed  in  a  narrow  street  through  w  hich 
you   were   to  pass.      The  rashness  of  your 
coachman,    it    is   said,  saved  your  life:  for 
finding  a  vehicle  placed  in  such  a  manner  as 
would  have  presented  an  insurmountable  dif- 
ficulty to  a  less  timid  driver,  he  gave  speed 
to  his  horses,  and  the  wheel  of  your  carriage 
couiing  in  contact  with  the  machine,  overset 
it  with  great  violence,  and  immediately  after 
you  had  passed,  the  explosion  took  place." 
"  That,'*  he  replied,  "  is  true:  your  informa- 
tion is  correct.''  ''  And  it  is  also  said,  that  you 
went  to  the  Theatre,  and  e^'joved  the  play  as  if 
nothing  had  happened.''    He  now  nodded,  or 
rather  made  a  slight  obeisance.     "  And  it  is 
also  asserted,  that  in  a  conversation  you  had 
with  Mr.  Fox,    at  St.  Cloud,  on  the  subject, 
you  accused  the  English  of  having  invented 
the  machine  for  your  destruction." — "  That 
is  the  fact,"  he  said,  ''I  certainly  did."  ''And 
that  you  particularly  alluded  to  Mr.  Wind- 
ham." *'Yes,  Alr.Vandanu'—''  It  is  also  said, 


(    168    ) 

General,  that  Mr.  Fox  contended  it  was  not 
of  English  invention,  for  that  the  crime  of  as- 
sassination was  repugnant  to  the  national 
character.  He  also  particularly  defended  Mr. 
Windham,  who,  he  said,  though  they  liad  dif- 
fered in  politics,  he  knew  to  be  an  hoxiourable 
man,  and  incapable  as  a  British  Minister,  of 
sanctioning  such  a  dishonorable  transaction." 
IS^poleon  remembered  the  conversation,  and 
acknowledged  that  he  accused  Mr.  Windham. 
I  now  ventured  to  ask  him  if  he  continued  of 
th*^  same  opinion.  '*  Yes,"  he  said,  "  the 
English  Miiiisfry  were  instrumental  to  the 
plot.  Their  money  has  gone  for  that  and 
other  extraordinary  purposes."  M)^  English 
blood  was  a  little  up  on  the  occasion  ;  and  my 
reply,  depend  iipon  it,  was  to  the  following 
ellecl. — "  My  nation  detests  an  assassin  more 
than  it  does  a  coward:  indeed  he  is  the  worst 
of  cowards ;  and  I  do  not  believe,  that  there 
is  'I  British  heart  \ihich  does  not  revolt  at  ihe 
thought,  and  subscribe  v/ith  an  honest  and 
glov  ing  sincerity,  to  the  opinion  of  IVIr.  Fox." 
— tie  gave  me  no  answer,  but  I  could  per- 
ceive that  he  was  not  convinced :  and  he  still 


{    169    ) 

retains  his  original  belief  in  the  contrivance 
of  the  Infernal  Machine. 

I  now  discontinued  the  subject,  and  ap- 
proached the  chimney-piece  to  examine  a 
small  bust  in  marble,  which  appeared  to  me 
to  be  exquisitely  sculptured.  When  he  saw 
my  attention  to  it,  he  exclaimed,  ''  that  is  my 
son."  Indeed  tlie  resemblance  to  the  father 
is  so  very  striking,  that  it  is  discernible  at 
the  first  glance.  On  one  side  is  a  miniature 
also  of  young  Napoleon,  and  a  highly-finished 
portrait  of  his  mother,  Maria  Louisa,  on  the 
other. 

He  now  complained  of  a  pain  in  the  great- 
toe  of  his  right  foot ;  described  the  sensation 
he  felt,  and  asked  if  it  betokened  the  gout. — 
I  requested  to  know  if  he  could  trace  the  dis- 
ease of  gout  to  any  hereditary  transmission. 
"  INo/*  he  replied,  neiiherof  his  parents  ever 
had  the  gout ;  but,  recollecting  himself,  he 
added,  "  that  bis  uncle.  Cardinal  Fesch,  had 
been  very  much  afHicted  by  it/' 

I  remarked,  that  even  when  the  disease 


(     170    ) 

was  known  to  be  hereditary  in  families,  atten- 
tion in  early  years,  to  exercise  and  diet,  often 
retarded  its  approach,  and,  when  it  came  at 
length,  would  render  the  disease  more  mild. 

I  observed  to  him,  that,  crnsidering  the 
active  life  he  led,  it  did  not  appear  that  he 
took  sufficient  exercise  to  preserve  himself  in 
a  right  state  of  health.  He  replied,  ''  my 
"  rides,  indeed,  are  too  confined ;  but  the 
"  being  accompanied  by  an  officer  is  so  very 
"  disagreeable  to  me,  that  I  must  be  content 
"  to  suffer  the  consequences  of  abridging 
"  them.  However,  I  feel  no  inconvenience 
"  from  the  want  of  exercise.  Man  can  ac- 
"  custom  himself  to  privations.  —  At  one 
"  period  of  my  life  I  was  many  hours  on 
"  horseback  every  day,  for  six  }ears ;  and  I 
''  was  once  eighteen  months  without  passing 
"  from  the  house.'* 

He  now  returned  to  the  grievance  of  being 
watched  by  an  officer.  "  You  are  acquainted,'* 
he  said,  "  with  the  Island  of  St.  Helena,  and 
*'  must  be  sensible  that  a  sentinel,  placed  on 


(    171     ) 

"  either  of  these  hills,  can  command  the  sight 
"  of  me  from  the  moment  I  quit  this  house,  till 
''  I  return  to  it.  If  an  officer  or  soldier  placed 
"  on  that  height  will  not  satisfy  your  Governor, 
"  why  not  place  ten,  twenty,  a  troop  of  dra- 
"  goons.  Let  them  never  lose  sight  of  me, 
"  only  keep  an  officer  from  my  side/' 

Believe  me,  my  good  Friend,  I  do  not 
grudge  the  pains  this  Letter  has  cost  me,  that 
1  might  be  clear  in  my  recollections  and 
accurate  in  my  report. — I  know  the  pleasure 
it  will  affi)rd  you,  and  that  reflection  repays 
me.  Future  circumstances  can  alone  deter- 
mine, whether  you  will  receive  another  St. 
Helena  Letter  from 

&c.  &c.  &c. 

W.  W. 


St.  Helena, 
MY    DEAR 

Thf.  arrival  of  a  Fleet  at  the  Island 
from  India,  and  which  will  afford  the  means 


(    172    ) 

of  conveying  my  last  Letter,  has  already 
enabled  me  to  begin  another.  This  circum- 
stance crowded  the  little  Town  with  passen- 
gers, who  were  all,  as  usual,  eager  to  see 
Buonaparte.  The  Countess  of  Loudon  dis- 
emb.irked  from  this  Fleet ;  and,  during  her 
stay  at  St.  Helena,  was  acconimodated  at 
Plantation-House,  the  residence  of  the  Go- 
vernor. In  compliment  to  this  Lady,  a  dinner 
of  ceremony  was  given  on  the  following  day, 
by  Sir  Hudson  Lowe  ;  and  an  invitation  was 
di.-^patched  through  General  Bertrand  to 
General  Buonaparte,  so  arranged  in  point 
of  politeness  and  etiquette,  as  to  justify  an 
expectation  that  it  would  be  accepted.  This, 
however,  happened  to  be  the  first  invitation 
which  he  had  received  ;  and  some  remarks 
passed,  that  it  had  rather  the  appearance  of  a 
wish  to  gratify  the  Countess,  than  an  act  of 
parti«"ular  civility  to  the  person  to  whom 
it  was  addressed.  1  know  that  it  was  re- 
ceived in  this  light  at  Longwood.  Count 
Bertrand  delivered  the  Governor's  card,  which 
was  read  and  returned  without  a  word  of 
observation.      "  Sire/'    said    Marshal   Ber- 


(    173    ) 

trand,  "What  answer  is  i I  your  Majesty's 
pleasure  that  I  should  retuni  ?"  *'  Say,  the 
Emperor  gave  no  answer/' 

I  passed  a  considerable  part  of  the  after- 
noon of  that  day  in  Napoleon's  apartment : 
and,  as  usual,  was  employed  in  answering,  to 
the  best  of  my  information,  such  as  it  is,  the 
various  questions  which  he  thought  proper  to 
ask  me.  His  enquiries  were  particularly  di- 
rected to  the  nature,  circumstances,  and  state 
of  the  fleet  which  had  just  arrived :  Our  trade 
to  India,  and  the  numerous  English  which 
appeared  to  be  constantly  passing  to  and  fro, 
between  India  and  Europe.  In  the  course  of 
this  conversation  I  happened  to  mention  the 
hope  entertained  by  the  strangers  in  the  town 
of  being  gratified  by  the  sight  of  him  as  he 
passed  to  the  Plantation-House,  to  dine  with 
the  Governor.  This  littlepiece  of  information 
proved  to  be  fort  mal  a  propos,  as  it  produced 
the  only  symptom  of  petulance  I  had  wit- 
nessed in  my  various  communications  with 
the  Ex-emperor ;  and  it  was  displayed  in  tone, 
look,  and  gesture,  in  his  very  brief  but  hasty 


(    174    ) 

reply. — "  What,  go  to  dinner,  perhaps,  ^vith 

a  file  of  soldiers  to  guard  me  !" In  a  few 

minutes,  however,  he  resumed  his  usual  cool 
manner,  and  continued  the  subject. — "  After 
all,'"  he  said,  "  they  could  not,  1  think,  ex- 
pect me  to  accept  the  invitation.  The  dis- 
tance is  considerable,  and  the  hour  unsea- 
sonable ;  and  I  have  almost  relinquished  the 
idea  of  exceeding  my  chain,  accompanied  as 
I  must  be  by  an  officer." 

The  Countess  of  Loudon  left  the  Island 
without  seeiiig  the  Ex-emperor,  and  is  said  to 
have  acknowledged  her  disappointment  on  the 
occasion ;  and  if  I  may  venture  an  opinion, 
but  remember  it  is  altogether  my  own,  I  think 
the  regret  is  mutual. 

He  asked  me  some  days  after,  if  I  had  seen 
the  Countess.  I  answered  in  the  affirmative ; 
and  added,  that  she  had  honoured  the  North- 
umberland with  a  visit,  and,  as  it  was  usual 
with  all  visitors  to  the  ship,  she  was  shewn  the 
cabin  which  he  had  occupied  during  the  pas- 
sage.    I  thought  abo,  it  would  amuse  him  to 


(    175     ) 

be  informed  that  curious  strangers  generally 
chose  to  indulge  their  fancy  by  sitting  down 
in  his  chuir.  "  And  did  the  Countess/'  he 
said,  "  do  the  chair  that  honour  ?"  Unfortu- 
nately I  could  not  speak  with  certainty  on 
that  item  of  his  enquiry  ;  not  having  been  in 
the  cabin  at  the  time.  He  seemed,  however, 
to  enjoy  the  whim  of  sitting  in  his  chair  ;  and 
continued  his  questions.  "  W  ould  it,  do  you 
"  suppose,  have  appeared  indecorous  to  the 
*'  people  of  England,  if  the  Countess  of  Lou- 
*'  don,  had  visited  Longwood  !  Could  it  have 
*'  been  thought  incorrect  in  any  degree,  if  the 
*'  Lady,  in  company  with  Madame  Bertrand, 
*'  had  paid  me  a  visit  in  this  garden  ?  Many 
''  Ladies,  on  their  return  to  England,  have 
"  been  introduced  to  me  in  that  manner.  Had 
"  the  Countess  of  Loudon  expressed  herself 
"  fatigued. by  the  voyage,  or  had  been  indis- 
"  posed  from  any  other  cause,  I  should  have 
^'  been  pleased  to  wait  on  her.'* — I  could  only 
«ay,  in  return,  "  that  I  was  a  countryman  of 
''  her  Ladyship,  and  if,  by  any  chance,  I 
*'  shouki  have  the  honour  of  possessing  the 
"  oppoituuity,  1  would  certainly  intrude  my- 


(    176    ) 

"  self  so  far  upon  her  attention,  as  to  in* 
*'  form  her  of  your  polite  disposiitiou  to- 
''  wards  her/' 

He  now  dashed  at  once  on  a  subject  so 
totally  ctiiferent  from  any  thm9  you  can  ex- 
pect, that  I  would  give  }onr  sagacity  its  full 
play  for  the  rest  of  your  life,  nor  fear  your 
sturablin«^  upon  it.  It  was,  as  usual,  in  the 
form  of  a  question,  and  your  impatience  will, 
in  a  moment,  be  satisfied. 

*'  Have  you,"  he  exclaimed,  "  any  know- 
"  ledge  of  Physiognomy?"—"  Not  from 
"  study." — "  Have  you  read  Lavater  ?" — "  I 
*'  have  read  some  extracts  from  his  works,  and 
"  that  is  all  I  know  of  them." — "  Can  you 
"  judge  whether  a  man  possesses  talents  from 
"  observing  the  features  of  his  face  ?" — "  All  I 
"  can  say.  General,  is  this  :  that  I  know  when 
"  a  face  is  pleasing  or  displeasing  to  me." — 
"  Ah,"  he  replied  in  an  instant,  "  there  it  is — 
"  you  have  found  it  out. — Have  you  observed 
"  Sir  Hudson  Lowe's  face  ?"—"  Yes,  I  have." 
— *'  And  what  does  it  promise ;" — "  If  I  am 


(     177    ) 

**  to  speak  the  truth,  I  like  Lady  Lowe's  much 
"  better." — He  now  laughed,  and  I  was  think- 
ing how  to  get  rid  of  the  subject,  which  had 
a  tendency  to  be  an  awkward  one,  as  it  might 
be  addressed  to  me.  He,  however,  gave  me 
no  time,  and  proceeded  to  draw  comparisons 
between  his  late  and  his  present  guardian ; 
but  in  a  vein  of  pleasantry,  as  it  appeared,  and 
with  such  a  rapid  succession  of  ideas,  that  I 
did  not,  by  any  means,  comprehend  his  ex- 
pressions, or  the  objects  of  them. 

I  happened  to  be  at  Longwood,  when 
Mf.  Raffles,  the  late  Governor  of  Java,  and 
his  suite,  obtained  permission  to  visit  the 
grounds  at  Lonerwood.  The  anxietv  of  that 
gentleman  to  see  Buonaparte  was  extreme  : 
his  curiosity  was  a  perfect  rage,  and  the  ut- 
most was  done  to  accomplish  its  gratification. 
In  short,  though  indisposition  might  have  been 
pleaded,  an  hour  was  appointed  by  the  Ex- 
emperor  to  receive  the  Ex-governor  ;  and  the 
latter  had  not  words  to  express  his  delight  at 
the  manner  in  which  he  had  been  received. 


(     178     ) 

In  a  short  time  after  Mr.  Raffles  had  taken 
leave,  I  received  a  message  from  Napoleon  to 
join  him  in  the  garden.  On  my  arrival  there 
I  found  him  surrounded  by  his  whole  suite, 
Mesdames  and  Messieurs,  with  the  carriage 
drawn  up,  saddle-horses  by  it,  and  all  ready 
for  immediate  departure.  My  appearance, 
however,  disarranged  their  intention  :  For, 
instead  of  stepping  into  the  carriage,  the 
principal  person  of  the  scene  turned  round, 
as  if  to  address  me-  I  bowed,  removed 
my  hat  from  my  head,  and  instantly  replaced 
it :  while  the  Marshals,  Counts,  and  Generals, 
stood  with  their  hats  under  their  arms.  That 
circumstance  did  not  altogether  disturb  me  ; 
though  my  gallantry  was  somewhat  embar- 
rassed on  account  of  the  Ladies,  whose  petti- 
coats were  blowing  about  them  from  a  smart, 

and  rather  unmannerly  breeze. "  Do  you 

know,"  he  said,  "  this  Governor  of  Java?'* 
— '*  I  know  no  more  of  him  than  from  the  in- 
troduction of  to-day.'*—"  Do  you  know  any 
thing  of  that  Island?"—''  What  I  know  of  it 
is  merely  from  the  information  of  others."— 


(    179    ) 

**  The  Dutch  have  represented  it  as  a  pestilen- 
tial climate ;  but  I  believe  that  a  nrore  fa- 
vourable opinion  is  now  entertained  of  it." — 
"  I  believe  so :  at  least  we  have  not  found  it 
so  bad  as,  from  previous  accounts,  we  had 
reason  to  expect." — "  Have  you  ever  seen  a 
case  of  the  plague?" — "  Never." — "  Do  you 
know  the  disease?" — "  My  only  knowledge  of 
it  proceeds  from  what  I  have  read."' — "  The 
army  of  Egypt  suffered  much  by  it ;  and  I 
had  some  difficulty  in  supporting  the  spirits 
of  many  of  those  who  remained  free  from  it. 
Yet  for  two  years  I  contrived  to  keep  my 
soldiers  ignorant  of  what  I  myself  knew.  The 
disease  can  only  be  communicated  through 
the  organs  of  respiration." — I  replied,  "that 
I  had  understood  actual  contact  would  con- 
vey it." — "  No  :"  he  said,  "  I  visited  the  hos- 
pital constantly,  and  touched  the  bodies  of  the 
sick  to  give  confidence  to  their  attendants  ; 
being  convinced  by  observation,  that  the  dis- 
ease could  only  be  communicated  by  the 
lungs.  At  the  same  time  I  always  took  the 
precaution  of  visiting  after  a  meal  and  a  few 
glasses  of  wine;  placing  myself  on  the  side 
n2 


(    180    ) 

of  the  infected  person  from  which  the  wind 
blew.'* — We  must  have  been  at  least  twenty 
minutes  in  conversation,  with  the  suite  in  all 
the  formality  of  attendance,  when  I  thought 
it  proper  to  make  some  show  of  retiring  ;  but 
he  would  not  take  the  hint,  for  a  considerable 
time.  At  length  he  made  a  slight  bow,  and 
led  Madame  Bertrand  to  the  carriage :  he 
followed  ;  and  I  stood  to  see  them  drive  off: 
observing,  however,  that  there  was  a  vacant 
seat  in  the  carriage,  he  hailed  me  to  come 
and  take  a  ride  with  them  :  I,  of  course,  ac- 
cepted the  invitation  ;  and  1  declare,  if  it  had 
been  a  party  in  a  jaunting  car  to  a  country- 
fair  in  Ireland,  there  would  not  have  been 
more  mirth,  ease,  and  affability. 

The  carriage  drove  off  at  a  pretty  round 
pace,  and  the  pleasantry  of  Napoleon  seemed 
to  keep  pace  with  it.  He  began  to  talk  Eng- 
lish ;  and  having  thrown  his  arm  half  round 
Madame  Bertrand's  neck,  he  exclaimed,  ad- 
dressing himself  to  me, ''  This  is  my  Mistress ! 
O  not  Mistress— yes,  yes,  this  is  my  Mistress  !*' 
while  the  Lady  was  endeavouring  to  extri- 


{    181    ) 

cate  herself,  and  the  Count  her  husband  burst- 
ing with  laughter.  He  then  asked  if  he  had 
made  a  mistake,  and  being  informed  of  the 
English  interpretation  of  the  word,  he  cried 
out  "  O,  no,  no — I  say.  My  friend,  my  love  ; 
No,  not  love ;  my  friend,  my  friend/'  The  fact 
was,  that  Madame  Bertrand  had  been  indis- 
posed for  several  days,  and  he  m  ished  to  rally 
her  spirits,  as  well  as  to  give  an  unreserved 
ease  to  the  conversation.  In  short,  to  use  a 
well-known  English  phrase — He  was  the  life 
of  the  party. 

The  circuitous  windings  of  the  ride  at 
Longwood  may  extend  to  five  or  six  miles  ; 
and  in  our  progress,  with  a  half  comic,  half 
serious  countenance,  he  asked  this  very  unex- 
pected question: — "  In  the  course  of  your 
practice,  and  on  your  conscience,  how  many 
patients  have  you  killed  ?" — It  is  not  unlikely 
that  1  looked  a  little  surprised ;  but  1  calmly 
answered,  "  My  conscience  does  not  accuse 
me  of  having  caused  the  death  of  any  one." 
He  laughed,  and  continued,  "  I  imagine  that 
physicians  may  mistake  diseases :  that  they 


(     182    ) 

may  sometimes  do  too  much,  at  other  times 
too  little,  After  you  have  treated  a  case  that 
has  terminated  fatally,  have-  you  not  reflected 
with  yourself,  and  said — well,  if  I  had  not  bled, 
or  vice  versa,  if  1  had  bled,  this  man,  he  ^\^uld 
have  recovered,  or  if  he  had  not  consulted  a 
physician  at  all,  he  might  have  been  now 

alive/' 1  made  no  reply,  and  he  continued 

his  questions.— 

''  Which  do  you  think  are  the  best  sur- 
geons, the  French  or  the  English  ?'* — ''  The 
English  undoubtedly."—"  But  wherefore  ?'*— 
''  Because  our  schools  are  better.  There  is 
more  system  in  our  education  ;  and  the  exa- 
mination is  such  as  to  establish  the  fitness  of 
any  candidate  for  the  profession  before  he  is 
regularly  admitted  into  it."—''  But  in  point 
of  practice  will  you  not  allow  that  the  French 
surgeons  have  the  advantage  of  you  ?" — "  In 
practice.  General,  the  French  are  empirics, 
though  they  do  not  vend  nostrums  like  our 
quacks  in  England.  They  are,  in  fact,  more 
guided  by  experience  than  theory.  But  you, 
Sir,  have  enabled  my  brethren  in  the  English 


(    183    ) 

army  to  be  tolerable  proficients  in  field  prac- 
tice." Napoleon  smiled  at  my  reply,  and 
immediately  proceeded  to  a  question,  which, 
though  it  is  not  altogether  disconnected 
with  the  former  subject,  I  did  not  expect. 

It  was  this. "  Who  is  your  first  physi- 

cian  in  London  ?" — "  That  is  an  enquiry 
which  I  did  not  expect,  and  cannot  take 
upon  myself  to  answer :  there  are  so  many 
physicians  of  eminence  there,  that  it  would  be 
hazardous  to  mention  a  favourite  name."— ~ 
, "  But  have  you  no  particular  person  in  the 

profession  who  takes   the  lead  ?" "  No, 

indeed  ;  there  are,  it  is  true,  fashionable  phy- 
sicians, who  have  their  run  for  a  season  or 
two,  or  even  three  ;  but  1  could  not  give 
the  preference  to  one,  without  doing  in- 
justice to  fifty.     I  could,  I  think,  more  parti 

cularly  distinguish  eminent  surgeons." 

"  What  is  the  general  fee  ?"  "  That  frequently 
depends  on  the  rank  and  fortune  of  the 
patient."-T-"  What  is  the  highest  that  you 
have  ever  known  ?" — "  1  really  cannot  give  a 
precise  answer  to  that  question  :  no  particular 
sum  in  that  way  at  present  occurs  to  me 


(    184    ) 

Handsome  fortunes  are  sometimes  acquired 
by  practice  in  a  few  years  ;  but  that  falls  to 
the  lot  of  but  few,  whom  particular  circum- 
stances, and  distinguished  patronage,  as  well 
as  professional  skill,  have  raised  into  great 
celebrity." — "  When  Corvesart  attended  my 
wife,  the  Empress  Maria  Louisa,  on  the  birth 
of  my  son,  he  was  ordered  three  thousand 
Napoleons.  I  wished,  at  one  time,  that  the 
Empress  should  be  bled,  according  to  your 
practice,  but  Corvesart  refused  :  She  was  in  a 
very  full  habit.  You  are  much  employed 
on  shore,  are  you  not,  as  well  as  on  board 
of  ships  ?" — I  am  sometimes  asked  to  visit 
the  patients  of  ray  friends." — "  Do  they  pay 
you  well  ?" — "  I  never  yet  accepted  of  a  fee. 
While  I  serve,  1  am  satisfied  with  my  pay." — 
"  What  does  your  King  allow  you  ?" — "  Tw^o 
hundred  and  twenty  pounds  a  year." — "  You 
have  been  all  your  life  at  sea,  have  you  not?" 
"  1  have,  indeed  ;  and  during  a  space  of  near 
twenty  years." — "  Does  your  King  provide 
for  you  afterwards  ?" — "  Yes,  Sir,  he  does. 
At  the  expiration  of  six  years  service,  he 
allows  me,  provided  I  am  no  longer  in  employ, 


(    185    ) 

six  shillings  a  day :  but  that  sum  is  not  in- 
creased for  any  subsequent  service,  until  I  have 
completed  thirty  years." — "  That  I  think,  is  not 
an  adequate  remuneration/' — "  I  think  so  too, 
General  ;  however,  I  have  no  right  to  com- 
plain, because  I  knew  the  conditions  before  I 
engaged ;  and,   in    England,   we   are  never 

obliged  to  do  so  against  our  inclinations/* 

**  Is  it  not  very  expensive  living  in  the  Island 
of  St.  Helena?" — "  Very  much  so  :  a  stranger 
cannot  board  under  thirty  shillings  a  day." — 
"  How,  then  do  you  contrive  to  live  ?" — "  At 
present  by  the  hospitality  of  a  very  kind  and 
generous  friend  ;  and,  occasionally,  I  have 
recourse  to  the  fare  of  the  Northumberland." 
He  continued  his  questions,  and  I  my  replies, 
as  you  will  perceive.  "  The  army  must  be 
an  enormous  expense  to  your  government,  is 

it  not  ?" "  Not  more,  I  trust,  than  it  can 

maintain.  It  is,  I  fancy,  greater  than  the 
navy."  "  But  from  what  cause?" — "  The  ex- 
pense of  the  army  is  oftentimes,  and  indeed 
necessarily  increased,  I  conceive,  from  its 
local  situation." — ''  And  why  not  the  navy  ?" 
"  The  latter  is  merely   stationary,    and  the 


(    186    ) 

former  more  or  less  permanent/' — "  Is  not 
England  more  attached  to  its  Navy  than  its 
Army  ?" — "  The  Navy  is  certainly  considered 
as  its  more  natural,  essential  and  effectual 
defence  ;  but  the  Army  ^vill  sometimes  raise 
its  head  very  high,  and  be  regarded  with  a 
rival  favour  when  it  is  crow  ned,  as  it  so  often 
is,  with  laurels  :  such  a  field  as  that  of  Water- 
loo can  hardly  find  adequate  gratitude  in  th^ 
hearts  of  Englishmen." To  this  observa- 
tion Napoleon  made  no  reply,  nor  did  he  give 

an  unpleasant  look  : But  he  changed  the 

subject. 

*'  Where,"'  said  he,  "  were  you  educated  r" 
— I  replied,  "  in  Edinburgh/' — "  You  have 
very  eminent  professors  there  I  know  :  I  re- 
member Doctor  Brown's  system  was  in  repute 
during  my  first  Italian  campaign.  I  have  read 
of  your  other  men  of  note,  and  I  wish  you 
would  call  them  to  my  recollection  by  repeat- 
ing their  names/* — I  accordingly  mentioned 
Black  in  Chemistry ;  Monro  in  Anatomy  and 
Surgery^  and  Gregory  in  Physic ;  but,  at  the 
same  time  I  observed,  that  while  I  particu- 


(    187    ) 

larized  these  distinguislied  characters  whose 
pupil  I  was;  I  could  name  others  of  equal 
merit  in  the  different  schools  of  the  Bntish 

empire. "  I  never  knew /'  said  Napoleon, 

"  but  one  physician  who  was  infallible  in  his 
diagnostics.  He  was  certain  in  his  discovery 
of  the  nature  and  seat  of  a  disease  ;  his  name 
was  Dubos  ;  but,  strange  to  say,  he  could  not 
prescribe  :  and  consequently  would  never  un- 
dertake the  treatment  or  cure  of  a  complaint 
whose  character  his  acumen  could  so  accu- 
rately penetrate."  I  observed,  "  that  he  had 
a  very  able  surgeon  with  him  in  Egypt,  Mon- 
sieur Larry'' — ''  Yes,"  he  answered,  "  he  was 
excellent  in  his  field  arrangements ;  but  1 
have  had  men  with  me  ^yho.  in  scientific 
knowledge,  were  far  superior  to  him."  "  Mr. 
Percy,"  I  said,  "  who  joined  you  on  the 
morning  of  the  battle  of  Austerlitz,  had  the 
reputation  of  superior  professional  talents." — 
"  Ah,"  he  exclaimed,  with  a  glow  on  his  coun- 
tenance,  "  how  did  you  know  that  ?"  I  must 
either  have  read  of  it  in  Larry's  Publication, 
or  heard  it  mentioned  by  General  Bertrand," 
— He  continued. 


(    188    ) 

"  It  was  my  intention  in  France  to  have 
classed  your  profession  into  three  divisions.  I 
heive  always  respected  it :  it  is  a  science  and 
more  than  a  science  :  because  it  requires  a 
knowledge  of  several :   Chemistry,  Anatomy, 

Botany,   and  Physic. For  the  first  class  I 

should  have  selected  the  most  eminent  of  the 
profession." — "  But  how,  General,  would  you 
have  discovered  them  ?" — By  their  reputa- 
tion, income,  and  the  figure  which  they  made 
in  the  world."  "  But  would  not  that  plan  be 
liable  to  objection  ?  many  men  of  merit  live 
in  obscurity." "Then  there  let  them  re- 
main," he  said,  "  what  else  are  they  fit  for  ?  if 
I  were  to  choose  a  surgeon  from  your  fleet, 
should  not  I  take  him  from  the  Northumber- 
land in  preference  to  the  little  Brig?"— "There 
General, you  may  also  be  mistaken ." — "  No,  no, 
no;  a  man  of  talent  in  every  station  and  con- 
dition in  life  will  discover  himself.  Depend 
upon  it  I  should  be  safe,  in  a  general  sense,  in 
adopting  my  own  plan.  The  first  ranks  should 
have  had  some  honorary  marks  of  distinction, 
exclusive  of  that  respect  in  private  life  which 
their  education  will  always  command.     The 


(    189    ) 

third  class  should  be  humble  in  the  extreme  ; 
nor  would  they  have  been  permitted  to  adminis- 
ter any  thing  beyond  the  most  inoffensive 
medicines."  "  Perhaps.  Sir,"  1  remarked, 
"  after  such  an  arrangement,  you  might,  ac- 
cording to  our  English  custom,  have  submitted 
future  candidates  to  an  examination."  "  Yes,'* 
he  replied,  "  that  might  have  been  right." 

"  A  physician,"  continued  he,  '•'  appears 
to  me  to  resemble  a  general  officer.  He  must 
be  a  man  of  observation  and  discernment,  with 
a  penetrating  eye.  Possessed  of  these  quali- 
ties, he  will  discover  the  strength  of  the 
enemy's  position.  Thus  far,  Doctor  Dubos 
could  go,  and  no  farther.  A  sagacious  prac- 
titioner will  just  employ  sufficient  force  to 
dispossess  the  enemy  of  his  strong  hold  :  a 
force  beyond  that  might  injure  the  citadel. 
%  Now,  I  think,  if  you  carry  your  Mercury  too 
far  you  must  do  mischief:  so  I  say  of  the 

practice  of  Sangrado." 1  then  expressed  to 

him  my  surprise  at  the  general  good  health 
which  he  had  uniformly  experienced  during 
the  singular  vicissitudes  of  his  extraordinary 


190    ) 

life.  "  Yes/'  he  said,  *' my  health  has  been 
very  good.  When  the  Italian  array  was  en- 
camped in  the  vicinity  of  swamps,  many  suf- 
fered by  fever,  while  1  had  not  any  complaint : 
as  I  observed  temperance  and  a  generally  ab- 
stemious balancing  between  my  appetite  and 
the  powers  of  my  digestive  organs.  I  had,  at 
the  same  time,  exercise  sufficient,  both  of  the 
body  and  the  mind." — ''  It  was  reported,  how- 
ever, that  you  were  very  ill  on  your  return 

from  Egypt." "  I  was  very  thin  ;  and  at 

that  time  subject  to  a  bad  cough.  For  my 
recover}^  I  was  indebted  to  Doctor  Corvesart, 
who  blistered  me  twice  on  the  chest."  "  Re- 
port also  said,  that  you  were  then  subject  also 

to  an  eruption,  at  least  on  the  skin. Your 

friend  Goldsmith  says  so." — "  Yes,"  he  an- 
swered, "I  will  tell  you." — Never  shall  I  forget 
the  pleasant  manner  in  which  he  related  this 
anecdote. 

"  At  the  siege  of  Toulon,  I  commanded  a 
small  battery  of  two  guns.  One  of  your  boats 
approached  close  to  the  shore,  and  firing  their 
gun,  killed  two  canonneers  by  my  side,  I  seized 


(    191    ) 

a  ram-rod  when  it  fell  from  the  dead  soldiers 
warm  hand.  The  man,  as  it  happened,  was 
diseased ;  and  I  found  myself  in  a  very  fe\r 
days  suffering"  under  an  inveterate  Itch.  I 
had  recourse  to  baths  for  a  cure,  and  at  that 
time  succeeded.  Five  years  after,  I  had  a 
return  of  the  same  complaint  with  increased 
violence,  and  I  presume  it  had  lurked  in  mj 
blood  during  the  whole  interval.  Of  that  I 
'was  shortly  cured,  and  have  never  had  any 
return." 

I  now  perceive,  my  dear that  I  shall 

bring  this  letter  myself;  but  I  well  know  it 
will  not  be  the  less  welcome  because  the  writer 
is  the  bearer  of  it. 1  shall  therefore  con- 
tinue my  narrative  without  any  further  inter- 
ruption to  the  end. 

The  Newcastle  and  Orontes  appeared  from 
the  heights  of  St.  Helena  on  the  morning  of 
the  19th  of  June.  My  delight  on  the  occa- 
sion is  not  easily  to  be  expressed. 

I  now  bent  my  steps  to  L.ongwood,  where 
I  arrived  about  ten  in  the  morning  :   and  I 


(    192    ) 

was  no  sooner  known  to  be  there,  than  Napo- 
leon sent  to  desire  I  would  breakfast  with 
liim  in  the  garden.  On  my  appearing  he  said, 
"you  are  come  take  leave  of  us." — "lam 
come  up,  General,  with  that  intention.'' — "You 
will  breakfast  then,"  he  added,  pointing  to  a 
chair,  which  the  attendant  in  waiting  imme- 
diately placed  for  me.  The  following  con- 
versation then  took  place. 

* 

"  Have  you  had  Letters  from  your  friends  ?" 
— "  No,    Sir,    the   ships  cannot   reach   the 

Bay  before  evening." "  Is   the  Admiral 

known  ?" — "  Yes,  he  is  Admiral  Malcolm." — 
"  Are  you  glad  to  return  to  England  ?" — 
u  Very  glad  indeed." — ''  I  am  not  surprised 
at  it :  but  have  you  heard  any  news?" — "  The 
last  store-ship   which   came   from  England, 

brought    some    new    Publications : The 

Quarterly  Review ;  a  book  stiled  '  Paul's 
Letters  to  his  Kinsfolk,'  ^c, ;  and  '  Boyce's 
Buonaparte.'" — "Have  you  read  them  r ' — 
"  I  have  indeed,  and  with  more  than  common 
interest." — "  And  what  occasioned  this  parti- 
cular feeling  of  interest?" — "  There  is  more 


(    193    ) 

truth  and  candour  displayed  in  these  two 
publications  than  any  1  have  hitherto  read  ; 
and  more  particularly  the  work  of  Mr.  Boyce, 
which  I  should  wish  you  to  see/*—"  Why, 
then,  did  you  not  buy  it  for  me  ?" — ''  There 
happened,  General,  to  be  but  one  copy 
on  the  Island,  and  it  was  purchased  by  a 
gentleman,  on  his  way  to  China,  who  wished 
me  to  read  it ;  that,  by  correcting  any  inac- 
curacies 1  might  observe,  the  work  would 
become  doubly  interesting  to  his  friends  in 
that  part  of  the  world."  '•  Is  it  like  the  work 
of  Helen  Maria  Williams?" — "  Very  superior, 
and  much  more  authentic." — "  Of  what  does 
it  treat  ?" — "  Your  motives  for  quitting  Elba: 
your  subsequent  conduct,  from  your  landing 
at  Frejus  till  you  embarked  in  the  Bellero- 
phon.  They  still,  however,  represent  you  as 
subject  to  violent  fits  of  passion,  taking  hasty 
strides  across  your  apartment,  w  ith  other  im- 
petuous marks  of  anger  and  disappointment. 
There  is  also  a  pathetic  story  related  of  the 
introduction  of  General  Solignac,  when  he 
waited  upon  you  from  the  Chamber  of  De- 
puties, to  urge  your  abdication.    This  author, 

o 


(    194    ) 

as  well  as  Paul,  whose  Letters  are  under  a 
feigued  name,  gives  very  interestingparticulars 
of  Waterloo.  It  will,  I  think,  make  you  smile, 
General,  when  I  tell  you  that  your  guide  La 
Coste  is  not  forgotten.     He  is  represented  as 

having  been  most  dreadfully  frightened." 

''  Frightened  !  at  what  ?"— *'  At  the  balls,  Sir, 
that  were  flying  about  him.  It  is  said  also, 
that  you,  at  the  time,  rallied  and  consoled  him 
with  the  assurance,  that  it  was  much  more 
honourable  to  receive  a  ball  in  the  breast  than 
in  the  back.  Besides,  he  is  made  to  complain, 
that  he  was  very  inadequately  recompensed 
for  the  labour  and  dangers  of  the  day  ;  that  a 
single  Napoleon  was  his  only  reward."  Na- 
poleon instantly  replied,  with  an  intelligent 
smile,  "  It  might  as  well  have  been  said  five 
hundred." — I  continued  : — 

"  Mr.  Boyce  appears  to  me  to  have  been 
very  attentive  to  accuracy  in  his  report  of  the 
two  contending  armies  " — "  What  number" 
I  was  instantly  asked,  "  does  he  give  to  that 
of  France  }  "  He  quotes  from  an  officer,  and 
naakes  them  to  have  been  seventy  thousand." 


(     195    ) 

The  reply  was — *'  I  had  seventy-one  thou- 
sand :  and  how  many  English  is  it  stated  there 
were  in  the  field  ?'' — "  Including  the  German 
Legion,  I  understand  there  were  thirty  thou- 
sand British  troops  ;  which,  united  with  the 
Belgians,  Hanoverians,  and  Brunswickers, 
formed  an  whole  of  sixty^eight  thousand 
men/' — "  How  many  Prussians  were  there 
under  Bulow  ?'* — "  I  cannot  correctly  say, 
perhaps  fifteen  thousand.*' — ''  And  how  many 
on  the  arrival  of  Blucher,  in  the  evening  ?" — 
"  I  really  do  not  know  :  bui  it  is  said  that  the 
Duke  of  Wellington  acknowledges  how  very 
happy  he  felt  at  the  appearance  of  his  old 
friend  ;  and  that  the  person  did  not  exist  who 
could  have  been  more  welcome  to  him  in  the 
course  of  the  evening  than  Blucher/'     • 

Ever  since  I  had  enjoyed  an  occasional 
communication  with  Napoleon,  I  never  ceased 
to  be  animated  with  a  strong  and  curious  desire, 
to  learn  his  opinion  of  our  renowned  Comman- 
der. I  had  repeatedly  heard  that  he  did  not 
withhold  it,  but  I  could  never  ascertain  the 
fact  on  any  certain  authority.  The  present 
o2 


(    196    ) 

moment  appeared  to  afford  me  the  opportu- 
nity  which  I  had  so  anxiously  sought ;  as  he 
seemed  to  be  in  a  temper  of  more  than  usual 
communication  and  courtesy,  though  I  have 
never  had  reason  to  complain  of  either.  At  all 
hazards,  1  therefore  resolved  to  make  the  trial ; 
as  it  might  be  the  only  opportunity  I  should 
ever  possess. — "  The  people  of  England/'  I 
said,  '*  appear  to  feel  an  interest  in  knowing 
your  sentiments  respecting  the  military  cha- 
racter of  the  Duke  of  Wellington.  They 
have  no  doubt  that  you  would  be  just ;  and, 
perhaps,  they  may  indulge  the  expectation 
that  your  justice  would  produce  an  eulogium 
of  which  the  Duke  of  Wellington  might  be 
proud.''  Silence  ensued  :  I  began  to  think 
that  I  might  have  gone  rather  too  far  ;  for  it 
is  most  true,  that  I  had  never  before  addressed 
him  without  looking  full  in  his  face  for  a  reply, 
but  my  eyes  dropped  at  the  pause,  and  no 
reply  was  made.  This,  however,  was  the 
second  question  I  had  ever  asked  which 
remained  a  moment  unanswered. 

At  the  same  time,  he  did  not  appear,  to  be^ 


(    197    ) 

in  the  least  displeased  ;  as  in  a  few  minutes  he 
renewed  the  conversation  with  this  inquiry. 

*'  You  mentioned  a  Review what  does   it 

contain?*'  "Criticisms  on  new  Publications  as 
they  appear ;  and  this  Number  observes  upon 
three  publications  that  relate  to  }ou:  one  in 
particular,  said  to  be  by  a  Lieutenant  of  the 
Bellerophon." — "What  could  he  find  on  my 
subject  to  work  up  into  a  book?" — "  lam  almost 
ashamed,  General,  to  repeat  to  you  the  trash 
these  publicationscontain :  indeed, it  surprised 
me,  that  so  respectable  a  work  as  this  Review 
should  condescend  to  notice  them,  and  quote 
such  silly  falsehoods  ;  nor  can  it  be  accounted 
for  in  any  other  way,  than  a  desire  to  gratify 
the  public  impatience  to  be  informed  of  every 
thing  and  any  thing  that  may  relate  to  yoti.    It 
contains,  among  other  misinformations,  ac- 
counts of  your  conduct  and  demeanour  while 
you  resided  at  the  Briars.    You  will  judge  of 
the  ingenuity  of  its  inventions  when  I  add,  that 
he  mentions  your  being  angry  with  one  of  the 
little  girls,  because  she  was  ignorant  of  your 
coin,  the  Napoleon.  You  are  also  represented, 
on  the  same  authority,  as  having  been  in  a 


(     198    ) 

great  rage  with  one  of  her  brothers,  for  having 
shown  you  the  picture  of  the  Great  Mogul 
on  a  pack  of  cards.  Nay,  Sir,  Monsieur  De 
las  Cases  does  not  escape  :  for  he  is  sent  to  the 
side-board  to  play  at  Patience^  until  the  new 
pack  would  deal  with  more  facility." — "  Your 
Editors,"  said  iSapoleon,  "  are  infinitely 
amusing :  but  is  it  to  be  supposed  that  they 
believe  what  they  write."  -'At  least, Sir,  i  pre- 
sume, that  they  hope  to  amuse  those  who  read. 
There  is,  however,  another  work,  which,  from 
its  apparent  authenticity,  has  been  received 
with  attention.  It  is  written  by  a  Frenchman, 
the  Abbe  Pradt."  I  was  now  perfectly  con- 
founded by  a  general,  and,  as  it  appeared,  an 
involuntary  laugh  ;  with  an  exclamation  of 
"  O,  the  Abbe  !" — It  appears  that  this  person- 
age was  the  very  humblest  of  the  most  humble 
adulators  of  Napoleon  :  he  had  been  in  a  low 
situation  in  the  Police,  but  possessed  qualities 
that  are  favourable  to  advancement  in  such 
times  as  those  in  which  he  lived,  •'  He  had 
both  cunning  and  hundour,"  said  Napoleon, 
*'  and  1  took  him  with  me  when  1  went  to 
Spain  ;  and,  as  I  had  to  wage  w ar  with  monas- 


(     199    ) 

teries,  I  fouud  the  Abbe  a  phalanx  against  the 
dominion  of  Priests.  De  las  Cases,"  he  added, 
"  will  give  you  fifty  entertaining  anecdotes  of 
the  Abbe. — Can  you  tell  me  what  is  become  of 
him?" — ''  I  really  have  not  heard.  He  also 
gives  a  description  of  your  return  to  Warsaw 
after  the  (disasters  in  Russia  ;  which,  I  doufet 
not,  would  amuse  you.  He  describes  a  tall 
figure  entering  his  hotel  wrapped  in  fur,  more 
resembling  a  being  of  the  other  world  than 
any  thipg  earthly,  —  It  was  Caul incourt.-— 
He  says,  likewise,  you  were  concealed  at 
the  English  Hotel,  where  he  procured  you 
some  excellent  wine.  This  Review,  how- 
ever, does  not  spare  the  Abbe,  who  declares 
that  the  subjugation  of  Russia  was  inevitable, 
had  it  not  been  for  the  sagacity  of  one  man  : 
'And  pray,'  says  the  Reviewer,'  who  is  this  man? 
— Why,  no  less  a  personage  than  the  Abbe 
Pradt,  who  would  have  it  thought  that  by 
his  roguery  he  out-witted  his  Master."  "  Na- 
poleon does  not  often  laugh  ;  but  the  story,  or 
the  idea  of  the  Abbe,  or  perhaps  both,  brought 
his  risible  faculties  into  complete  exertion. 


(     200     ) 

Unroll  your  ]Map  of  Flanders,  my  friend  ; 
display  it  in  due  form  on  your  table,  and  fol- 
low me,  if  you  can.  I  was  this  morning  cu- 
riously gratified  by  a  military  description  of 
the  various  movements  of  the  French  army, 
on  Napoleon  s  Charts  from  the  day  it  passed 
the  Sambre  to  the  eventful  battle  of  Waterloo. 
1  naturally  expected,  as  you  may  suppose,  a 
detail  of  those  various  circumstances  by  which 
it  was  lost,  or,  which  amounts  to  the  same 
thing, — The  why  and  the  wherefore  it  was 
not  gained.  My  conjecture  was  not  ill- 
founded,  for  Gourgond  proceeded  to  point 
out  to  me  the  errors  which  were  committed 
by  some  of  the  principal  commanders  in  the 
French  army,  and  proved  so  fatal  to  the  last 
great  effort  of  their  Imperial  Master.  These 
he  traced  with  a  readiness  and  perspicuity 
which  induced  me  to  imagine,  at  the  time, 
that  I  clearly  comprehended  the  whole. 
Nevertheless,  1  have  my  doubts,  whether 
I  shall  make  the  errors  of  these  blundering 
captains  as  clear  to  you,  as  they  were,  in  mj 
fancy,  made  apparent  to  me. 


(    201     ) 

Napoleon,  it  seems,  was  completely  igno- 
rant of  the  movement  made  from  Frasnes,  by 
Comit  Erelon,  (Drouet)  on  the   16th.     For 
when  he  appeared  near  Ligny,  Napoleon  ac- 
tually deployed  a  column  of  French  to  oppose 
him,  mistaking  his  force  at  the  time,  for  a 
division  of  the  Prussian  army. — ^Erelon  was 
now  made  acquainted  with  the  defeat  of  the 
Prussians  ;  and,  without  thinking  it  necessary 
to  have  any  communication  with  Napoleon, 
as  to  future  operations,  returned  to   his  ori- 
ginal position.     That  division  of  the  army, 
therefore,  became  totally  useless  for  that  day 
both  to  the  Emperor  and  to  Marshal  Ney. — 
Grouchy,  losing  sight  of  Blucher,  and  taking 
the  circuitous  route  which  he  pursued,  was 
represented  as  having  committed  a  most  fatal 
error. — While  the  right  wing  of  the  French, 
in  the  battle  of  the  18th  was  engaged,  in  de- 
feating the  flank  movement  of  Bulow,  of  which 
they  were  perfectly  apprised,  Marshal  Ney 
laad   orders  to   engage  the  attention    of  the 
English  during  this  part  of  the  action  ;  but  by 
no  means  to  hazard  the  loss  of  his  troops,  or  to 
exhaust  their  strength.  Ney,  itappears,  did  not 


(     202    ) 

obey  the  order,  or  met  with  circumstances  that 
rendered  it  impracticable  for  him  to  adhere  to 
it.  Me  was  stated  to  have  contended  fov  the 
occupation  of  a  height  and  thus  weakened  his 
corps,  so  that  when  the  Imperial  guards  were 
brought  to  the  charge,  he  was  unable  to 
assist  them. — 1  understood  that  Napoleon  had 
crossed  the  Sambre  with  111,000  men.  In 
the  battles  of  Ligny  and  Quatre  Bras  he  lost 
10,000.  Grouchy's  division  consisted  of 
30,000  detached  to  follow  Blucher,  leaving  an 
effective  force,  on  the  morning  of  the  18th  of 
71,000.  I  hope  you  will  comprehend  my 
account,  which  I  think  was  the  purport  of 
General  Gourgond's  statement  to  me  ;  though 
I  do  not  know  any  two  characters  more  liable 
to  a  small  share  of  perpleivity,  than  a  sailor 
describing  a  terra  firma  battle  ;  and  a  solcjier 
entering  into  the  particulars  of  a  naval  engage- 
ment.— But,  by  way  of  climax,  I  was  assured 
that  the  report  of  Buonaparte's  standing  on  an 
elevated  wooden  frame  toobtain  acommanding 
view  of  the  field  of  battle,  is  altogether  a  mis- 
representation.— It  was,  on  the  contrary,  a 
raised  mound  of  earth,  where  he  placed  himself 


(    203    ) 

with  his  staff;  and  the  ground  being  sloppy 
and  slippery,  he  ordered  some  trusses  of  $traw 
to  be  pkk?ed  under  his  feetlo  keep  them;  dry, 
and  prevent  his  sliding. 

This  was  the  last  visit  I  paid  to  Napoleon  : 
and  wheii  I  took  my  leave  of  him,  he  rose 
from  his  chair,  and  said,  "  I  wish  you  health 
and  happiness,  and  a  safe  voyage  to  your 
country,  where  I  hope  you  will  find  your 
friends  in  health  and  ready  to  receive  you/' 

I  had  been  uniformly  treated  with  such 
respectful  kindness,  and,  in  some  degree, 
with  such  partial  confidence,  by  General  Ber- 
trand,  Mons.  de  las  Cases,  and,  indeed,  by 
every  one  of  the  suite,  that  I  could  not  take 
my  leave  of  them  without  a  considerable  de- 
gree of  sensibility.  A  more  amiable,  united 
and  delightful  family  than  that  of  General 
Bertrand  I  never  yet  saw  :  nor  is  his  affection 
as  a  husband,  and  his  fondness  as  a  father, 
less  striking  than  his  fidelity  to  his  Master. 


And   here  I  conclude  ray  Narrative.- 


(    204     ) 

If  any  other  little  matters  should  occur  to  my 
recollection,  I  can  make  a  kind  of  Post- 
script of  them. The   sketch    which   you 

desired  of  St.  Helena,  may  be  the  subject  of 
conversation  hereafter,  by  your  hospitable  and 

friendly  fire-side. In  the  mean  time,  and 

at  all  times, 


I  am,  &c.  &c. 


W.  W. 


ADDITIONAL  NOTICES. 

Captain  Piontowski,  an  officer  in  the  Po- 
lish troops  attached  to  Buonaparte's  person, 
who  had  accompanied  him  to  Elba^  and  had 
a  command  in  the  little  army  that  landed  in 
France,  formed  one  of  the  suite  which  accom- 
panied the  Ex-emperor  to  England. — He  v/as, 
however,  refused  to  attend  the  exile  of  his 
fallen  Master.  The  disappointment  he  suf- 
fered, on  the  occasion,  was  extreme;  and  he 
still  continued  to  persevere  in  his  application 
to  follow  that  fortune  to  which  a  sense  of  the 


(    205    ) 

most  ardent  and  affectionate  duty  impelled 
him.  Notwithstanding  a  Lady  from  France, 
to  whom  he  had  been  betrothed,  joined  him 
at  Plymouth  and  married  him,  he  still  most 
zealously  adhered  to  his  original  object;  and, 
having  at  length  obtained  the  sanction  of  go- 
vernment, he  took  his  passage  in  a  store-ship 
for  St.  Helena. — The  arrival  of  this  faithful 
follower  was  not  expected :  Napoleon,  how- 
ever, could  not  but  be  sensible  of  his  attach- 
ment, and  received  him  with  kindness,  But 
neither  his  situation,  nor  his  manners  were 
such  as  to  associate  him  with  the  suite,  nor 
did  his  modesty  appear  to  expect  it.  An 
apartment  was  assigned  him  by  the  Generals; 
and  Mr.  O'Meara,  the  Surgeon,  thinking  he 
was  neglected,  with  that  goodness  of  heart 
and  generous  nature  which  distinguishes  his 
character,  made  him  welcome  to  his  table. 
Such  were  the  amiable  and  unassuming  man- 
ners of  the  romantic  Pole,  that  this  distant 
treatment  of  him  was  a  subject  of  general  ani- 
madversion; and  a  want  of  generous  feel- 
ing was  attributed  to  Napoleon,  for  inatten- 
tion to  such  an  evident  example  of  fidelity. 


(    206     ) 

But  this  afterwards  appeared  to  be  a  ground- 
less suspicion.     The  Captain  occupied   his 
garret  during    the  night,    and   occasionally 
amused  himself  with  his  gun  during  the  day; 
happy    in    the    enthusiastic    satisfaction    of 
sharing  the  fate  of  the  great  object  of  his 
idolatry.     It  happened,  however,  in  one  of  his 
sporting  excursions,  that  his  piece  accidentally 
went  off  in  the  act  of  loading  it ;  and  very  se- 
verely wounded  his  right-hand.  With  this  mis- 
cihance  Napoleon  became  acquainted,  and  ex- 
pressed a  desire  to  see  and  console  him :  but, 
previous  to  the  execution  of  this  kind  inten- 
tion, a  female  servant  of  General  Montholon 
was  removed  from  one  of  the  very  comfortable 
rooms  at  Longw  ood,  and  Piontowski  was  con- 
veyed thither.     The  following  day,  Napoleon 
paid  him  the  projected  visit,  but  without  sus- 
pecting he  had  been  in  any  other  apartment, 
and  amply  repaid  his  devoted  Pole  for  the 
wound  in  his  hand,   by  giving  such  a  warm 
delight  to  his  honest  and  faithful  heart. 


In  speaking  of  different  diseases  to  which 
the  human  frame  w  as  subject,  a  favourite  topic 


(     207    ) 

with  Napoleon,  when  a  professional  man  was 
by  any  means  admitted  to  him,  the  small-pox 
happened  to  be  mentioned  ;  and  he  instantly 
entered  upon  the  discovery  of  vaccination, 
with  which  he  appeared  to  be  perfectly  ac- 
quainted, and  whose  beneficial  effects  he 
mentioned  with  the  highest  encomiums.  Nor 
did  his  observation  close  without  their  usual 

finale an  interrogatory. — ''  Have  not  the 

people  of  England  given  me  some  credit,  for 
my  having  adopted,  encouraged,  and  indeed 
decreed,  the  rigid  observance  of  Dr,  Jenners 
Sifstem  /" 


The  quiet,  unassuming  demeanour  of  the 
persons  composing  the  suite  of  Napoleon, 
never  knew  any  interruption,  on  the  deck  of 
the  Northumberland,  where  we  held  our  con- 
versation, but  when  General  Gourgond  chose 
to  display  the  bloody  track  of  his  heroic  feats 
in  the  field.  No  idea,  however,  is  intended 
to  be  conveyed  of  his  exceeding  the  real 
prowess  of  his  military  character ;  but  only 
that  he  loved  to  talk  about  it,  when  his  former 


(    208     ) 

companions  in  arms  were  silent.  Among 
other  proofs  of  his  hair-breadth  'scapes,  he 
was  fond  of  exhibiting  a  sword,  whose  renown, 
as  well  as  that  of  its  owner,  was  engraved  on 
the  blade ;  and  whose  inscription  related, 
that  with  this  mighty  and  glorious  weapon  he 
saved  the  life  of  Napoleon,  in  Russia,  when 
it  was  threatened  by  the  uplifted  arm  of  a 
fierce  and  avenging  Cossack. 


The  following  is  a  correct  abstract  of  a 
conversation  had  with  General  Bertrand ; 
when,  and  particularly  at  the  commencement 
of  it,  his  feelings  appeared  to  be  very  strongly 

excited. He  acknowledged  very  full} ,  and 

lamented  very  sensibly,  the  too  extended 
grasp  of  Napoleon's  ambition. — "  It  was  in 
"•  itself  a  grand  and  noble  principle,  and,  left 
*'  to  its  own  original  objects,  and  confined  to 
"  its  natural  operations,  might  have  proved 
"  a  source  of  exteasive  good  and  untarnished 
*'  glory.  But  evil  councils,  and  who  can,  at 
"  all  moments,  and  under  all  circumstances, 


(    209    ) 

"  repel  their  insinuating  or  momentary  influ- 
*'  ence,  provoked  the  excesses,  which  have 
"  been  so  often  seen  to  strip  the  most  com- 
"  manding  of  all  passions,  of  its  associate 
''  virtues." — — Here  his  opinion  seemed  to 
point  to  Maret,  Duke  of  Bassano,  as  the  cause 
of  unspeakable  mischief,  and  an  example  that 
inferior  spirits  are  sometimes  permitted  to 
influence  minds  of  a  far  higher  order  ;  and 
not  unfrequently  to  their  dishonour,   if  not 

to   their    ruin. ''  Napoleon,"   he   added, 

''is  a  most  extraordinary  and  wonderful 
"  man." — The  conversation  proceeded,  and 
I  replied. 

"  That  is  not  to  be  doubted  :  but  I  wish  to 
"  see  more  of  the  ordinary  man  in  him.  Could 
"I  but  observe  him  endearingly  caressing 
"  children,  as  you.  General,  do  your  Hortentia 
"  and  your  Henry  ;  or  playing  with  a  dog,  or 
''  patting  his  horse,  I  should  consider  him  with 
"  very  different  sentiments  from  those  which 
"  I  now  feel." — "  Believe  me,  dear  Doctor,  he 
"  is  a  man  totally  different  from  all  others." 

F 


(    210    ) 

"  That  may  be  :  but  1  want  him  to  possess 
"  certam  qualities  in  common  with  ordinary 
"  men,  and  I  wish  you  would  tell  me  that  he 
"  discovers,  at  any  time,  the  feelings  of  affec- 
"  tion  and  tenderness;  the  capacity  to  be  a 
"  kind  husband  and  a  fond  parent/* 

"  That  I  can  most  assuredly  do.  He  is 
"  not  without  a  heart,  in  your  sense  of  the 
"  expression.  But  he  does  not,  cannot,  will 
"  not  make  a  parade  of  it.  Is  it  possible  that 
"  you  should  expect  any  thing  of  a  frivolous, 
"  or  trifling  appearance  from  him  ;  and,  in  a 
"  character  like  his,  the  amiable  playfulness 
"  of  private  domestic  life,  might  have  such  a 
"  semblance  :  besides,  the  individual  feelings 
"  of  the  man  must,  after  all,  be  lost  to  those 
"  who  only  view  him  in  the  blaze  of  his  public 
"  life." 

— "But  that  blaze,  General  Bertrand,  is 
"  now  extinguished  ;  and  I  wish  for  his  sake, 
"  and  the  honour  of  human  nature,  that  the 
"  symptoms  of  love,  tenderness,  and  attach- 


(    211    ) 

"  ment  might  appear,  in  some  direction  or 
"  other,  to  beam  from  him." 

"You  may  believe  me,  when  I  assure 
"  you,  that  though  they  may  not  have  ap- 
"  peared  to  you,  they  are  by  no  means  want- 
"  ing  in  him. — By  way  of  example,  imagine 
*'  a  day  as  it  used  to  be  passed  at  the  Thuil- 

"  levies  :  1  will  describe  it  to  you. At  six 

*'  in  the  morning  he  would  be  examining  a 
"  Russian  dispatch  ;  at  seven,  the  same  from 
"  Vienna  ;  at  eight,  he  might  visit  a  work  of 
"  art ;  at  ten,  a  review  succeeded  ;  at  twelve, 
"  the  reception  of  some  department  ;  at  one, 
"  the  affairs  of  the  army  ;  at  four,  a  Prefect 
"  demanded  audience  ;  at  six,  perhaps,  he 
"  had  appointed  to  meet  the  Empress,  whom 
"  he  would  treat  with  every  mark  of  kindness 
"  and  affection ;  admire,  with  a  Parisian 
"  gallantry,  the  embroidery  of  her  gown,  the 
"  folds  of  her  robe,  the  flowers  in  her  hair,  or 
"  the  display  of  jewels  on  her  person  :  while 
"  he  would  continue  devoted  to  her,  till  public 
"  business  again  required  his  attention  ;  to 
*'  which  he  was  ever  in  a  state  of  prepara- 
p  2 


(    212    ) 
tion.     He  was  never  sensual,  never  gross, 


"  but  in  an  unceasing  state  of  action/' — 
Count  de  las  Cases  continued  the  subject. 


"  He  never  speaks  of  himself ;  he  never 
"  mentions  his  achievements.  Of  money  he 
*'  is  totally  regardless  ;  and  he  was  not  known 
^'  to  express  a  regret  for  any  part  of  his  trea- 
"  sure  but  the  diamond  necklace,  which  he 
"  wore  constantly  in  his  neckcloth,  because 
"  it  was  the  gift  of  his  sister,  the  Princess 
"  Bourgoise,  whom  he  tenderly  loved/'  This 
he  lost,  after  the  battle  of  Waterloo. 


I  was  naturally  induced  to  make  a  sketch 
of  the  state  and  position  of  our  passengers,  at 
the  moment  when  we  came  to  an  anchor,  off 
St.  Helena  ;  but,  having  mislaid  it  at  the  mo- 
ment when  I  wrote  the  account  of  our  arrival 
in  one  of  the  foregoing  Letters,  I  then  stated 
it  from  the  general  recollection  of  the  instant. 
Having  now  recovered   the   sketch,  I  have 


(    213    ) 

added  it  as  a  more  exact  picture  of  the  scene, 
and  which  i  have  been  persuaded  will  not  be 
considered  as  an  impertinent  repetition. 

The  morning  was  pleasant,  and  the 
breeze  steady :  at  dawn  we  were  sufficiently 
near  to  behold  the  black  peak  of  St.  Helena. 
Between  eight  and  nine,  we  were  close  under 
the  Sugar-Loaf  Hill.  The  whole  of  the  French 
party  had  quitted  their  cabins,  with  the  ex- 
ception of  Napoleon,  and  taken  their  re- 
spective stations. — On  the  right  stood  Ma- 
dame Montholon,  with  her  arm  entwined 
in  that  of  the  General,  her  husband.  Her 
look  seemed  to  ask  a  cheering  influence  from 
him  :  I  could  fancy  that  she  said, — "  if  this 
is  to  be  my  lot,  still  I  have  you  for  my  com- 
fort ;  and  there  is  Tristram,  that  little  darling, 
who  will  be  a  comfort  to  us  both."'  On  the 
poop  sat  Madame  Bertrand,  and  the  Marshal 
stood  behind  her.  I  was  the  only  unoccupied 
person  belonging  to  the  ship,  and  could 
therefore,  undisturbed,  contemplate  the  scene 
around  me.  I  was  afraid  to  approach  Ma- 
dame Bertrand,  for  I  was  near  enough  to 


(    214    ) 

perceive  an  action  in  the  muscle  of  her  throat 

which    betokened    a  sob. De  las   Cases, 

resting  his  arm  on  the  shoulder  of  his  son, 
was  stretching  his  little  figure  on  tip-toe,  but 
in  vain,  to  look  over  the  gangway;  but  all 
his  exertion  would  not  enable  him  to  see  more 
than  half-way  down  the  mountain. — General 
Gourgond  endeavoured,  by  a  smile,  to  sup- 
press what  he  felt ;  for  he  had  no  female  to 

console  him. The    servants  were  gazing 

with  open  mouths,  and  all  their  eyes  ;  while 
the  children,  unconscious  of  island  or  rock,  or 
prison  or  palace,  were  performing  their  little 
evolutions  as  usual ;  when  the  Newfound- 
land dog  would  occasionally  break  in  upon 
their  hollow  squares. — We  did  not  see  Napo- 
leon till  the  ship  had  anchored  in  front  of  the 
Town.  About  eleven  he  made  his  appear- 
ance.  He  ascended  the  poop,  and   there 

stood,  examining  with  his  little  glass  the 
numerous  cannon  which  bristled  in  his  view. 
I  observed  him  with  the  utmost  attention,  as 
I  stood  beside  him  for  near  half  an  hour; 
and  could  not  discover,  in  his  countenance, 
the  least   symptoms   of  strong    or   particu- 


(    215     ) 

lar  sensations.  He  afterwards  rallied  Ma- 
dame Bertrand  on  the  elegant  stockings  she 
wore  on   the   occasion  ;    when    she   tried   to 

check  the  tear  ;  but  it  would  not  do. She 

exclaimed,  "  Oh,  Doctor  W ',  we  are 

indeed  too  good  for  St.  Helena !" 


THE    END. 


Printed  by  W.  Clowes, 
Northumberland-court,  StrancV. 


^1?^ 


