sre 


i * 


_ > j 
? ec? cee. 
- , * 


eg Toa 


tient 2f* 


7, 


_ NAPOLEON IN EXILE; 


A Gotee from St. Helena. 


VOL. II. 


——— 


_ 
- 
’ 
i 
Pha - ‘ F 
a 
. 
Oo. 
» 


Se 


—ne — 


er ~ ~ 


NAPOLEON IN EXILE; 


oR, 


A Goice from St. Helena, | 


THE 


OPINIONS AND REFLECTIONS OF 


NAPOLEON 


ON THE 
MOST IMPORTANT EVENTS OF HIS LIFE AND GOVERNMENT, 


IN HIS OWN WORDS. 


By BARRY E. O’MEARA, Esa. 
HIS LATE SURGEON. 


IN TWO VOLUMES. 


VOL. I. 


- = = 


PRINTED FOR W. SIMPKIN AND R. MARSHALL, 
STATIONERS’ HALL COURT, LUDGATE-STREET, 


1822. 


A VOICE 


FROM 


ST. HELENA. 


_ 21st April, 1817—Napoteon has been for some 
days in very good spirits. On Saturday, the 19th, 
some captains of East Indiamen came to see 
Count and Countess Bertrand. Captains Innes, 
Campbell, and Ripsley, with Mr. Webb, stationed 
themselves at the back of the house in such a situ- 
ation as to be likely to see Napoleon on his return 
from Bertrand’s, where he had gone about four 
) ’clock. _Napoleon beckoned to, and conversed 
with them for nearly an hour, during which he 
asked many questions about India, the East India 
Company, Lord Moira, their own profits, &c.; and 
to the commodore, who had a very youthful appear- 
ance, in a laughing manner he observed, that he 
‘was a child, and ought to be ashamed of com- 
manding captains so much SMa than himself. 


VOL. II, 


to 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


Asked the emperor whether it was at Ledi or 
Arcola that he had seized the standard, and pre- 
cipitated himself amongst the enemy’s troops. He 
replied, “ at Arcola, not Lodi. At Arcola I was 
slightly wounded ; but at Lodi no such circum- 
stance occurred. Why do you ask? Do you 
think me léche ?” said he, laughing. I begged to 
assure him of my thorough conviction of the con- 
trary, which was too well known to be doubted ; 
and that it was merely to solve a difference of 
opinion which had occurred between some of us 
English who had not the means of procuring at 
St. Helena any books to satisfy us at which of 
the two it had occurred, that I had taken’ the 
liberty to ask him. ‘“ Those things,” said he, 
with a smile, “ are not worth mentioning.” ——*"” 

Had a long conversation with him on medical 
subjects. He appeared to entertain an idea that 
in cases purely the province of the physician, the 
patient has an equal chance of being dispatched 
to the other world, either by the physician mis- 
taking the complaint, or by the remedies adminis- 
tered operating in a different manner from what was 
intended and expected, and was for trusting entirely 
to nature. With respect to surgery, he professed a 
far different opinion, and acknowledged the great 
utility of that science. I endeavoured to convince 
him, that. in some complaints, nature was a bad 
physician, and mentioned i in proof of my argument 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. oi 


the examples which had taken place under his 
owa eyes of the-cases of Countéss Montholon, Ge- 
neral Gourgaud, Tristan, and others ;. who if left 
to nature, would have gone to the other world. 
1 observed that in practice we always had’ a cer- 
tain object in view, and never prescribed reme- 
dies. without first. having considered well what 
we had to expect from their operation. Napo- 
leon, however, was sceptical; and inclined to think 
that if they had taken no medicine, maintained 
strict abstinence from every thing except plenty 
of diluents, they would have done equally well. 
However, after having heard all my afguments, 


he said; :‘ well, perhaps if ever I have a serious 


malady, I may change my opinion, take all your 
medicines, and do what you please. I should 
like to know what sort of a patient'I should anake, 
and whether I should be tractable, or otherwise. 
Tam inclined to think the former.” I reasoned 
with hin afterwards about inflammation of the 
Jungs, andasked him if he thoaght that nature, if 
left to herself, would .effect’a cure in that com- 
plaint. He appeared a little staggered at this at 
first ; but after asking me what were the remedies, 
to which I replied that venesection was the sheet- 
anchor, he said, “ that complaint! belongs to the 
surgeon, because he cures it with his lancet, and 
not, to the physician.” I then. mentioned. dysen- 
tery and intermittent fevers. ‘The remedies given 
B 2 


4 A- VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


in intermittent fevers,” said he, “ frequently pro- 
duce worse complaints than the disease that they 
remove. Suppose’ now that the best: informed 
‘physician visits forty patients a day; amongst 
them; he will kill one or two a month by mistaking 
the disease, and in the country towns, the charla- 
‘tans will: killbabout half of those who die under 
their hands.” ; 
_ “ The country towns in Taglends as well asin 
France,” said he, “ abound with Molitre’s doc- 
sores Are you a fatalist?” I replied, ‘ in'action I 
am.” _ “ Why not every where-else?” said the em- 
peror; I said, that I believed a man’s dissolu- 
tion, in certain cases, to be inevitable if he did not 
endeavour by. proper means placed in his power, 
to ‘prevent his fate. For’ example, I said, that 
if a man in battle saw a cannon shot coming 
towards him, as sometimes happened, he would 
naturally step to one side, and thereby avoid an 
otherwise inevitable death ; which comparison. I 
‘thought would hold good with certain complaints, 
by considering the ball to be the disease, and 
stepping aside, the remedy. Napoleon replied, 
“* perhaps by stepping to one side, you may throw 
yourself in the way of another ball, which other- 
‘wise would have missed you. I remember,” 
added he, ‘‘an example of what I tell yow haying 
occurred at Toulon, when I commanded the artil- 
Jery. There were some Marseilloise artillerymen 


A VOICE FROM ST, HELENA. 5 


seit to the siege. Now ofall the people: in 
France, the, Marseilloise. are the least brave, 
and indéed, generally speaking, have but little 
enérgy:' I observed an officer to be very careful 
of himself, like the rest, instead of shewing an ex- 
ample. { therefore called out and said, ‘ Mon- 
sieur officer, come out and observe the effect of 
your shot.. You do not know whether your guns 
aré well pointed or not. At this time we. were 
firing’ upon the English ships. I) desired. him to 
see if our shot struck them in the hull. He was 
very unwilling to quit his stdtion; but at last he 
came over to where I was, a little outside of the 
parapet, where he began to look out. | Wishing, 
however, to make himself small, and to secure as 
much of his body as possible, he stooped down 
and sheltered one side of his body behind the 
parapet, while he looked under my arm. He had 
not:been long in that position before a shot came 
close to me, and low down, which knocked him 

to pieces. Now, if this man had stood upriglit, 
and more exposed to danger, he would have been 

safe, as the ball would have passed between am 
without hurting either.” ) 

[recounted to the emperor, after this, a circum- 

stance which. had happened in the Victorious, 

seventy-four, Captain Talbot, when I was on board 

of her, which I explained minutely to him. Dur- 

_ ing'the action with his ship the Rivoli, a man who 


6 A VOICE FROM ST, HELENA. 


had been’ slightly wounded, had crept into the 
heart of the cable tier in the orlop deck, and 
placed himself amongst the cables in such a man< 
ner, that it appeared to be a matter of impossibi- 
lity, that a shot could reach him.’ Notwithstand- 
ing the’ apparent security of the place, towards the 
end of the action a shot struck the ship very-low 
down, penetrated the wings, went through ‘two 
or three coils of the cable, then rose upwards, 
struck one of the beams which supported: the 
lower deck, and being spent,:rebounded back,. 
fell upon this man’s breast who was lying on~his 
back, and killed him. He was found afterwards. 
with the shot, (@ thirty-six pounder,) lying meen 
his breast. | 

* This,” said he, “ confirms what I say to 
you, that a man cannot avoid his destiny.” Na- 
poleon appeared entertained with this anecdote, 
and asked, whether the man was a sailor ora. 
soldier? I replied, a sailor. Pit SR4), 

‘The emperor during the course’ of conversation, 
spoke about eunuchs; the making of whom he 
observed was a most diagraickfal and horrid prac-. 
tice. “I put a stop to it,” said he, “in all the 
countries under my dominion; even in Rome itself 
I prohibited it under pain of death. It was en- 
‘tirely put a stop to, and I believe that although 
the pope and the cardinals are now in power, it 
will not be again revived, I recollect,” ‘added 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA, 7 


he, “an incident with respect to one of those 
gentry, which, made me laugh, There was one 
Crescentini, an. excellent singer, who often sang. 
before me and delighted me much, As I wished 
to encourage merit in every science, and as it was. 
his misfortune, and not his fault to have been mu-, 
tilated, having been probably only two or. three 
years old when it was performed, I conferred. 
‘upon him the knighthood of the iron erown, , This 
however displeased a great many, who said that 
a thing who was not a man ought not to. have an 
order for manhood conferred upon him, There 
were great discussions about it, in- which. Ma- 
dame Grassini, whom I suppose you know, took 
a pert Whilst others were blaming me, Grassini 
said, ‘1 really think the emperor has done right 
in giving it to him; I think that he deserves it.’ 
Being asked why, she replied, ‘ I think he merits 
it, if it were only on account of. his wounds.’ This 
sally produced the greatest. laughter, and turned 
the business completely. . I believe that no BAAR 
_ langbed more at it than myself,” 
_ 23rd. —Yesterday Napoleon was, indisposed, 
_and had recourse to his customary remedies, diet 
and. diluents. He remained all, day i in his, bed- 
room, and eat nothing. Told me that he had 
risen at three i in the morning, and wrote or dictated 
all day. 
Gave him. two or three newspapers, He. re- 


8 A VOICE FROM ST: HELENA. 


peated. his disbelief of the rumour of war being 
likely to take place between Russia and America, 
as ‘it was contrary to the interests of both. — 

~ General Gourgaud the day before juicer 
rode out towards the ‘alarm house, and on his 
way met the Russian commissioner and Captain 


Gor, ‘with whom he conversed for a considerable 


time. ‘They were seen by Captain Poppleton, 
who was on his way to dine at Plantation House. 
_ When his excéllency was informed of this, he said 
at first that Captain P. ought to have remained’ 
with them to listen; but when it was explained’ to 


him that he could not have done so without ‘af 


fronting them, as General Gourgaud knew that he 
was to dine at Plantation House, he ac gy a 
that it could not have been done. 

‘This day, however, a note came from Major 
Gorrequer, stating that the governor wanted to 
see Captain Poppleton directly, and that he was 
required to write an official statement of what he 
had seen take place yesterday between the com- 
missioner and Gourgaud. ‘That the governor re: 
gretted he had not followed and kept company 


with them, in pursuance of the conversation he had» 


had with him (Captain P.) in town on a certain 
day. In this conversation the governor said he 
expected that he would, whenever he’ saw theni 
speaking together, drop in as it were by accident, 
and make one of their party. * 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 9 


These precautions appeared curious, ‘as the 
parties had a long interview together at the last 
races before the governor a and his staff 
without molestation. | 

-Saw Napoleon in the evening didi: who de- 
clared himself to be quite well. He spoke of the 
time he was in the habit of devoting to business 
when in Paris. That occasionally he used to dic- 
" tate to four different secretaries at a'time, all upon 
different subjects, and sometimes even to five, each 
writing as fast as’ he could. Made some observa- 
tions upon the Emperor of Austria. Observed 
that if he were in his power, no treatment could 
be too good or limits too extensive. The empéror 
he pronounced to be a good and religious man, 
but a ganache. A man, who though he did not 
want common sense, never did any thing of him- 
self, but was always led by the nose by Metter- 
nich or some one else. As long as he had a bad 
minister, his government would be bad, as he en- 
_ tirely trusted to him, and only paid attention to 
botany and gardening. 

24th. Napoleon in very good spirits. Very 
curious in his enquities about Murat’s expedition 
against Sicily. Asked me to describe minutely the 
strength of the English force which had then occu- 
pied Sicily, and appeared surprised when I said that 
it had amounted to about twenty thousand Eng- 
lish Hanoverians, &c. He asked if 1 thought 


Vv 


10 A, VOICE, FROM ST, HELENA, 


that Murat would have succeeded in taking, the 
island, if he had landed?* 1: replied that 1 be- 
lieved not, as, independent of the formidable Eng- 
lish force against him, the Sicilians, themselves in 
general hated the French, and declared that.they 
would haye caused another “ Sicilian Vespers’’ 
if they came. He asked “ how many troops) Fer- 
dinand had?” ; 1 replied, perhaps fifteen thousand 
men, of whom, however, we were very doubtful, 
and consequently kept near Palermo, with the ex- 
ception of a regiment of cavalry. He asked, “ if 
our ships could have kept the channel on the 
night that Murat had caused a landing to be made 
by.a small body, and whether they could have been 
kept at anchor along the Sicilian side of the Faro?” 
I replied, that I had no doubt the ships might 
have kept the channel on that night; that they 
wight also have remained at anchor along the 
Faro, but at a risk during the Scirocco winds, as 
the bottom was a bad holding ground, and if, the 
aochors went, the ships must go on shore. He 
asked the name of the English admiral, ‘‘ That 
imbecile Murat,” added he, “ lost me about twelve 
or, thirteen hundred men by the foolish disem- 
barkation he made in Sicily. I know not what 


“* It may be necessary to explain to the reader, that T was at- 
tached to the flotilla against Murat in a mortar-boat, under. the 
cowmand of Captain Coffin, R. N. during the whole of the period 
alluded to. , 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. It 


object! he could have had in view by thus land- 
ing a few'men,’’’ I replied that Murat had said 
le intended to have landed with his whole army 
neat the Faro, while this small body was) in- 
tended to act as a diversion. ‘ Do you think 
that ‘he could have landed on that night?” said 
Napoleon. I replied, I thought he. could, as all 
our ships had: been’ withdrawn’ from their, sta~ 
tions and were locked up in the harbour’ of Mes- 
sina. Napoleon said, “ If I had really intended, 
Murat to have taken Sicily, I would have pushed 
out the Toulon fleet with thirty thousand men to 
effect\a landing near Palermo, from whence the 
fleet should have proceeded directly to the’ Faro, 
to cover Murat’s landing, But, it was only, in 

tended to keep your English army doing nothing 
in Sicily by means of the canaglie under Murat,* 
and not to take Sicily, as there were few French 
troops with him, and I was apprehensive that your 
army might have been employed elsewhere against 
me.” J asked if there had been any secret treaty be- 
tween Murat and the English admiral and general 


»* Murat was not aware of this, He was sincere in his inten- 
tions of landing in Sicily; but on the night in which he wanted 
to embark all his army for that purpose, General Grenier, who 
commanded the French troops with him, shewed bim an order 
propibiting them to make the attempt. . This I‘have: been since 
informed by a person who was miniater'at abe time'to the unfor- 
tunate King Joachim. 


12 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


to allow Murat ’to’ withdraw with his boats and 
troops without molestation, “ No,” said the em- 
peror, “none that know of. Why do you ask 
such a question ?”» T'replied, * because so little had 
been done’ to arihoy them ‘in their retreat, that: T 
often thought that’ some agreement’ must ‘have’ 
been ‘made’ to let Murat ‘withdraw quietly’ with 
his troops, provided he abandoned his enterprize.” 
He Taughied, ‘and net «a ‘there ‘was ‘ote, at least 
to my’ knowledge.” |! © Vi 

T then imentioned lo: him’ the pl to massacre 
the English officers, and ‘drive the English out of 
Sicily, sald ‘to have been discovered’ in 1810, (I 
think) by ***.' * Caroline,” said he, * was very’ 
capable of forming such’ a ‘plot.’ ‘I believe, how- 
ever, that * * invented 'a great ‘part of it, and also’ 
betrayed “you ‘at ‘the time ‘that he pretended to 
make'such important discoveries. Murat ‘got ‘in- 
formation from some’ officer in the English ser- 

vice.”» ‘I said that *** had frequently gone over’ 
to Calabria disguised asa peasant. “ Very | pro- 
Dably he ‘betrayed you every time he went,” re- 
plied Napoleon. 

- He spoke about the Corsicans: observed that 
they were brave and revengeful ‘by nature, the’ 
best friends and the most inexorable enemies in 
the world, « Their prominent national character,” é' 
added he, “ is never to forget a benefit or an in- 
jury. For the slightest insult in Corsica, una ar- 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 13 


chibugiata, Murders are consequently very com- 
mon. At the same time no people are more grate- 
fal for benefits conferred, and they will not scruple 
th ‘sacrifice their lives for the person, who hestoseed 
em.” 
u  26th.—Had some conversation: with Napoleon 
relative to Count Bertrand having been) stopped 
by the sentinel'a few days back, when going down 
towards Mr. Wilton’s cottage. Napoleon said, 
that he supposed the sentinel. had orders to stop 
all suspicious persons, similar to those given to 
the one at Hut’s Gate, and observed in a laughing 
mapper, that, the French were the only suspicious 
people in the island. “Told him that.a report had 
arrived im the island. of war having been declared 
between Spain and, America, and, Russia and 
America. ‘‘ Russia and America?’ said he, “Im- 
possible. If it takes place, I shall never be asto- 
nished, again at any circumstance that happens, 
The Spaniards will be well, drubbed,” J. said, 
that, one of the American large frigates could take 
a Spanish seyenty-four., This he. would not. be- 
lieve. I then said, that during the war with Spain, 
one of our frigates, which were smaller than the 
Americans, would not haye been ‘afraid to attack 
a Spanish seventy-four. Napoleon looked at me 
in rather an incredulous manner, shook ‘his head, 
laughed and said, “ Sempre per la marina, dot- 


14 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


tore*— she certainly would have been takeu.” 
I replied, that if the weather was bad, J did not 
think so. He said, that there never had been an 
instance on ‘record of a frigate’s having taken: a 
seventy-four. — 

20th—Dined with Sir Pultney Malcolan i in 
town. Count Balmaine came to pass the even+ 
ing, during the course of which he had a long con- 
versation with me. He said that -he-had that day 
met General Gourgaud, near the alarm house, 
and that finding himself in a very delicate situa: 
tion, he had told the general that his position was _ 
very embarrassing, as it appeared that he (Bal- 
maine) was an object of suspicion to the gover- 
nor; that he must consequently beg to decline 
any further communication with him beyond the 
customary salutations of politeness, however un- 
pleasant it was to do so in a place where there was 
so little French society, until after the arrival of 
the Conqueror, by which vessel he expected in- 
structions of importance, and such as would 
clearly point out to him the line of conduct which 
he was in future to pursue. That in doing this, he 
had rather gone beyond his present instructions, 
which were not to éviter ces messicurs la, but to 
treat them precisely as he did the inhabitants and 
— eagees on the island; that he could not 


brent 


* Always for the navy, Doctor. 


& VOICE FROM ST. HELENA, 15 


accowat for the suspicion manifested by the go- 
vernor, as it would not be Yi gh 0. he was 
sentout to betray. 
~ Cipriani in town. “On his deen “an whites thie 
obligations he was under to Sir Thomas Reade, 
who was very busily employed in assisting him to 
procure some hams and other aennenen nae 
out ‘of the company’s stores. - 
30th —Napoleon has been pantiiell for some 
days in dictating and writing observations upon 
the works of the Great Frederick, Told me that 
when finished they might probably comprise five 
or six octavo volames, and would consist of 
_ military observations and reflections only, with 
as much detail as would be necessary for the ex- 
planation of the operations commented upon. For 
several mornings he -has been up at three, a.m. 
writing. Saw several pages of his hand-writing, 
‘which ‘was much more legible than any I had be- 
fore seen. He observed, that formerly. he was fre- 
quently in the habit of writing only half or three 
quarters of each word, and running them into each 
other, which was not attended with much incon- 
venience, as the: secretaries had become so well 
accustomed ‘to. it, that they could read it with 
nearly as much facility as if it were written: plain- 
ly; that, however, no person, except one well ac- _ 
‘customed to his manner of writing, could read it. 
Latterly, he said, he had begun to write a little 


came 


16 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


more legibly, in consequence of not being so much 
hurried as on former occasions. 

Napoleon then observed, that I had: medals con- 
siderable progress in: French since he had first seen 
me, ‘though you have,” said he, “a very bad ac- 
cent. It has been said by some of the English, 
that I understand Italian better than. French, 
which is not true. Though I speak the Italian 
very fluently, it is not pure. Non parlo Toscana,* 
nor am I capable of writing a book in Italian, nor 
do I ever speak it in preference to the French,” . 

Speaking about Chateaubriand’s attacks upon 
him, he observed, ‘“‘ C’est un de ces-liches qui cra; 
chent sur un cadavre. (He is one of those poltroons 
who spit upon a dead body.). Like Pichon and 
others, he is one of those insects,that feed upon a 
corpse which, while living, they. dared. not. ap- 
proach.” After some other conversation, | asked 
him, if there had been a sufficiency of provisions 
for his:army on the retreat from Moscow, whe- 
ther it might not have been accomplished with a 
loss much smaller than that which they had,sus- 
tained?. Napoleon answered, ‘‘No} the. cold 


would have destroyed them, even if they, had had 


a sufficiency of provisions. Those who had food, 
died by hundreds. Even the Rania themealene 
died like flies.” 

May 2d.— General Montholon very ill. lee 
leon expressed much anxiety about him.. 


* I do not speak Tuscan, 


A VOICE FROM st. HELENA,’ 17 


 Ath-—Baron Sturmer came inside of Longwood, 
and had some conversation with’ the’ seiperin! of- 
ficer relative to Napoleon. 

‘6th.—Saw Napoleon, to whom ’ gave a book, ent 
titled; Meurs et Coutumes des Corses, which he 
ran over, frequently laughing very heartily at seve- 
rab’of the anecdotes which were recounted in it. 
The‘author, he said, was an ‘ignorantaccio, and 
wholly “unacquainted with many circumstances 
rélative to the history, manufactures, &¢. of Cor 
sica ; in fact, that he was either a place-hunter, of 
a man who had been den bastonato* by the Corsi: 

cans. ‘That many of the anecdotes he related re- 
iat assassinations which had beeri committed, 
were true, but that the Corsicans were not in the 
habit of assassinating strangers; that they were 
the best friends and the worst enemies in the 
world; that'those who espoused a party, remained 
unchangeable. |“ Even J,” continued he, “in the 
height of my power, could never induce the Eng: 
lish party to change their opinions, cr { of 
fered'to receive them all into my service.” _ 

‘« The admiral,” said he, “ held along conversa! 
tion with me a day or two ago. He praised the 
governor ; said: that 1 was mistaken in him ; that 
he was an extremely well-informed man, and had 
a good heart: at bottom. He was Wh anxions 


Bedi 


y ‘Well Soe ach ; 
VOL, If. € 


18 A. VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


that I should meet him, on an opportunity that 
soon would be afforded by the arrival of the am- 
bassador, when he suggested. that we might meet 
as if nothing had previously occurred. I told him 
that he did not know the.governor ; that until he 
changed his conduct; I would not see him, unless 
by force. I obseryed that he might, without.any 
discussion, alter his restrictions, and treat me as I 
would myself treat.a person placed ina similar 
situation : in fact, in a word, put matters upon the 
same footing as he found them, or nearly so: but 
that it would answer no purpose for us to meet, 
I complain of the ill treatment I receive. He says, 
“Il comply with my instructions,’ This is always 
his excuse.. Now, althongh I am convinced that 
his instructions specify no more than that he 
should take every precaution to prevent my escape 
and otherwise to treat me well, and with as little 
possible expense as may be, yet I could not well 
tell him that he asserted a falsehood. All that I 
could reply would be by making a comparison (in 
doing which you must always exaggerate), by 
likening him to a hangman, who, while he puts a 
rope round your neck to dispatch you, only exe- 
cutes his orders; but that is not a reason that you 
should be obliged to make a. companion. of him, 
or receive him until the moment of execution,— 
I could only say this, and tell him that if such 
were his orders, he had disgraced himself by ac- 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 19 


cepting a dishonourable employment; that if he 

had fot, he was still worse, in being the contriver. 

of'such. As long as he treats me 2 la Botany 

Bay, so‘ long will not I see him. T certainly 

would understand not to see the commissioners, 

and not to enter houses ‘which od said | par 
ted.” 

«TF told the aduairal, ” continued the? ve (hal I 
hoped the Prince Regent would know of the 
treatment which I receive here. The admiral 
said, that if I thought myself aggrieved, I ought 
to complain, either to the Regent, or to the minis- 
ters! “I think ‘it would be a degradation to me to 
cémplain to ministers who have treated me so ill, 
and who act from hatred. The admiral strove to 
excuse the governor, and declared that he knew it 
was the intention of the English government’ to 
treat me well, and that there must be some mis- 
take or misconception, which would be reetified. 
I told him, that you English were great égoistes, 
very-fond of excusing each other, and of praising 
your country and yourselves; but that to strangers, 
every thing was justifiable. I spoke to him about 
the detention of the French prisoners, and the re- 
éeption of the prisoners who had broken their 
parole, of which Thad been accused. I explained, 
that the English ‘were the first to’ begin ;”: here 
Napoleon gave an explanation similar to that 
which appears in a preceding part of the work. 

c 2 


20 A VOICE FROM ST, HELENA, 


“ I. then published in the Moniteur, the names of 
several English who had violated their. parole and 
escaped, before any Frenchman. had done the 
same, For it was much easier to escape in France, 
than in England, as the English prisoners were 
allowed great liberty, and much more space than 
the French were in England. But the fact is, 
that your ministers hate me, because 1 acted 
vigorously, and always retaliated upon them. 
When they blockaded France, I blockaded Eng- 
land, and I always made reprisals, which they 
had not been, accustomed to. under the feeble 
government of the Bourbons, whom they used to 
insult at their pleasure. I told him that the Eng- 
lish would hereafter repent. of having prosecuted 
the war with so much hatred against me. _ If they 
had left me in France, after my return from Elba, 
all Europe would have been quiet, France con- 
tented, no internal commotions, nor hatred against 
the English, for forcing on the nation a king whom 
they detested. The revolutionary spirit which 
exists now against the actual government. of 
France, may find its way to England, and if so, 
there is no knowing how it may terminate.” 

(I told him also,” continued Napoleon, “ that 
I had been well pleased at the capture of Copen- 
hagen, because it made bitter enemies of the 
Danes, without injuring me., For it was not 
ships that I wanted, but naval officers and  sea- 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 21 


meu who were all left behind to man my vessels. 
T also informed him, that the capture and robbery 
of the Spanish frigates pleased me; as it caused 
you to be hated in Spain, where you might have 
been and were popular before, and besides, was 
unworthy of a great nation. I told him that I did / 
not receive money direct from Spain. That I got 
bills upon Vera Cruz, which certain agents sent by 
circuitous routes, by Amsterdam, Hamburg, and 
other places, to London, (as I had no direct com- 
munication). The bills were discounted by mer- 
chants in London, to whom ten per cent.,'and 
sometimes a premium, was paid as their reward. 
Bills were then given by them upon different 
bankers in Europe for the greatest part of the 
amount, and the remainder in gold, which last 
was brought over to France by the smugglers. 
Even for the equipping my last expedition, a great “if 
part of the money was raised in London.” Tasked 
if he meant that, after his retarn from Elba? He 
replied, “yes, that last expedition.” 

- ©T told the admiral,” continued Napoleon, 
“that you had been the first violators of the peace 
of Amiens; that your ministers, who boast so much 
of not having acknowledged me as emperor, wére 
80 conscious, themselves, of having been the yio- 
lators of the treaty, that they offered, through 
Lord Whitworth, to give thirty millions of francs, 
and ‘to assist, as much as lay in their power, to 


22 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


make me king of France, if I would consent to 
the English retaining Malta.” I took the liberty 
of asking to whom the proposal had been made? 
“To Malouet, who was minister to Louis a short 
time ago,” replied the emperor, ““ My answer to- 
this offer was, ‘Tell Lord Whitworth, that 1 will 
owe nothing to strangers, or to their interference, 
If the French nation do not, of themselves, create 
me king, foreign influence shall never be employed 
by me to obtain it.’ The fact is, that your minis- 
ters always deceived the people by false and art- 
ful representations, and are of the opinion ex- 
pressed by the great Lord Chatham, ‘ that if 
England acted towards France with justice for 
twenty-four hours, she would be ruined.” 

“ The admiral,” continued Napoleon, “is very. 
well informed about the history of the last years ; 
is really an Englishman, and sticks up for his 
country whenever he can; but notwithstanding, he 
could not contradict several of the assertions I 
made to him, because they were incontrovertible 
facts, He returned frequently to the proposed 
interview with the ambassador, which he is most 
desirous should take place. Iam convinced, that 
no good would arise from it. I wish,” added he, 
“that he should know my sentiments on these 
matters.” 

I remarked, that perhaps his refusing to see the 
ambassador, might be construed into an insult to 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 23 


the British government, and to the nation, which 

he represented. Napoleon replied, “ It cannot 

admit of such a construction, He is not sent as 

an ambassador to St. Helena. He was ambassa- 
_ dor to the Emperor of China, and at St. Helena 
ean only appear in his private capacity. Conse- 
quently, there is no necessity for his being intro- 
duced by the governor. If he wants to see me, 
let him go to Bertrand, without being accom- 
panied by any of the governor’s people, then we 
will see about it. However, I think it would be 
better for both, that itshould not take place. For 
if L receive him, I must put on an appearance of 
eheerfulness, and clothe my face with smiles; as 
it is contrary to my custom to receive any person: 
otherwise. Then, I must either be obliged to 
make complaints to a stranger of the barbarous 
treatment I receive here, which is lessening to the 
dignity and’ character of a man like me; or else, I 
must furnish an opportunity to this governor, to 
filk the ambassador's head with lies, and make 
him observe, that I am so well treated, that I have 
made no complaints, that I want for nothing, that 
for me on a tous les égurds possibles, and enable 
him to write home a bulletin of falsehoods, with 
an appeal to the ambassador in proof of the truth 
of them. So that it would place me in an auk- 
ward dilemma, and one which it would be better 
to avoith” | du tlsutoM 1 


ZA A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


‘ He was very ‘auxious: in his enquiries about: 
Captain Meynell, who was. very Cneemenn ill. 
General Montholon much better. pina ted 

‘I shewed him the Naval Chronicle, in which 
there was a long article about the death of Cap- 
tain Wright. ‘ No person,” said Napoleon, ‘“as- 
serts positively that he had seen him murdered; 
and the principal evidence who testifies to the be- 
lief of it, was' a man who was himself in prison. 
Let him be asked for what crime he was thrown 
into a gaol. It is not a place for honest people, or 
for those whose testimony could be relied upon. 
If I had acted properly, I should have ordered 
Wright to be tried by a military commission as\a 
spy, and shot within twenty-four hours, which by 
the laws of war I was entitled to do. What would 
your ministers, or even your parliament have done 
to a French captain that was discovered landing 
assassins in England to murder King George? If 
Lf had, in retaliation of the assassins sent to murder 
me, sent others to murder *** and the Bourbon 
princes, what would have been done to the cap- 
tain of :the vessel who had landed them in Eng- 
land, if. he were taken?. They would not have 
been so lenient as. I was with Wright. . They 
would have had him tried and siecanind sur le 
champ.” « om 3 ley FOW 31 JUS oe. 

7th.—Napoleon riety particular, in entzairing 
about Captain Meynell, whose death he observed 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 25 


would grieve him, as he had air d'un brave homme. 
Had some: more conversation’ with him relative to 
the prisoners made at the commencement of the 
war, ‘I said, that I believed he had demanded 
that the ships as well as the prisoners made in 
them should be given up, in exchange for those 
detained in France... He replied, that he did not 
recollect that he had demanded the ships. “The 
only reason,” added he, “ that- your government 
would give as a right for detaining them as pri- 
soners was, that they had always done so in preced- 
ing wars, and that it would be lessening to the 
dignity of the government to give them up, or to 
consider as prisoners of war those who had been 
detained by me in France. To this, I answered, 
that they had always done so, because they had to 
deal with imbéciles, and people who knew not how 
tovact vigorously, and were afraid to retaliate. As 
to the exchange of prisoners, I offered to effect it 
im the following manner, viz. to send three thou- 
sand men, consisting of two thousand Spaniards 
and Portuguese, and one thousand English to a 
certain place, there to be exchanged for three thou- 
sand French, and so on until all were exchanged. 

Your government would not consent to this, but 
required that all the English: should be exchanged 
at first; though the others were your allies, and 
were taken fighting by your’side. As soon as 
the French prisoners in England heard of this 


so 


26. A VOICE. FROM: ST, HELENA. 


proposal, they wrote over the strongest letters, 
possible; protesting against, and praying me not: 
to consent to such terms, alleging, that as soon: 
as. your ministers had got all the English pri- 
soners, amountivg I believe to ten thousand,: 
they would under some pretext break off the ex-: 
change ;* and that they (the French prisoners,) 
who were already treated badly enough, would: 
then. be subjected to every species of brutality. 
and ill.treatment, as the English would no longer 
be afraid of reprisals. What I most regret,’ added. 
he, ‘and. am most to blame for is, that during 
my reign, I had not caused the English prisoners. 
to be put on board of pontons, and treated 
exactly. as you treated mine in England. In» 
deed, 1 had given orders to have it done, and. 
to place. them in ships in the Scheldt. Décres, 
the minister of marine, though he hated you. as 
much, as a man could do, opposed it om the 
ground of the expense, the difficulty of effect 
ing it, and other reasons. There were numbers: 
of reports also from your transport board, testi- 
Seatingeed treatment which the he ts 


* 1 have. some sencliention fa although I cannot find it in a 
journal) that Napoleon also told me that he bad ; proposed to the 

‘minister that both powers should simultaneously land 
their respeetive prisoners in sueh ports in England arid France as 
might have ‘been previously agreed aahiccnshg itis “PF 
not agreedito by his majesty’s ministers, 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 27 


joyed, which imposed upon me fora time ; but, as 
I found out from the prisoners themselves after- 
wards, they were filled with lies, like the reports 
that are sent from this island.. I was also so much 
occupied with affairs of a more important nature, 
that I forgot it.” 1 took the liberty of observing, 
that I hoped he did not credit what he saw in 
Pillet’s libel. .“ No, no,” replied Napoleon, “I 
believe no exaggerated statement of the kind. 
l reason from the testimonies of the prisoners 
themselves and from the circumstances. In the 
first place, it was le comble du barbarie to put 
any prisoners, especially soldiers, in ships at all. 
Even sailors like to be on shore. I see that the 
admiral likes to live on shore, as well as every 
officer and seaman who can effect it. . Man was 
born on shore, and it is natural for him to like. it. 
Your ministers said that they had not any for- 
tresses to put them in. Then, why not have ex- 
changed or sent them to Scotland, instead of 
massacreing them in pontons. I am very sorry 
that 1 did not carry my intentions into execution, 
as im the event of a war fifty or sixty years hence 
between the two countries, it. will be said, but 
even Napoleon suffered the English to put the 
French prisoners in pontons without having re- 
taliated. My intentions were to have put all the 
milords,and the principal prisoners in pontons, and 
to have made them undergo precisely the same 


28 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


treatment as that practised upon my prisoners in 
the prison-ships in England. ‘This would have’had 
the desired effect, and would have been beneficial 
to both parties. ‘For the complaints of * my lords,” 
to which I would have allowed every publicity 
to be given, would have produced such an out- 
cry; such a sensation amongst you English, who 
are égoistes, by making you feel yourselves that 
which you inflicted upon others, that your olig- 
archy would have been obliged to remove the 
French prisoners from the pontons, which would 
have been followed ‘by a similar step on my part. 
} would have left the canaille in the fortresses, as 
they, poor devils, had nothing to do with the 
measures of your ministers, who, indeed, cared 
but little what they suffered. I would not,” con- 
tinued Napoleon, “desire a better testimonial in 
my favour than that of the prisoners of the diffe- 
rent nations who have been in France. Many of 
your English sailors did not want to be exchanged. 
' They did not wish to be sent again on board of 
their floating prisons. The Russians declared, 
that they were much better than in their own coun- 
try, after they discovered that their heads were 
not to be cut off, which they at first had been 
persuaded to believe; and the Austrians ‘would 
not have escaped, even if allowed.” — 

© Another shocking act of your ministers,” said 
‘Napoleon, “ was the bundling (jeté) of some hun- 


A. VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 29 


dred ;wounded ‘and disabled soldiers who had 
been, born in countries under me, and, were 

wounded fighting your battles against me, on: nae 
coast of Holland, where they were liable by the 
laws of the country to be tried and shot within 
twenty-four hours, for having carried arms against 
it... When it was reported to me, and application 
made to try them, I said, ‘ Let them go on. Let 
them land as many as they like. They will tell 
what treatment they have received, and will pre- 
vent others of my troops from deserting and join- 
ing the English,’ To say nothing of the inhuma- 
uity,of the practice,” said Napoleon, lifting, up 
his, hands with emotion, “ it was very bad policy 
on the part of your ministers, as these poor muti- 
lated wretches told it every where; and I also 
caused the names, countries, where wounded, &c., 
of many of them to be published in the Moniteur.” 
1 endeavoured to controvert the tenor of some 
of his assertions ; but in consequence of not being 
sufficiently well acquainted with the circum- 
stances, I could make but a feeble effort against a 
man who was master of the subject, to say nothing. 
of the difficulty of napiensting against snalean an- 

onist.-. ij : 1 bende 

»A1th—Told Sir Sadun Lowe what Napoleon 
had said relative to the restrictions, and the com- 
missioners, &c. ‘ His excellency asked why J had 


| 


30 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


not told him this before? I replied, because it had 
only occurred yesterday, and that having often 
made him communications of a similar nature be- 
fore, I had not thought it important. He observed 
that it was of great importance, as having taken 
place since he had’ sent his answer to their obser- 
vations upon his restrictions. He then observed, 
that the principal cause of all the difficulties which 
he had’ to combat with the French people had 
arisen from Sir George Cockburn’s having, upon 
his own authority, and beyond his instructions, 
taken upon himself to grant much more indul- 
gence, and a much greater space for limits with- 
out being accompanied by a British officer, than 
he had any right to do; not only bad he not the 
right, but it was contrary to his instructions, and 
that on his arrival, he had been astonished at Sir 
George Cockburn’s conduct. He then spoke for 
some time about the letter which had been written 
hy Madame Bertrand to Marquis Montchenu; 
which he’ seemed ‘to consider as a very heinous 
offence. ' I observed that Count Bertrand had 
said, that at the time the letter was written, there 
had existed no prohibition against epistolary cor- 
respondence with persons domiciliated. in the 
island as the marquis was, and that since that 
letter had been written by Madame Bertrand, six 
sealed letters had been received by her, amongst 


A VOICE PROM ST. HELENA. 3 


awhich-was.one from Sir George Bingham. | His 
excellency did not appear to be well pleased with 
this observation of Count Bertrand’s, >» 
.The quantity of wood and coals allowed not 
being near sufficient, Count Montholon desired 
ie to represent to the governor, that in the ad- 
miral’s time, when there were not near so many 
fires. as at present, there was more than double the 
quantity of fuel allowed ;, that for some time they 
had. been obliged to burn the. wine-cases; and to 
request of him if he did not think, proper to:in- 
crease the quantity furnished by government, he 
would give directions that the purveyor might 
supply it, on their paying for it themselves. _Went 
to Plantation House and explained to the gover- 
nor the aboye communication, particulariaing the 
number of fires; who, after some discussion, re- 
plied, that he would give orders for onjntiitions) 
supply to be furnished: |. . 194 
_»12th.—Napoleon, in his bath, Had some eon- 
versation about the governor, “If,” said he, “ the 
governor on his arrival here had told Bertrand, 
that. in consequence. of orders from his ;govera- 
ment, he was under the necessity of imposing fresh 
restrictions, and had described the nature of them, 
directing that in future we should conform our: 
selves, to them, instead of acting-in the underhand 
manner he has done, I would have saidy this is a 
man who does his duty clearly and openly with- 


82 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


out tricks or shuffling. It. is necessary-that theré 
should be in this world such men as gaolers, 
scavengers, butchers, and hangmen ; but still one 
does not like to accept of any’of those employ- 
ments. ‘If I were in the tower of London, I might 
possibly: have a good opinion of the gaoler for the 
manner in which he did his duty; but I would 
neither accept of his situation, nor make a com- 
panion of him. Captain H * * told Madame Ber- 
trand, that in the whole British dominions,’ a 
worse'‘man than this gaoler could not be selected 
as governor; and that we should very shortly 
find such to be the case. In fact he described 
him to be just as we have found him. But as’ we 
thought that he was desirous to induce Madame 
Bertrand to leave the island with her family, it was 
supposed that he had exaggerated the imperfee- 
tions of this man, though we evidently saw that 
there was something in it.”’ 

- After some conversation onthe same shot 
Napoleon said, “ When I was at Elba, the Prin- 
cess of Wales sent to inform me of her intention 
to visit me. I, however, on her own account, 
sent back an answer begging of her to defer it a 
little longer, that [ might see how matters would 
turn out; adding, that in a few months I would 
have the pleasure of receiving her. 1 knew that 
at the time, it could not fail to injure the princess, 
and therefore 1 put it off. It is astonishing that 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 33 


she desired it, for she had no reason to be attached 
tome, as her father and brother were killed fight- 
ing against'me. She went afterwards to see Marie 
Louise at **, and I believe that eg are x sone 
friends’? * 

© Prince Leopold, ” soutnine we “ was one sof 
the handsomest and finest young men in Paris, at 
the’ time’ he was there. At a masquerade given 
by the queen of Naples, Leopold made a conspi- 
euous and elegant figure. The Princess Char- 
lotte must doubtless be very contented and very 
fond of bim. He was near being‘ one of my aid- 
de-camps, to obtain which he had made interest 
and’ even applied ; but by some means, very fortu- 
nately for himself, it did not succeed, as probably if 
he‘had, he would not have been chosen to be a fa- 
ture king of England. Most of the young princes 
in Germany,” continued he, “ solicited to be my 
aid-de-camps, and Leopold was then about a 
teen or nineteen years of age.” 
"Some conversation now took place relative to 
the infernal machine, and the different plots which 
had ‘been formed to assassinate him. “ Many of 
the plots of the Bourbons,” said ‘he, “and the *** 
were betrayed to me’ by Frenchmen, employed 
"and ‘well paid by themselves, and in their’ confi- 
dence, but who in reality were agents of the French 
police. By means of them, I became acquainted 
with their plans, and the names of the contrivers of 

VOL. 11. D 


34 A VOICE FROM ST, HELENA, 


the'plot, one of whom was the Comte d’***. Louis, 
the present king, always refused to give his consent, 
These agents had conferences with the Bourbon 
princes, and with some of your ministers, especi- 
ally with Mr. H ***, under-secretary of state, and 
rendered an account of every thing to the police. 
If I had acted right, J should have followed the 
example of Cromwell, who on the discovery of 
the first attempt made to assassinate him, the plot 
of which had been hatched in France, caused it to 
be signified to the French king; that. if the Jike 
occurred again, he, by way, of reprisal, would 
order assassins to be hired to murder him and a 
Stuart.. Now I ought to have publicly. signified; 
that on the next attempt at assassination, 1 would 
cause the same to be made upon. king * * * and 
the Bourbon princes, to accomplish which last 
indeed, I had only to say that I would not punish 
the projectors.” M3 

13th.—A pplication made by me to: Major, Gor- 
requer (on the part of the maitre d’hotel) to. re- 
quest that the governor would give directions to 
Mr. Breame (the company’s farmer) to let the 
establishment have two calves. monthly, as Napo- 
leon, was partial. to veal, and Mr, Breame had 
refused to dispose of them without leave from ithe 
governor, 

Permission was accordingly. granted by, Sir 
Hudson Lowe to let.the French have twoicalyes 


A VOICE FROM: ST. HELENA. 35 


monthly, for which the farmer was to be paid 
by the French themselves. 

/14th.—Napoleon in very good. sninitnl atehe 

meé “ why I had’ dined in: camp yesterday?” Lre- 
plied, ‘« Because there was nothing.to eat at Long- 
wood.” He laughed heartily at this, and observed, 
“ that certainly was the best reason in the world.” 
' Afterwards he conversed for some. time,about 
Moreau, and said that he was by no means a 
man of that superior talent which the English 
supposed ; that he was a good.general of division, 
but not adapted for the command of a great army. 
“ Moreau was brave,”’said he, “ indolent, and/a 
bon vivant. He did nothing at his quartier général 
but Joll ona sofa, or walk, about with a pipe in 
his mouth. He scarcely ever read a book, His 
disposition was naturally good, but he was in- 
fluenced by his wife and mother-in-law, who were 
two intriguers. I recommended Moreau to marry ~ 
hervat:the desire of Josephine, who.loved her be- 
cause she'was acreole. Moreau had fallen greatly 
in public estimation on account of his conduct 
towards Pichegru.* After Leoben, the senate of 


* While Napoleon was at, Moscow, Count Daru received a let- 
ter from Madame Moreau praying of him to ask the emperor to 
= her to return to France for a few months on private ‘and 

nsable business. Daru knowing that the best mode of ob- 
jing any thing from Napoleon was by being candid and open, 
shewed. “him the letter,“ Oui,” replied the emperor, “ elle doit 
D2 


36 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


Venice were foolish enough to stir up a rebellion 
against the French armies, without being either 
sufficiently strong themselves, or having adequate 
assistance from other powers ,to promise the 
slightest hope of success. In consequence of this, 
I caused Venice to be occupied by the French 
troops. An agent: of the Bourbons, the, Count 
d’ Entraigues, whom I suppose you haye heard of 


dere venue, et elle doit déjd étre repartie.” Daru said that a woman 
could not be dangerous. “ Elle vient: intriguer,” answered Na- 
poleon, “ Perhaps you are one of those who think that Moreau 
is a'good citizen?” Sire,” replied Daru, ‘je crois que sous, le 
rapport du civisnie et du patriotisme, le caractéere de Moreau est in- 
attaquable.” « Eh bien, vous vous trompez,” said Napoleon, and 
the subject was dropped. At Dresden, in 1813, while Napoleon 
was at breakfast along with Maréchal Victor and Daru, a Russian 
flag of truce was announced. After the person who bore it had 
accomplished his mission, Napoleon asked him some questions 
relative to the disorder which he had observed iu the advanced 
posts of the enemy’s army on the preceding day, and if the 
Russians had not lost some officer of distinction. The officer 
replied, “ No.”  Cependant,” said Napoleon, “ il y a eu du de- 
sordre ; d tel poste on a emporté quelqu’un blessé ou tué.” “ Je ne 
sache pas,” replied the officer, “ que nous ayons perdu personne, a 
moins que votre majesté ne veuille paler du Général Moreau, qui a 
été blessé d mort aux avant postes.” ‘« Le Général Moreau?” re- 
peated Napoleon, and afterwards making a sign with bis head to 
Daru, “ eh bien!”....Daru instantly recollected the conversa- 
tion at Moscow, when Napoleon had made use of the same words, 
at which time he had supposed that the emperor’s opinion had 
‘been influenced by personal motives, and allowed that he was 
‘now obliged to acknowledge that he had judged right, oat — 
Moreau was far from being a good citizen. se the 


lows 


A Voce FROM ST. HELENA. 37 


in England, was there at the time. Fearing the 
consequences, he escaped out of Venice, but on 
his ‘way to Vienna (I think he said) he was arrested 
on the Brenta by Bernadotte, with all his papers. 
As soon ‘as it was known who he was, he was 
sent to me, being esteemed a man of some impor- 
tance. Amongst his papers we found his plans, 
and the correspondence of Pichegru with’ the 
Bourbons. I had them immediately attested by 
Berthier and two others, sealed and sent tothe 
directory, as they were of the greatest conse- 
quence. [ then examined d’Entraigues myself, 
who, when he saw that the contents of his papers 
were known, thought there was no use in attempt- 
ing concealment any longer, and confessed every 
thing. ‘He even told me more than I could possibly 
have expected; let me into the secret plans of the 
Bourbons with the names of their English parti- 
zans, and, in fact, the information I obtained from 
him was so full and so important, that it deter- 
mined me how to act on the moment, and was 
the chief cause of the measures I then pursued 
and of the proclamation which I issued to the 
army, warning them, that, if necessary, they would 
be called upon to cross the mountains, and re- 
eter their native country to crush the traitors 
who were plotting against the existence of the re- 
public. At this time Pichegru was chief of the le- 
gislative body. The Count d’Entraigues was so 


38 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


communicative, that I really felt obliged to him, 
and I may say that he almost yained me. He 
was a man of talent and acuteness, intelligent and 
pleasant to converse with, though he proved after- 
wards to be a mauvais sujet. Instead of putting 


him in confinement, I allowed him to go where he ~ 


pleased in Milan, gave him every indulgence, and 
did not even put him in surveillance. A few days 
afterwards I received orders from the directory 
to cause him to. be shot, or what in those times 
was equivalent to it, to try him by a military 
commission, and sentence to be immediately exe- 
cuted. I wrote to the directory that he had 
given very useful information, and did not .de- 
serve such a return; and finally, that I could. not 


execute it; that if they still insisted upon shooting 


him, they must do it themselves. Shortly after 
this, d’Entraigues escaped into Switzerland, from 
whence the coquin had the impudence to write a 
libel, accusing me of having treated him in the 
most barbarous manner, and even with having put 
him in irons; when the fact was, that I had al- 
lowed him so much liberty, that it was not until 
after he had escaped for several days that his 
flight was discovered, and then only by having 
seen the arrival of the Count d’Entraigues notified 
in the Swiss papers, which at first was thought to 
be impossible, but on’ sending to examine his 
quarters, it was found to be true. This conduct 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 39 


of d’Entraigues greatly displeased all who at 
Milan had been witnesses of the indulgent man- 
ner’ in ‘which I treated him. Amongst others, 
some:ambassadors and diplomatic characters were 
so-much offended, that they drew up and signed a 
declaration contradictory of these accusations, In 
consequence of the information gained from d'En- 
traigues, Pichegru was banished to Cayenne.” 

' Immediately after the seizure of d’Entraigues, 
Desaix came to see me. Conversing with him 
about Pichegru, I remarked that we had been 
greatly deceived, and expressed my surprise that 
his treason had not been discovered sooner. ‘ Why,’ 
said Desaix, ‘ we knew of it three months ago.’ 
‘:How can that be possible?’ [ replied. Desaix 
then recounted to me the manner in which Mo- 
reau, with whom he had been at that time, had 
found in the baggage of the Austrian general 
Kilingspor a correspondence of Pichegru’s, in 
which his plans in favour of the Bourbons were 
detailed, and those of the false manceuvres which 
he intended to put in practice. J asked Desaix 
if this had been communicated to the directory? 
He replied, ‘no, that Moreau did not wish to 
ruin Pichegru; and had desired him to say nothing 
about it. I told Desaix that he had acted very 
wrong; that he ought immediately to have sent 
all the: papers to the directory, as I had done; 
that in fact it was tacitly conniving at the destruc- 


40 A, VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


tion of his native country. As.soon as Moreau. 
was informed that Pichegru was found out, he 
denounced him. to the army.as a traitor, and sent. 
to the directory the papers containing the proofs 
of it, which he had kept concealed in his posses-: 
sion for some months, and allowed Pichegru to. 
be chosen chief of the legislative body; though. 
he knew that he was plotting the destruction of 
the republic. Moreau was accused this time, and 
with justice, of double treachery." ‘ Thou hast 
first,’ it was said, ‘ betrayed thy country, by con- 
cealing the treason of Pichegru, and afterwards 
thou hast uselessly betrayed thy friend, by dis- 
closing what thou oughtest to have made known: 
before; but which, when concealed. by thee until 
it was discovered by other means, ought to have 
ever remained a secret in thy breast.’ Moreau — 
never recovered the esteem of the public again,” »: 

I mentioned the retreat of Moreau, and asked 
if he had not displayed great military talents in: 
it? “ That retreat,” replied the emperor, “instead 
of being what you say, was the greatest blunder 
that. ever Moreau committed. If he had, instead’ 
of retreating, made a détour, and marched in the 
rear of Prince Charles,” (1 think he said,) ‘he 
would have destroyed or taken the Austrian army. 
—The directory were jealous of me, and wanted to: 
divide, if possible, the military reputation; and as. 
they. could not give credit to Moreau for a.victory, 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. Al 


they did for a retreat, which they caused to be 
extolled in the highest terms; though even the 
Austrian generals condemned Moreau for having 
done ‘it. | You may probably hereafter,” continued 
Napoleon, “have an opportunity of hearing the 
opinion of French generals on the subject, who 
were present, and you will find it consonant to 
mine. ‘Instead of credit, Moreau - merited ‘the 
greatest censure and disgrace for it.. Asa general, 
Pichegru had much more talent than Moreau.” — 
‘* Moreau ridiculed the idea of the formation of 
the legion of honour. When he heard fronmsome 
one that it was also intended to be given to those 
_who:had distinguished themselves in science, and 
not to be confined to feats of arms alone, he re: 
plied, ‘ Well, then, I shall apply for my cook to 
be made a commander of the order, as his talents 
are most superior in the science of cookery.” 
\eIn reply to some arguments which I offered to 
convince him that“* * * and the English * * * 
** were ignorant of that part of Pichegru’s plot 
which embraced’ assassination, Napoleon replied, 
“‘ 1 do not suppose that’ * ** * or any otherof the 
English ***** actually said to Georges or Pi- 
chegru, ‘ you must kill the first consul ;’ but they 
well: knew that such formed the chief and indeed 
the only hope of suécess ; and yet they; knowing 
this, furnished ‘them with money, and ‘provided 
ships to land them in France, which, to all intents | 


42 A VOICE \FROM ‘ST. HELENA. 


and purposes, rendered them accomplices ; and if 
*** had been tried by an English jury, he would 
have been condemned as such. Lord * * ** took 
great pains to persuade the foreign courts \that 
they were ignorant of the project of assassination, 
and wrote ‘several ;letters, in which he acknow- 
ledged. that the English had landed men for the 
purpose of overturning the French government; 
but denied the other. -However, he made a very 
lame business of it, and none of the continental 
‘governments gave any credit to his assertions. It 
was naturally condemned as, on the ground of 
retaliation, none of the sovereigns or rulers were 
safe. It was at the time that I had it in contem- 
plation to effect a descent in England. Your *** 
did\not want to get rid of ‘ Napoleon Bonaparte,’ 
but of ‘ the first consul.’ Fox had some conver- 
sations with me on the subject of the 3rd Nivose. 
He too, like you, denied that the *** were privy 
to the scheme of assassination, but, faintly, after 
hearnig what I had to say, and condemned the 
whole transaction. Indeed his own measures 
were quite opposed to it. The conduct of the 
Emperor of Germany also formed a striking con- 
trast... When I had possession of his. capital, he, 
through religious motives, positively and with sin- 
cerity prohibited any attempt of ‘the kind, which 
might have been executed daily, as J often ae 
about without suspicion.” {PV ormeds hashoss 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 43 


During the conversation, I mentioned that Ber- 
nadotte had been strongly suspected of being luke- — 
warm in the cause of the allies, if not. of playinga 
double part; that he was called Charles Jean 
_ Charlatan, and supposed to be likely to join him 
if any reverse happened to the allies. Napoleon 
replied, ‘‘ Probably they called him Charlatan, 
because he.is a Gascon, a little inclined to boast- 
ing. As to joining me, if I had been successful, 
he would have done no more than all the rest. 
The Saxons, Wirtemburghers, Bavarians, and/all 
those who abandoned me when I was unfortu- 
nate, would have joined me again if I had been 
successful. After Dresden, the Emperor of Aus- 
tria went upon his knees to me,* called me. Ais 
dear son, and begged for the sake of his very dear, 
dear daughter, to whom 1 was married, not to ruin 
him altogether, but to be reconciled to him. Had 
it not been for the desertion of the Saxons with 
their artillery, I should have gained a victory at 
Leipsic, and the allies would have been far th 
ferently situated.” 

shetty 24 en in chi bed-room, complained 


epee sense, but merely asa forcible ineniier oF viet me 
comprehend the earnestness with which the emperor of Austria 
made the application. Napoleon mai! used the same ex- 
pression in similar instances, 


44 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


of head-ach, and had his feet immersed in a pail of 
hot water. At first he was rather melancholy, 
butsubsequently became tolerably lively and com- 
municative. ‘He spoke about Egypt, and asked 
me many questions; amongst others, whether a 
three-decker. could enter the harbour of Alexan- 
dria without having been lightened? I replied, 
that I thought it might, or if not, that it might 
be ‘very easily lightened.* | ‘Napoleon’ observed, 
that’ he had sent an officer named Julien, from’ 
Cairo, with peremptory orders to Bruyes to enter 
the harbour of Alexandria, but that unfortunately 
he was killed by the Arabs on’the way. “I 
called,” continued he, “a fort which I built ‘at 
Rosetta after him.”’ He asked me if I knew 
that fort, to which I replied in the ‘affirmative, 
“Tt was surprising,” continued he, “ how Bruyes' 
could have thought of engaging at anchor with- 
out having first fortified the island with twenty 
or thirty pieces of cannon, and having brought 
out a Venetian sixty-four, and some frigates which 
he had in the fort of Alexandria. In a conversa- 
tion which I had with Bruyes some weeks before, 
on board of the Orient, he himself demonstrated 
to me that a fleet ought never to engage at anchor, 
at least that a fleet which did so, must always be 


be “When at ‘Alexandria, Isaw the Tigre and Canopus dd the 
harbour. They were 80-gun ships ‘of the largest class, an drew 
as much water as a three-decker. 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 45 


beaten, on account of the facility which the attack- 
ing ships would have of taking up their position ; 
and that an order (whether from Bruyes, or not, 
I did not understand) actually existed prohibit- 
ing it. Notwithstanding which, Bruyes himself 
adopted it afterwards. Bruyes,” continued he, 
“always believed, that if Nelson attacked him, it 
would be made on his right, thinking his left inex- 
pugnable on account of the island; and, had pre- 
pared matters accordingly. 1 endeavoured. to 
convince him that a ship or two of his: left might 
be taken by a superior force, and an opening af; 
forded thereby for the enemy’s fleet to'enter.”. 
I observed, that if Bruyes had anchored head 
and stern, he might have gone in much closer to 
the shore, as he would not have been obliged to 
make an allowance for the ships to, swing, and 
consequently no space would. have been left for 
Nelson to pass between the French fleet and the 
land.’ Napoleon appeared to coincide in this opi- 
nion, and said that he would ask the opinion of 
the admiral on the subject.. He added, that prior 
to the departure of Julien, orders had been sent to 
Bruyes, that he should not quit the coast of 
Egypt until after he had ascertained the physical 
impossibility of the fleet’s being able to enter the 
harbour of Alexandria. If possible, he was, or- 
dered to carry it into execution; if not, to, proceed 
' to Corfu with. his fleet. “Now, Bruyes,’. conti; 


A 


46 A’ VOICE! FROM ST) HELENA. 


 nued ‘he, “not having ascertained the fact, as-ori 
the contrary, Barré: asserted that it was practica- 
ble, of which I‘ was also myself convinced, did not 
think: himself #uthorized: to go away; and atthe 
same time’ was afraid to enter the harbour even if 
possible, thinking it hazardous’ without having 
been first assured that’ we were in full possession 
ofthe country, He was ignorant: of my saccess 
at'Cairo until twenty-four hours before he was at- 
tacked'by Nelson. In this manner he remained in 
balance, and ‘neglected to secure himself: More- 
over, he never expected ‘that Nelson would have 
attacked him with ‘an inferior force. If he had 
brought’ out his’ frigates, and ‘well fortified the 
island; Nelson would either never have attacked 
him, or would have been beaten if he had: It was 
with great difficulty that’ [' made: Bruyes: depart 
from Toulon. After sailing, he wanted ‘to send four 
ships‘ to attack Nelson, who was lying with three 
dismasted vessels at ***, but [would not allowit, 
as the success of the enterprize was of too mach im- 
portance to allow the captureof twoor three ships 
to be’ put’ in’ competitiom with it. Bruyes: after- 
wards‘wished to separate the fleet} which I-would 
not’permit. Bruyeswas a man of unquestionable 
talent; but he wanted that decisive! resolution 
that’ enables a’ man’ to seize an-opportunity pre- 
sented by thecmoment;) which: 1’ conceive to: be 
the: ceaiaeneiie emia inva general, or admiral. 


A VOICE, FROM ST, HELENA, 47. 


Probably from want of experience, he had not that 
confidence in his own ability aud the propriety of 
his,plans, which rarely any thing else can impart. 
Unless| nature forms.a man of so peculiar astamp 
asi to be enabled to see and decide instantanéously, 
nothing but experience can give it. I, myself, 
commanded an army at twenty-two years: of age; 
but, nature made me different: from most! others, 
If, Nelson had. met Bruyes’) fleet, in» going’, to 
Egypt, I know not what might have happened, as 

L bad placed \three hundred and fifty, or four-hun- 
dred veterans.in each line-of-battle ship, who were 
trained. to, the guns twice a-day, and, had, given 
orders that each ship should engage one,of yours. 
Your vessels;were small, and I believe not-well- 
manned, and I gave this order to prevent your ob- 
isiedanristereningen by your superior. skillrin 
taanceuvring.” 

Here some. Neeeailad took nlenei upon. theie com, 
parative; merit of the English and; French seamen. 
I, urged, that English sailors fought with more 
confidence; that.if any. accidents happened to the 
ships in action, they would remedy them. mach 
sooner, and would, fight longer than the French 
seamen. Napoleon, said, he agreed im every 
thing but the last. “ Signor Dottore,” said she, 
GaatineradManceebioora quanto lInglese. The 
French. soldiers hada. great contempt for the 
English troops at the beginning of the war, cansed, 


48 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


perhaps, by the failure of the expeditions under 
the Duke of York, the great want of alertness, 
&c., in the English advanced posts, and. the mis- 
fortunes which befel your armies. In this they 
were fools, as the English were well known to be 
a brave nation. It was probably by’ a similar 
error, that Regnier was beaten by General Stuart ; 
as the French imagined that you would run away 
and-bedriven.into the sea: Regnier was a mau 
of talent, but more fit to give counsel to an army 
of twenty or thirty thousand men, than to com- 
mand one of five or six. Your troops, on that 
day, were nearly all English, and Regnier’s were 
chiefly Poles. It is difficult to conceive how little 
the French soldiers thought of yours, until they 
were taught the contrary. Of your seamen, they 
always spoke in terms of respect, although: they 
would only allow that they were more expert and 
quick, and not more brave than their own.” 

“« When,” continued Napoleon, “I was at Tilsit, 
with the Emperor Alexander and the King: of 
Prussia, I was the most ignorant of the three in 
military affairs. These two sovereigns, especially 
the King of Prussia, were completely aw fait, as 
to the number of buttons there ought to be in front 
of a jacket, how many behind, and the manner in 
which the skirts ought to be cut. Not a tailor in 
the army knew better than King Frederic, how 
mapy measures of cloth it took to make a jacket. 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA, 49 


In fact,” continued he, laughing, ‘‘ 1 was nobody 
in comparison with them. They continually tor- 
mented me with questions about matters belong- 
ing to tailors, of which [I was entirely ignorant, 
though, in order not to affront them, I answered 
just as gravely as if the fate of an army depended 
upon the cut of a jacket. When I went to see 
the King of Prussia, instead of a library, I found 
he had a large room, like an arsenal, furnished. 
with shelves and pegs, in which were placed 
fifty or sixty jackets of various modes. Every 
day he changed his fashion, and put on a diffe- 
rent one. He was a tall, dry looking fellow, and 
would give a good idea of Don Quixote. He at- 
tached more importance to the cut of a dragoon 
_ -or a hussar uniform, than was necessary for the 
salvation of a kingdom. At Jena, his army per- 
formed the finest and most shewy manceuyres pos- 
- sible, but I soon put a stop to their coglionerie, 
and taught them, that to fight, and to execute daz- 
zling manceuvres and wear splendid uniforms, 
were very different affairs. If,” added he, “ the 
French army had been commanded by a tailor, 
the King of Prussia would certainly have gained 
the day, from his superior knowledge in that art ; 
- but as victories depend more upon the skill of the 
general commanding the troops, than upon that 
of the tailor who makes their jackets, he conse- 
quently failed.” ; 


VOL. II. E 


50 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


_ The emperor then observed, that we allowed 
too much baggage, and too many women: to’ ae- 
company our armies. “Women, when they are 
bad,” said he, “are worse than inen, and more 
ready to commit crimes. The soft sex, when de- 
graded, falls lower than the other.. Women are. 
always much better, or much worse than men. 
Witness the fricoteuses de Paris, during the revo- 
lution. When F comthanded at the Col de Tende, 
a most mountainous and difficult country, to enter 
which the army was obliged to pass over ‘a tar 
row bridge, Ff had’ given directions that no wo- 
men should be allowed ‘to accompany it, as the 
service was a4 most difficult one, and required the 
troops to be continually on the alert. To inforce 
this order, I placed two captains on the bridge, 
with instructions, on pain of death, not to permit 
a woman to pass. I went to the bridge myself, 
to seé that my orders were complied with, where 
1 found a crowd of women assembled. As soon 
as they perceived me, they began to revile me, 
bawling out, ‘Oh, then, petit caporal, it is you 
wlio have given orders not to let us pass.’ I was 
then called petit caporal by the army. Some 
wiles further on, I was astonished to see a consi- 
derable number of wotien with the troops. f 
immediately ordered the two captains to be put in 
arrest, and brought beforé me, intending to have 
them tried immediately. They protested their 


A’ VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. at 


innocence, and asserted, that no woman had 
crossed the bridge. I caused some of those 
dames to be brought, when, to my astonishment, 
by their own confession, I found that they had 
thrown the provisions that had been provided 
for the support of the army out of some of the 
casks, concealed themselves. in them, ant passed 
over unperceived.” 

» Napoleon observed, that he did not esteem the 
English cavalry to be by any means equal to 


the infantry. The men, by some fault, were not 


able to stop the horses, and were liable to be 


cat to pieces, if, in the act of charging, it became 


necessary to halt and retreat. That the horses 
were accustomed to be fed too luxuriously, kept 


too warm, and from what he had learned, — 


neglected by the riders. 


‘I offered some explanations about the quantity 


of baggage allowed by Lord Wellington; which [ 
said did not’exceed a small portmanteau for each 
officer; that only five women to a hundred men, 
were allowed to embark for foreign service; and 


that new regulations had been adopted to prevent 


the horses of the cavalry from being kept too 
warm, or too highly pampered. Napoleon re- 
plied, that he had been informed by French offi- 
eers, that the baggage of one English officer in 
France, or in Belgium, was greater than that of 
tea repel. | 
E2 


J 


52- . A VOICE: FROM ST. HELENA. 


18th.— Major Fehrzen came to Longwood: 
Being asked, why he did not call upon the Ber- 
trands occasionally; he replied, that the gover- 
nor had signified his desire, that no communica- 
tion, beyond that of a common salutation, should 
take place between the officers of the 53d regiment 
and the persons detained in St. Helena. He ad- 
mitted that the dark and mysterious conduct pur- 
sued towards the French was of a nature likely 
to excite suspicion, but assured them, that in the 
53d regiment there were no assassins to be found. 

22nd.—Napoleon in his bath, and suffering from 
head-ach. Had some conversation about Mont- 
chenu, who, he said, would perfectly agree with 
the idea which the English had formerly held of 
the French, viz. that they. were a nation of dancing- 
masters; in which opinion they must have been 
strengthened during the revolution, by seeing ar- 
rive amongst them a set of vain triflers, who had 
been expelled their own country for their arro- 
gance and tyranny. ‘This idea,” added Napo- 
leon, “‘ was impressed so strongly upon the minds 
of the English, that when I sent Duroc as ambas- 
sador to Petersburg, Lord St. Helens, the English 
enyoy there, being curious to see what he was like, 
took an opportunity of observing him closely on 
his entrance into that capital; and on being after- — 
wards asked his opinion of him, replied, ‘ Ma fos, 
au moins il n'a pas Vair danseur;’ expressing there- 


A’ VOICE’ FROM ST. HELENA. 53 


by that: Duroc was the only Frenchman he had 
seen who had not the appearance of a dancing- 
master; which I can readily believe, as probably 
until that time he had seen no other Frenchmen 
than imbéciles like Montchenu, with whom Eng- 
land was overrun. Vraiment cest-trop fort, Ven- 
voyer une telle béte ict, to a settlement of a rival 
nation, in order to render his own: an object of 
_ contempt, and confirm the English in their old 
prejudices. Does not Montchenu,” said he, “ an- 
swer the idea you formerly entertained of the 
French nation?” 

After leaving the bath, Napoli elie about 
Ricite; and said, that the European nations would 
yet find that he had adopted the best possible 
policy at the time he had intended to re-establish 
the kingdom of Poland, which would be the only 
effectual means of stopping the increasing power 
of Russia. It was putting a barrier, a dyke to 
that formidable empire, which it was likely would 
yet overwhelm Europe. 1 donot think,” said he, 
“that I shall live to see it, but you may. You 
are in the flower of your age, and may expect to 
Jive thirty-five years longer. I think that you will 
see that the Russians will either invade and take 
India, or enter Europe with four hundred thou- 
_ sand Cossacs and other inhabitants of the deserts, 
and two hundred thousand real Russians. When 
Paul was so violent against you, he sent to me for 


¥ 


54 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


Mali to invade India. [I sent him one, with in- 
stractions ‘in detail.” (Here Napoleon shewed 
me on a map the routes, and the different points 
from wheuce the army was to have proceeded.) 
“From a port in the Caspian Sea he was to have 
marched on to India. Russia,” continued he, 
“mast either fall or aggrandize herself, and it is 
hatural to suppose that the latter will take place. 
By invading other countries, Russia has two 
points to gain,—an increase of civilization and 
polish, by rubbing against other powers,* the ac- 
quisition of money, and the rendering friends to 
herself the inhabitants of the deserts, with whom 
some years back she was at war. The Cossacs, 
Calmacks, and other barbarians, who have ac- 
companied the Russians into France, and other 
parts of Europe, having once ‘acquired a taste 
for the luxuries of the south, will carry back 'to 
their deserts the remembrance of places where 
they ‘had such fine women, fine living, and not 
only will not themselves be able to endure their 
own barbarous and sterile regions, ‘but will com- 
municate to their neighbours a desire to conquer 
these delicious countries. In all human proba- 
bility, Alexander will be obliged ‘either to take 
dudia from ‘you, in order to gain riches ‘and pro- 
vide ‘employment for them, and ‘thereby prevent 

wevolutivns in Russia ; ‘or ‘he will make an‘irrup- 


* The literal English of his words. 


A WOICE FROM ST. HELENA, 55 


tion into Europe, at the head of some hundred 
thousand of those barbarians ou thorseback, and 
two hundred thousand infantry, and carry every 
thing before him, What I say to you is con- 
firmed by the history of all ages, during which it 
has been invariably observed, that whenever those 
barbarians once got a taste of the south of Eu- 
rope, they always returned to attempt new con- 
quests and ravages, and have finally succeeded 
in making themselves masters of the country. It 
is natural to man to desire \to better his condition ; 
and those canaiille, when they contrast their own 
deserts with the fine provinces they haye left, will 
always have an itching after the latter, well know- 
ing also, that no nation will retaliate, or attempt to 
take their deserts from them. Those canaille,” 
continued he, “possess al] the requisites for con- 
quest. They are brave, active, patientof fatigue and 
bad living, poor, and desirous of enriching them- 
selves. I think, however, that all depends upon 
Poland. If Alexander succeeds jiu incorporating 
Poland with Russia, that is to say, in perfectly re- 
conciling the Poles to the Russian government, and 
not jmerely subduing the country, he has gained 
the greatest step towards subduing India. My 
opinion is, that he will attempt either the one or 
_ the,other ofthe projects I have mentioned, and I 

think the last to be most probable.” 
TL observed. that the distance was great, and that 


56 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


the Russians had not the money necessary for such 
a grand undertaking. ‘The distance is nothing,” re- 

plied the emperor ; “supplies can be easily carried 
upon camels, and the Cossacs will always insure 
a sufficiency of them. Money they will find when 
they arrive there. The hope of conquest would 
immediately unite armies of Cossacs and Calmucks 
without expense. Hold out to them the plunder 
of some rich cities as a lure, and thousands would 
flock to their banners. Europe,” continued he, 
“and England i in particular, ought to have pre- 
vented the union of Poland with Russia.” ° 

« A great object for England,” added Napoleon, 
“ought to be to keep Belgium always separate 
from France; as France having Belgium, might be 
said, in case of a war with England, to have pos- 
session of Hamburgh, &c. It would, however, 
have been better for England that Austria had it, 
than that it should be possessed by Helland, be- 
cause Austria is stronger; and when France arises 
from her present state of nothingness, Holland 
being too weak to stand alone, will always be at 
her feet.” 

“If I had succeeded in my expedition to Rus- 
sia,” added he, “I would have obliged Alexander 
to accede’ to the continental system against Eng- 
land; and thereby have compelled the latter to 
make peace. I would also have formed Poland 
into a separate and independent kingdom.” I 


iti 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 57 


asked what kind of a peace he would have given 
to us. “A very good one,” replied Napoleon. 
“T would only have insisted upon your disconti- 
naing your vexations at sea.” I asked if he would 
have left us Malta; to which he replied in the af- 
firmative, adding, that he was tired of war, and 
was as well adapted for the former as the latter ; 
that he would have employed himself in the im- 
proving and adorning of France, in the education 


of his son, and in writing his history. “ At least,” . 


said he, “the allied powers cannot take from me 
hereafter the great public works which | have ex- 
ecuted, the roads which [ made over the Alps, and 
the seas which [ have united. They cannot place 
their feet to improve where mine have not been 
before. They cannot take from me the code of 
laws which I formed, and which will go down to 
the latest posterity. Thank God, of these they 
cannot deprive me.’ 

I said that I had been seeking for the number 
of ships which had been seized by the English 
prior to the proclamation issued by him for the 
‘detention of the English in France, and could 
only discover that two chasse marées had been 
‘taken in Quiberon Bay. “Two chasse marées?” 
‘said Napoleon, ‘“‘why there was property to the 
amount of seventy millions, and I suppose above 
two hundred ships detained, before I issued the 
proclamation. But it is what England has al- 


58 A WOICE FROM s8T. HELENA. 


ways done. In the war of 1773, you did the 
same, and you gave asa reason, that you had al- 
aways done so. The great cause of dispute be- 
tween you and us was, that I would not allow 
you to.do what you liked at sea; or at least, if so, 
that I would actas it pleased me by land. Inshort, 
1. did not wish to receive laws from you, but ra- 
ther to give them. Perhaps in this I pushed mat- 
ters too far. Man is liable to err. When you 
‘blockaded France, [ blockaded England; and. it 
owas not a paper blockade, as 1 obliged you to 
send your merchandize round by the Baltic, and 
‘occupy a little island in the North Sea, in order 
do smuggle. You said that you would shut me 
out from the seas, and I said that I would shut 
‘you out from the land. You succeeded; but 
chad it not been for accidents, you would not. 
Your country is nothing the better for it, through 
the imbecility of your ministers, who have aggran- 
dized Russia instead of their native country.” _ 

I asked Napoleon again, as I was anxious to 
yput.the matter beyond a doubt, whether, if 'Tal- 
‘leyrand had delivered the Duc d’Enghien’s letter 
in time to him, he would have pardoned the 
writer? He.replied, “ It is probable that 1 might; 
for in it he made an offer of his services; besides, 
she was the best of the family. He behaved very 
bravely and with much dignity before the court- 
-anantial, and denied nothing. It is true that I, as 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 59 


well as the nation, was very desirous of making 
an example of one of the family; that was against 
him; bat still | think that I would have pardoned 
him.” 

. Tasked if he would have pardoned Pichegru? 
“ Pichegru,” said he, “had fallen into great con- 
tempt, and was not likely to do me much mischief. 
In remembrance of the conquest of Holland, it is 
possible that I might, on condition of banishment 
to America.” 

* If,” said he, “ Lord Castlereagh were to offer 
to place me again upon the throne of France on 
the same conditions that Louis fills it, I would 
prefer remaining where I am, There is no man 
more to be pitied than Louis. He is forced upon 
the nation as king, and instead of being allowed 
to ingratiate himself with the people, the allies 
oblige him to have recourse to measures which 
must increase their hatred instead of conciliating 
their affections. Royalty is degraded by the steps 
they have made him adopt. On de rend sé salle et 
méprisable, that it reflects upon the throne of Eng- 
dJand itself. In place of making him Masha 
on La couvert dordure.” 

.. “The French nation,” continued ,he, “ seal 


never willingly consent to receive the Bourbons 
as kings, because,the.allies wish it. They would 


desire me, because the allies do not; but putting 


me out of the question, the French are desirous to 


60 - A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


see the throne filled by one chosen by themselves, 
and for whom no enemies or foreign powers had 
interfered. Ask yourselves, you Englishmen, 
what your sentiments would be in a similar case? 
The wish of your ministers to re-establish despotic 
power and superstition in France, cannot be agree- 
able to the English. A free people, unless indeed 
a desire to humble and to injure prevails, cannot 
wish to see another nation enslaved. III treated 
as I have been, and deprived of every thing dear 
to me,” added he, “I prefer my sojourn on this 
execrable rock, to be seated on the throne of 
France like Louis, as I know that posterity will 
do me justice. Another year or two will prob- 
ably finish my career in this world, but what 
I have done will never perish. Twelve hundred 
years hence, my name will be mentioned with re- 
spect, while those of my oppressors will be un- 
known, or only known by being loaded with in- 
famy and opprobrium.” 

“I am inclined,” continued Napoleon, “ to 
doubt very much what has been said of Crom- 
well. It has been asserted that he always wore 
armour, and continually changed his abode, 
through fear of assassination. Now both these 
assertions have been made of me, and both 1 know 
to be false, as were most may those imputing the 
same to him.” 

«The conduct of your gonditnaent in attempting 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA: 61 


to put down liberty, and enslave the English, sur- 
_ prises me,” continued Napoleon; “ For Russia, 

Prussia, and Austria to do so, I wonder not, as 

they do not merit the name of liberal, or of free 

nations. In them, the will of the sovereign was 

always law, the slaves must obey; but that Eng- 
land should do so, surprises me; unless, as I 
said to you on a former occasion, political mo- 
tives, jealousy, and a wish to humble and lessen 
those who have enriched themselves by trade, pre- 
vail with your prince, and amongst your olig- 
archy.” 

23rd.*—A message sent for me to attend the 
governor at Plantation House. Found him in 
the library with Sir Thomas Reade. His excel- 
lency said, ‘ that the day before yesterday some 
newspapers of a later date than any of his own, 
had been received by Mr. Cole the postmaster, 
some of which were lent to me in direct violation 
of the act of parliament, which positively prohi- 
bited communication, verbal or written, with Ge- 
neral Bonaparte, or any of his family, or those 
about him, without his, (the governor's) know- 
ledge. That he therefore wished to know from 
myself, whether I had lent those papers, or any 
others to General Bonaparte?” I replied that T 
- had lent those and many others at various times 


ae am not positive that this conversation did not oecur on the 
22nd, as in some pages of my journal it is so dated. OF 


62 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA, 


to Napoleon, as I had been constantly in’ the ha: 
bit of lending papers to him, since had been on 
the island. That Sir George Cockburn had in 
more instances than one, given me newspapers to 
take to Longwood before having perused them 
himself. Sir Hudson Lowe replied, that it was 
a violation of the act of parliament. I replied, 
that I was not included in the act of parliament, 
as | had made an express stipulation that I should 
not be considered or treated as one of the French, 
and would immediately resign my situation, if I 
were required to hold it upon such terms. His 
excellency said, that “he desired me to understand, 
that for the future 1 was not to lend General Bo- 
naparte any newspaper, or be the bearer of any 
information—news or newspapers—to him, with- 
out having previously obtained his sanction.” I 
observed, that I felt it difficult how to act, for if, 
after the arrival of a ship, Napoleon asked me if 
there were any news? I could not possibly pre- 
tend ignorance. His excellency said, that “ as soon 
as a ship arrived, both Captain Poppleton and 
myself ought to be shut up in Longwood, until 
the whole of the information or news brought was 
made known to him, and then I could obtain from 
him whatever news was proper to be communi- 
cated to General Bonaparte.” I replied, that I 
would not remain an hour in my situation, sub- 
ject to such a restriction. . 


A VOICE FROM 8ST. HELENA. 63 


_ His excellency observed, that “some months, 
ago information of the greatest importance had been 
communicated by me to General Bonaparte, be- 
fore he, (the governor,) had himself known it, viz. 

that of the dissolution of the chamber of deputies 
in France; that I had myself told him, that I had 
informed General Bonaparte of it, and concluded 
by asking, if I had communicated this intelligence 
verbally, or by means of a newspaper, and if the 
paper had not been lent to me by Sir Pultney 
Malcolm?” 

T replied, that at such a distances of dere I 
could not recollect whether the: communication 
made by me had been verbal or by means of a 
newspaper; that most probably it had been both; 
and that [ did not recollect from whom I had re 
ceived the newspaper. His excellency said, that 
“a person possessed as I was of a memory so ex- 
traordinarily good, could not pretend want of re- 
collection,” and repeated the question. I answered, 
that trifles did not remain long impressed upon 
my memory. The governor observed it was sim 
gular 1 could not recollect that it had been lent 
by the admiral, and in a sneering way asked, “ if 
it was not a Scotch paper?” I answered that b 
never had seen a Scotch paper at Longwood: 
_ That Sir Pultney Malcolm often had’ selected 
twovor three papers of the oldest dates for me, and 
sent the recent ones to him (Sir Hudson). His 


64 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


excellency then demanded, “if the, papers lent by 
the admiral had been for myself, or if Sir Pultney 
knew that they would be submitted to General Bo- 
naparte for perusal.” I replied, ‘‘ For myself, and 
I do not know whether he is aware of the use I put 
them to or not.” Sir Hudson said, that ‘it was 
very extraordinary I could not tell if the admiral 
knew of it. That by the signature of his majesty’s 
ministers, nobody but himself had any right to 
communicate in any manner whatever with Gene- 
ral Bonaparte.” I observed that Sir George Cock- 
burn had never considered it necessary to keep 
back newspapers from Napoleon; that the only 
instructions he had given me on the subject were, 
that it would be better not to shew him any thing 
personally very offensive. Much more conver- 
sation took place, during which the governor often 
recurred to the Scotch paper. 

- 24th.—Found Napoleon in his. bed-room, af. 
flicted with head-ach. Recommended him to use 
cold: applications to his forehead and temples, 
which he immediately put in practice with consi- 
derable benefit. 

In the course of conversation sihvariastias he ob- 
served, that a great discordancy existed amongst 
the libels which had been published at his ex- 
pense. Some asserting that his lust had carried 
him to the length of having an incestuous correspon- 
dence with his sisters, &c. while others maintained 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 65 


impuissance equally forcibly. ‘* This last report,” 
continued he, “ was so prevalent, that when a 
marriage between me and a sister of the Emperor 
Alexander was in agitation, the empress, her mo- 
ther, said to Alexander, that she would not con- 
sent to sacrifice her daughter, and throw her into 
the arms of one who, ne peut rien faire; that if 
her daughter were married to me they would. be 
obliged to act as Gustavus had done. with his 
queen, which she could not reconcile with reli- 
gion. .Do you know,” added he, “that history 
about Gustavus?” I replied in, the negative. 
“ Why, Gustave était impuissant, and not having 
an heir to the throne, i fit. coucher un de. ses 
chambellans avec la reine, from which sprang that 
madman who resigned the crown a few years ago. 
In_ one of his fits of madness, that imbécile since 
confessed that the Swedes had acted with justice 
in deposing him, as he had no right to the crown. 
‘ My dear mother,’ said Alexander, ‘is it possible 
that you can believe these stories? I assure you 
that I should not wish you better fortune than to 
be sufficiently young, to be married to him,. and 
you would not long want an heir.’ Kourakin,” 
said he, “ told me this anecdote afterwards, which 
created great mirth at Paris.” 

_ Napoleon. then spoke about Madame de Stiel. 
« Madame de Stiel,” said he, “was a woman of 
considerable, talent and great. ambition ; hut so 
VOL. II. F 


V 


66 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


extremely intriguing and restless, as to give rise 
to the observation, that she would throw her 
friends into the sea, that at the moment of drown- 
ing she might have an opportunity of saving them. 
I was “obliged to banish her from court. At Ge- 
‘neva, she became very intimate with my brother 
Joseph, whom she gained by her conversation and 
writings. When I returned from Elba, she sent 
her son to be presented to me on purpose to ask 
payment of two millions, which her father Neckar 
had Jent out of his private property to Louis XVI. 
‘and to offer her services, provided fF complied 
‘with this request. As I knew what he wanted, 
and thought that I could not'grant ‘it without ill- 
treating others who were ina similar predicament, 
1 did not wish to see ‘him, and gave directions 
that he should not be ‘introduced. However, 
Joseph would not be denied, and brought him i in 
‘in, spite of this order, the “Attendants at the door 
‘not liking to refuse my brother, especially as he 
‘said that he would be answerable for the’ conse- 
quences, I received him very politel y, heard ‘his 
business, and replied, that I was very sorry it was 
hot i in my power to colnply with his request, as it 
‘was contrary to the laws, and would do an’ injus- 
tice to many others: Madame de Stiel was not 
“however contented with this. ‘She wrote a long 
‘letter to Fouché, in which she’ stated her claims, 
and that she wanted the money in order to portion 


> 


A NOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 67 


‘her daughter. in marriage to the Duc de Broglie, 
promising that if I complied with her- request, I 
might’ command ‘her and hérs; that she would be 
black and white for me. Fouché communicated 
this,.and advised me strongly to comply, urging 
‘that iti so critical a time she might be of consi- 
derable service. I answered, that! I sorniint — 
‘no bargains.” yafotive ath te 
Shortly after my return from the ebidanael of 
Italy,” continued he, “ I was accosted by Madame 
de Stiel in a large company, though at that time 
T avoided going out much in public. She) fol- 
lowed me every where, and stuck so close that)I 
could not shake lier off. At last she asked “me, 
‘who at this moment is a premitre femme du 
monde? intending to pay:a compliment to me, and 
expecting ‘that I \would return it: 1 looked at 
-her, and ¢oldly replied, ‘ she who ‘has borne the 
(greatest number of children,’ turned round, and 
left her gteatly confused and ‘abashéd. He con- 
eluded by observing, that he could not call:her 
‘a wieked,» woman, but ‘that she was a restless 
_ -uintrigante, rag of | considerable: talent and 
sinfluence” Bee ob 
o! “He then, tid npon the ‘bad state: of Eng- 
dnd, :and:said that he had made a calculation, and 
found t that it would require fifty years of an, unin- Vv 
— peace stoner Eogienitiy. pay off the 


68 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


national debt, a‘ circumstance which had never 
occurred, and never would. 

Saw Sir Hudson Lowe at Plantation House, 
with whom I had a conversation, chiefly upon sub- 
jects ‘connected with the admiral. Informed him 
that maccheroni formed an item of magnitude iu the 
expenditure of Longwood, as for the two pounds 
of that article, which they consumed daily, they 
were obliged to pay twenty-four shillings to Mr. 
Solomon. His excellency observed that there was 
plenty of it in the government store.* ' 

Cipriani in town making the customary oe 
chases of provisions. 

26th.—Napoleon ndiapooetl with ‘catarrh, in- 


-flammation and tumefaction of the right cheek and 
gums, with head-ach, caused probably by exposure 
- yesterday to the cold wind in’the garden. 


/27th.—Napoleon better. Right cheek,’ how- 
ever, is still tumefied. Had some conversation 


-with him about the ambassador. “ If,” said he, 
. a million of francs iad’ been given to the first 
» mandarin, every thing would have been settled, 


and it would not have been a reproach to the na- 
tion; as that embassy was not one which regarded 
the honour of the country. It was, and ought to 


be considered more as an affair of merchandize 


#* When was éent up a few days after, it was found to 
have been re cee, ca ae rai 


YY 


A VOICE FROM 8T. HELENA. 69 


than. as one immediately affecting the nation. It 
was in fact an embassy to China from the tea-mer- 
chants in England, and therefore advantages might 
with great honour be purchased. Besides, when 
you send ambassadors to those barbarians, you 
must: humour them and comply. with their cus- 
toms. They do not seek you. They never have 
sent ambassadors in return for yours, nor asked 
you to send any. Now great commercial advan- 
tages may be lost to England, and perhaps a war 
with China be the consequence. If I were an 
Englishman, I should esteem the man who ad- 
vised a war with China to be the greatest enemy 
to my country in existence. You would in the 
end be beaten, and ee a revolution in India 
would follow.” Ae 
Tn the course of a pwnte years,” added he; , 
“ Russia will have Constantinople, the greatest \/ 
«part of ‘Turkey, and all Greece. This I hold to 
be as certain as if it had already taken place. Al- _ 
most all the cajoling and flattering which Alexan- 
der practised towards me was to gain my consent 
to effect this object. I would not consent, fore- 
seeing that the equilibrium of Europe would be 
‘destroyed. In the natural course of things, in:a 
few years Turkey must fall to Russia. The 
greatest part of her population are Greeks, who 
you may say are Russians... The powers it would 
injure, and who could oppose it, are England, 


a 


70 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


France, Prussia and Austria, Now: as to: Aus- 


tria, it will! be very easy for Russia to: engage her 


assistance by giving her Servia, ‘and: other’ pro- 
vinces bordering upon the Austrian dominions, 
reaching near to Constantinople. The only hy- 
pothesis that France: and England «may ever be 
allied’ with sincerity willbe in order to prevent 
this. » But even; this ‘alliance would not. avail. 


France, England, and Prussia united cannot pre- 


vent it. Russia’and Austria can at-any time effect 


it.. Once mistress:of Constantinople, Russia gets 


all: the commerce of the Mediterranean, becomes 
a great naval power, and God knows’ what may 
happen. She quarrels with you, marches off to 
India an army of seventy thousand good soldiers, 
which to Russia is nothing, and a hundred thou- 
sand canaille, Cossaes. and others, and England 
loses India. Above'all the other powers, Russia 
is:the.most to be feared, especially by:you. » Her 
soldiers are braver than the Austrians, and shehas 
the means of raising as’ many as she»pleasés. In 
bravery, the French and English soldiers: are the 
only. ones. to be compared to them... All>this I 
foresaw. I see into futurity. farther’ than others, 
and. I wanted to establish a barrier against those 
barbarians by re-establishing the-kingdom of Po- 
Jand and putting Poniatowski at the head of Jit-as 
king; but yourémbéciles of ministers would not con- 
sent. ‘A hundred years-hence, I ‘shall be praised 


. 


A VOICE FROM ST, HELENA. 71. 


(encensé), and Europe, especially England, will la- 
ment that I did not succeed. When they see the 
finest countries in Europe overrun and a , prey to. 
those northern. barbarians, they will say, ‘ -Napo- 
leon was right,’ The Russians are beginning al- 
, YTeady with you; I see that they haye prohibited 
the introduction of your merchandize. England 
is falling. Even, Prussia prohibits your goods. 
What a change for England! Under the great, 
Chatham, you forbade the most powerful sove- 
reign in Europe, the Emperor of Germany, to. na-. 
vigate the Escaut, or to establish, an extensive. 
commerce at Ostend, this was barbarous and, 
unjust, but still you had the power to prevent 
Now Prussia shuts her. ports against. you, What 
a falling off! In my opinion the only thing which + fie 
can save England will be abstaining from med- 
dling i in continental affairs, and by withdrawing 
her army from the continent. Then you may in- 
sist upon whatever i is necessary to your interests, 
without fear of reprisals being made upon your 
army. You are superior in maritime force to all 
the world united ; ; and while you confine yourself 
to that. arm, you will always be powerful, and be 
dreaded. You haye the great advantage of de- 
earns: war when you lke, 8 and of carrying it on 


72 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


of those powers who disagree with you, and inter-’ 


rupt their commerce without their being able ma- 
terially to retaliate. By your present mode of 


proceeding, you forfeit all those advantages. Your _ 


most powerful arm is given up, and you send an 


army to the continent where you are. inferior to’ 
Bavaria in that species of force. You put me in’ 
mind of Francis the First, who had a formidable 


and beautiful artillery at the battle of Pavia. ‘But 
he placed his cavalry before it, and thus masked 
the battery which, could it have fired, would have 
insured him the victory. He was beaten, lost 


every thing, and made prisoner. So it is with 


you. You forsake your ships, which may be 
compared to Francis’s batteries, and throw forty 
thousand men on the continent, which Prussia, or 
any other power who chooses to prohibit your 
manufactures, will fall upon and cut to teri 
if you menace or make reprisals. 

- “So silly a treaty as that made by your minis- 
, ters for their own country,” continued the empe- 
ror, “was never known before. You give up 
every thing, and gain nothing. All the other 
powers gained acquisitions of country and mil- 
lions of souls, but you give up colonies. For ex- 
ample, you give up the isle of Bourbon to the 
French. -A more impolitic act you “could ‘not 
have committed. You’ ought ‘to endeavour’ to 
make the French forget the way to India, and all 


- 


- A VOICE FROM~ ST. HELENA. 73 


Indian policy, instead of placing them half way 
there.. Why did you give up Java? | Why Suri- 
nam, or Martinique, or the other French colo- 
nies?) To avoid doing so you had nothing°more 
to say than that you would retain them for thedive 
years the allied powers were to remain in France- 
Why not demand Hamburg for Hanover. Then 
you would have an entrepét for your manufactures. 
In treaties, an ambassador ought to take advantage 
of every thing for the benefit of his own country.” 
‘ Napoleon then said, that if I were asked any 
questions by the ambassador about a reception at 
Longwood, I should say, that he (Napoleon) was 
not on good terms with the governor, and could 
not think of receiving him with that person. That 
if he were desirous of being introduced, he would 
receive him presented by Count Bertrand or by 
the admiral. “I have no doubt,” added he, “that 
_ this governor will tell him that I am very much 
dissatisfied with him for doing his duty, and that 
{-am sulky. That having been so long used to 
command myself, I have not philosophy: enough 
to bear restraint. ‘That I have been treated very 
well, and have made a very bad return for it. If 
the’ ambassador asks you, you-may say that I 
have my own way of receiving persons who wish 
to 'be introduced to me. That I do not wish to 
affront him, far from whe but that T ene: see the 


governor.” Pr. a iy aisibi f] 


74 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


28th.— A servant, named William Hall, dis- 
missed from Longwood, After leayiug it, he un- 
derwent a,long interrogation at Plantation House 
by the governor relative to what he had seen and 
heard during his residence at Longwood, Py 

The Ocean, Experiment, and another ship, ar- 
rived from England, yesterday. 

Saw Sir Hudson Lowe, who. told me, with 
some embarrassment, that “his conduct had un- 
dergone a parliamentary investigation, and. that I 
should. see in the newspapers an account of a mo- 
tion relative to General Bonaparte, that had been 
made by Lord Holland in the House of Lords, 
but that; e had not as yet. received any official ac- 
count of itfrom Lord Bathurst, That the reports 
of his lordship’s: reply, as given in the newspapers, 
might be incorrect. or unfaithful, which I had 
better say, if General —— asked me any 
Gestion! sui 

'80th.— Napoleon sent for; aii m his, bedroom. to 
explain several passages in the Times newspaper, 


particularly in, the speech imputed to, Lord Ba- 


thurst in.reply to Lord Holland’s motion for the 
production, of papers relative to him, Having 


read. those parts, ,which stated that, every change | 


which bad taken place in; the situation of the 
complainant had been for his own benefit; that the 
reason for lessening his limits had, been, his tam, 
pering with soldiers or inhabitants; that he, had 


A VOICE’ FROM’ ST.’ HELENA. 75 


only received one letter; that the communication 

with officers:and inhabitants was unrestricted and: 
freé }that people had ‘gone to Longwood in dis- 
guise, &c. &e. “ Je suis bien aise,” said Napoleon, 

“de voir que le ministre Anglais ajustifié sa conduite 
atroce envers moi au parlement, d sa nation et & 
l Europe avec des mensonges ; triste ressource, qui ne 
dure pas long temps. 11 regne di bugie non durera 
per sempre,”* continued he, “I felt greatly asham- 
ed, and ready to sink into the earth, and stammered 
out the excuse that had ‘been suggested to me by 
Sir Hudson Lowe.” . “ It'is even worse,” said he, 
“in-the Morning Chronicle. In the Times, it ap- 
peared as if prepared for publication in a ministe- 
rial, office; but in the Chronicle, it looks as if | 
coming from; his own mouth. | have ordered 
Bertrand,” added he, ‘to make a faithful transla- 
tion of it, and to consult you about any phrase or 
delicacy of language ; of the sense of which he may 
be doubtful. Lord Bathurst,” continued he, “ has 
shewn: great, indelicacy in having shewn or told 
to; Montchenu in. London, the. contents of a let- 
ter written by Gourgaud to his: mother, which the 
old blockhead repeated to all the worldchere. -He 
asserts that I.only recewed. one: letter, that from 
my brother Joseph, which is false. He ought to 
act. like 1 a »confessor; ‘to hear..every. thing; ‘and 

aemaSaseige The reign of lies will not Tast for ever. 


76 A’ VOICE FROM‘ST. HELENA. 


divulge nothing; but it is of a piece: with the 
rest of his outrageous conduct. He wants to: de- 
base and to lower me. There are some: of: his 
pleasantries that I do not well comprehend. I 
shall; however, soon be able to give him a proper 
answer. If the governor oe — tell: me 
what I have said.” - 

Napoleon then iabdenipedl it was strange thie a 
sovereign, who by the Grace ofsGod, was born 
lord and master of so many millions, could not 
receive a sealed letter. ‘‘ How,” said he, “can 
complaints be made to the sovereign of a corrupt 
or vile minister if such be the rule. : In time® of 
war, if a minister betrays and:sells his country, 
how can it be known to the king, if the complaint 
must go through the hands of the persons com- 
plained of? At whose option it will be either to 
varnish and colour it over as best suits: his — 
or suppress it altogether.” © - 

» “ Santini,” continued he, “ has published a 
brochure full of trash. ‘There are some truths in 
it, but every thing is exaggerated. There was 
always — to exist on but not enclagtis for 
a aoos table.” 

31st. stato Napoleon a translation I had diate 
by his desire, of a letter which appeared in 
the Courier newspaper. After reading it» he ex- 
pressed his opinion that it had been written by 


A. VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 77 


the governor himself, and that the seeming incor- 
rectness of one part, was only to mask the real 
= . 
He then spoke at length about the state 2 of 
England, observed, that it was necessary not to 
yield too much to the people, or to allow them to 
think that it were conceded through fear. That 
perhaps the suspension of the habeas corpus act, 
might, for a short time, be a proper step, as, well 
as an army. kept up to intimidate the canaille. 
“ But,” said he, “I consider these to be only topi- 
cal applications, which if used without general re- 
medies, that should act upon the constitational 
‘disease, might prove repellent and dangerous, by 
driving the complaint to nobler parts. England 
may be likened unto:a patient requiring to have 
his system changed by a course of mercury. The 
only radical remedy is that which will affect the 
constitution, that is to say, relieve the misery 
which exists...This can only be effected by pro- 
‘curing a vent for your manufactures, and by reduc- 
tion of expenditure, ministers setting the example 
‘themselves, by giving up the sinecures, &c. This 
would contribute essentially to calm the public agi- 
‘tation. Had the ministers come forward like men, 
‘at the-opening of: the: session of parliament, and 
thrown. up their sinecures, this, with the example 
set:by the Prince Regent, would have quieted all 
tumults and complaints. The people, in expecta- 


"78 A VOICE’ FROM 8ST. HELENA. 


tion'of experiencing something radically beneficial 
from sé good a beginning, would have united,'and 
time would have been gained to adopt measures 
‘to relieve the general distress. An exclusive com- 
‘mercial treaty for twenty years with the Brazils 
‘and Spanish South: America might ‘still be de- 
‘manded with success. Or assist the colonies in 
‘rendering themselves independent, and you will 
‘have ‘all their commerce. Ai war with Spain, if 
‘she refused to agree to your demands, would divert 
~the attention of the public, employ soldiers ‘and 
Sailors, and a great portion of »manufacturers. 
‘All your miseries, I maintain ‘to be owing to 
‘the imbecility ‘and ignorance .of Lord »Castle- 
reagh, and’his inattention to the real prosperity of 
‘his own country. ‘Had Lords Grenville or Wel- 
lesley been ambassadors, I am ‘convinced. that 
‘the interests of England would have been -con- 
‘sulted. What would those Englishmen, who 
lived one hundred “years ‘ago, ‘say, .if Ahey!conld 
rise from their graves; be informed of your glori- 
‘ous ‘sticcesses, ‘east their eyes upon England, 
_ ‘witness her distress, atid be informed, that inthe 
treaty of|pédce ‘not’a single ‘article for ‘the benefit 
_ 6f England: had’ been stipulated! »that,on the con- 

‘trary, ‘you had given ‘up “coriquests ‘and .commer- 
dial ‘rights necessary to your -existence. -When 
‘Austria'gained ten millions of inhabitants, Russia 
“@ght,; ‘Prussia ten, Holland, ‘Bavaria, Sardinia, 


‘A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. ‘79 


‘and every other ‘power, obtained an increase of 
territory, why not England? who was the main 
organ of all the success. Tustead of establishing 
-a’number of independent maritime states, such as 
‘Hamburg, ‘Stralsund, Dantzic, Genoa, to serve 
‘as entrepéts, for your manufactures, with condi 
‘tions, either secret or otherwise, favourable to 
your commerce, you have basely given up’ Genoa 
‘to the King of Sardinia, and united Belgium to 
‘Holland. You have rendered yourselves hated 
‘by the Italians| and Belgians, ‘and: have ‘done ‘ir- 
-reparable injury to your trade. For, ‘although 
‘it is ‘a great point for you, that Belgium should’ be 
.separated from France, ‘it is a’ serious ‘disadvan- 
‘tage to you that she should be! united to Hol- 
‘land. Holland has no manufactories, and conse- 
‘quently would have’ become ‘a depét for yours, 
‘from whence a prodigious influx would be ‘kept 
‘up in‘ the continent. Now, however, that .Bel- 
~gium has been made a part of Holland ; ‘this last 
‘will naturally prefer. taking the manufactures of 
her subjects to those ofa stranger, and all» Bel- 


\gium may be called a manufacturing town. ‘Inde- - 


“pendent of this, in case’ of any future’ war with 
France, Holland must join the latter through’ fear 


“of losing the provinces of Belgium. Peopleval- _ 


“ways consider the danger that is: most imminent. 
“They will reason thus: ‘ Lf we declare against 
‘France, we lose, direetly, Belgium and our manu- 


80 A ‘VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


factures; if against England, what can, she do? 
Blockade. our ports, and effect disembarkations. 
We shall still have the commerce of the continent, 
and shall have time enough to prepare ourselves. 
We must, therefore, declare for France.’ It would 
haye been much better that you should have.given 
it to Austria, or why not have made it an indepen- 
dent country, and placed an English prince as_so- 
vereign? Now let us see the state you are actually 
in.,, You are nearly as effectually shut out from the 
continent, as when | reigned and promulgated the 
continental system. I ask you what peace. dic- 
tated by me, supposing that I had been victorious, 
could have been worse in its effects for England, 
than the one made by Lord Castlereagh, when 
she was triamphant.,. The hatred which your 
ministers bear to,.me, has precipitated, them into 
an abyss.’ You recollect I told you some, time 
ago, that I. thought, it. bad. policy to,leaye the 
English troops, in France, and make Lord.,Wel- 
lington »commander-in-chief., You ,now. see) the 
effectiof it... Prussia denies entrance to. your mer- 
chandize. What can you do? You can neither 


attempt, to: intimidate, or proceed to extremities, . 


-as Prussia could fall upon Lord Wellington and 
his.forty thousand men. While,you retain your 
.troops on the. continent, you will never be. inde- 
pendent.: Had you, after) the, grand | blow was 
given, when I was disposed of, withdrawn, your 


— 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 81 


troops from the continent, you would have been 


independent; you would not have drawn down 


the hatred and jealousy of the continental powers, 
especially at seeing Lord Welliugton comman- 
der-in-chief, and they never would have dared 
to shut their ports against you. You could then 
have sent your ships, blockaded their ports, and. 
have declared, ‘if you do not permit ny merchan- 
dize to enter, no other shall either go in or come 
out.’ They would soon have listened to reason. 
—Now, your hands are tied; your meddling in 
continental affairs, and trying to make yourselves 
a great military power, instead of attending to the 
sea and commerce, will yet be your ruin as a na- 
tion. You were greatly offended with me for having 
called you a nation of shopkeepers. Had I meant 
by this, that you were a nation of cowards, you 
would have had reason to be displeased; even 
though it were ridiculous and contrary to histori- 
cal facts; but no such thing was ever iutended. 
I meant that you were a nation of merchants, and 
that all your great riches, and your grand re 


‘sources arose from commerce, which is true. 


What else constitutes the riches of England. It 
is not extent of territory, or a numerous popula- 
tion. It is not mines of gold, silver, or diamonds. 
Moreover, to man of sense ought to be ashamed 
of being called a shopkeeper. But your prince 


_and your ministers appear to wish to change al- 


VOL. II. G 


82 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA: 


together Z'esprit of the English, and to render you: 
another nation; to make you ashamed of your 
shops and your trade, which have made you what 
you are, and to sigh ‘after nobility, titles, and. 
crosses ; in fact to assimilate you with the French. 
What other object can there be in all those ‘cor- 
dons, crosses, and honours, which are so profusely 
showered. You are ‘all ‘nobility now,. instead of 
the plain old Englishmen. You are ashamed of 
yourselves, and want to:be a nation of nobility 
and gentlemen* | Nothing isto be seen or heard of 
now in England, but ‘ Sir John,’ and ‘ my lady.’ 
All those things did very well with me in France, 
because they were conformable to the spirit of the 
nation, but believe me, it is contrary both to the 
spirit and the interest of England. . Stick to your 
ships, your commerce, and counting-houses, and 
leave cordons, crosses, and cavalry uniforms ‘to 
the continent, and you will prosper. Lord Castle- 
reagh himself was ashamed of your being called 
a nation of merehants, and frequently said in | 
France, that it was a mistaken idea to suppose 
that England depended upon commerce, or was 
indebted to it for her riches ; and added. that it 
was not by any means necessary’ to her. How I 
laughed when. I heard of this false pride. » He be- 
trayed his country at the peace Ido not mean 


"© ‘This he said in English, as well as the wend ‘marked with 
commas, which follow. L 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 83 


to say,” continued! he, laying his ‘hand: over his. 
heart, “ that he did it from here, but he betrayed 
it by heglecting its! interests. He was in fact the 
¢ommis of the allied sovereigns. | Perliaps he 
wanted to convince them that you were not a na- 
tion of merchants, by shewing ‘clearly that you 
would not make any advantageous bargain for 
yourselves; by magnanimously giving up every 
‘thing, that nations might ‘cry, ‘Oh! how nobly 
England ‘has behaved.’ Had he attended ‘to the 
interests of his own country, bad he stipulated for 
commercial treaties, for the independence of some 
maritime states and towns, for certain advantages 
to. be secured to England, to indemnify her for 
the waste of blood, and the enormous. sacrifices 
she had made, why then they might have said, 
«What a mercenary people, they are truly a nation 
of merchants; see what bargains they want to 
make:’ and Lord Castlereagh’ would not have 
been so well received in the drawing-rooms !” 

..“Palent: he may haye displayed in some in- 


stances,” continued the emperor, :“ and great per- — 


tinacity in accomplishing my downfal ; but. as to 
knowledge of, or attention to, the interests of his 
own country, he has manifested neither the one 
nor the other. Probably for’a thousdnd years, 
such ‘another opportunity of aggrandizing Eng- 
Jand will not occur. In the position of affairs, 
nothing could have been refused to you. But 
G2. 


8 A VOICE FROM 8ST. HELENA. 


now after such romantic and unparalleled suc- 
cesses ; after having been favoured by God and by 
accidents, in the manner you have been; after ef 
fecting impossibilities—I may say, effecting what 
the most sanguine mind ‘could never have enter- 
tained the most distant idea of, what has England 
gained ?—the cordons of the allied coversigus ed 
Lord Castlereagh !” 

““ When,” continued Napoleon,* “ a nation has 
been favoured so much as yours has been, and 
that misery exists in that nation, it must be owing 
to the imbecility of the ministers, The transition 
from war to peace cannot explain it. It is of too 
long a continuance. Had I been‘ the English’ mi- 
nister, or had the minister been possessed of com- 
mon sense, and not blinded by vanity, or one who 
would not have allowed himself to be duped ‘by 
the attentions of kings and emperors ; you would 
have been rich, the seas covered with your ships, 
and your manufacturers would have been wealthy 
and flourishing. Lord Castlereagh will be an ob- 
ject of poset” for the nation and wor he 
terity.” 

I told Napoleon that in one of the Couriers 
sent him by the governor, I had observed a speech 
attributed to Sir Francis ‘Burdett, accusing him 
of having established eight bdastiles in ‘France. 


* This conversation was communicated by me in 1817, ‘to 
official persons. 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 85 


Napoleon replied, “ In some respects it is true. 
L established a few prisons, but they were for cer- 
tain persons who were under sentence of death ; 
as I did not like to have the capital punish- 
ment executed, and could not send them to a 
Botany Bay, as you were masters of the sea and 
would have eho them, I was panes to keep. 
them in prisons.” 

“There were,” continued a some Vendean 
chiefs, Chouans, and others, who had been arrested 
for rebellion and other crimes, to whom the 
choice was given, either to be tried, or to remain: 
in prison as long as the government might think 
it necessary for the safety of the state. Those 
gaols were inspected twice a year by a committee 
* composed of a councillor of state, and two judges; 

each time offered the prisoners the choice of | 
continuing in prison as. they were, or of being 
brought to trial; but they always preferred the 
former. They were allowed. three francs a day 
for their subsistence. No abuses,” continued he, 
‘“‘ were known to be committed in the prisons; 
and in fact instead of being a crime as imputed to 
me in that paper, it was a mercy. But,” added 
he, “ where is the country without ela, Are 
there not some in Enghand?” 

.. June 2nd.—An orderly dragoon brought a letter, 
directing me to proceed immediately to Planta- 
tion House. Found his excellency in the library, 
who asked what were General Bonaparte remarks 


86 A, VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 

upon the discussions in. parliament. 1 repeated 
Napoleon’s expressions (as I had been desired to 
do). When] mentioned the remarks he had made 


upon the assertion imputed to Lord: Bathurst, 


that every change which had taken place had: 
been for the benefit of the complainant, also. his 
observations on the indelicacy of disclosing the 
contents of letters, Sir Hudson Lowe took up a 
number of the Times newspaper, and with a coun- 
tenance in which embarrassment was visible, obs 
served, “ that! Lord Bathurst was right in having 
asserted, that whatever alterations had been made, 
had been for the better, because his lordship 
must have alluded to the different manner: in 
which letters were now sent to Longwood; for in- 
stead of passing through the hands of inferior of- 
Jicers as before, they were now oe seen and read 
by himself (the governor),” » bi eis 

Some conversation then took: stesecaeladinanans 
the quantity of provisions allowed to Longwood. 
Sir Hudson Lowe maintained that the quantities 
. had been fixed by Count Montholon, and that he 
(Sir Hudson) ‘had never heard any complaints 
made of a deficiency, I explained to his excel- 
lency, that Count Montholon had not fixed the 
quantities, and also called“to his recollection that 
the scantiness of the allowance had been frequent- 
ly reported to him by the orderly officer, by the 
purveyor, by ‘myself, and also by the ‘niaitre 
d'hétel,. Sir Hudson Lowe: persisted that the 


s 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 87 


quantities had been specified by Count Montho- 
lon, and sent for Major Gorrequer to prove the 
correctness of his assertion, Major Gorrequer, 
however, did not support his excellency ; as he de- 
clared that the quantity of the wine only had been 
fixed by the count, and that of the remaining 
articles. by a scale framed by orders of his excel- 
lency himself. Notwithstanding a little confusion 
produced by this, Sir Hudson Lowe persisted, in 


‘asserting that he was ignorant of thé insufficiency 


ef the allowance of provisions; upon which I 
thought it necessary to enumerate the days .on 
which representations to that, effect had been made 
to him by me, by Mr. Balcombe, and by the 
maitre d’hétel; and also observed, that the assist- 
ance rendered by Sir Thomas Reade twice a 
week in procuring divers articles of eatables for 
Longwood, for which payment had been fre- 
quently «made in his presence by Cipriani, could 
not-have left Sir Thomas in ignorance respecting 
the wants of the French. The governor sneer- 
ingly observed, “ it appeared that I should be the 


_ best witness those people could call.” 


 4th.—An increase of twenty-eight pounds. daily 
in’ the meat furnished by government to Long- 
wood, ordered by Sir Hudson Lowe... . 

Independent of the usual guard, an officer has 
bins ‘stationed at Hut’s Gate since the arrival of 
the ships from England, with orders to inspect 


88 A VOICE FROM’ST. HELBNA. 


minutely every one ‘approgehing Rhaterelnene 
to allow “no suspicious persons” to pass. 
5th.—Count and Countess Montholon went to 
town shopping, and to pay a visit to Admiral 
and Lady Malcolm. The officer who accompa- 
nied them was ordered by the governor to “follow 
them into the admiral’s, and to pay attention ‘to 
their conversation.” Td | 
- 6th.—Saw Napoleon, who was in very goad 
spirits. ‘Told me that Count Montholon had been 
informed yesterday that a person who had seen 
the Grand Lama had just-arrived in the island; 
he therefore desired, that as scon as 1 went to 
- town, I should endeavour to get acquainted with 
him, and inquire what ceremonies had been made 
use of ; whether adoration was practised, and in- 
form myself of every possible particular. ‘‘ Iam,” 
said he, “‘ very curious to get some information 
about this Grand Lama. I have never read any 
accounts about him that I could rely upon, and 
sometimes have doubted of his existence.” 

Saw Sir Hudson Lowe in town, with whom I 
had some conversation relative to Napoleon’s ob- 
servations on Lord Bathurst's speech. His ex- 
cellency gave me a message to be delivered to 
him in reply. Mentioned to him that Napoleon 
had also remarked, when speaking of Lord B., 
“ Quasi tutti li ministri son bugiardi, Talleyrand,n'e 
il caporale, poi viene Castlereagh, poi Metternich, 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 89 


Hardenberg,* &c.” Informed him also that Napo- 
leon had desired me to endeavour to make myself 
acquainted with a gentleman lately arrived, who, 
it;was reported, had seen the Grand Lama. Sir 
Hudson appeared not to know that such a iene 
was in the island. | 

» Shortly afterwards | met Capt: Balston, of the 
Hon. Company’s sea-service, who reminded me of 
our former acquaintance. By him I was informed 
that a gentleman had arrived from China, with a 
letter of introduction to me from Mr. Urmston, of 
Macao, with whom I had been on terms of ‘inti- 
macy. On seeing the gentleman afterwards, I 
_ found that his name was Manning, and that he was 
the person of whom [ was in search. He wore a 
long black beard, and had travelled through the 
kingdom of Thibet as far as the frontiers of China. 
i told him that the emperor had expressed great 
curiosity about the Grand Lama, and that if he 
came up to Longwood, there was every probabi- 
lity that he would see him. Mr. Manning related 
that he had been a prisoner in France, and -had 
been released by Napoleon, and furnished with a 
passport, as soon as the emperor had learned that 
he was a person travelling for information, which 
might ultimately benefit society ; that as a mark 
of his gratitude for this favour, he had sent some 
little presents to the governor for him; with a re- 
‘Almost all ministers are liars. Talleyrand is their corporal, 
next come Castlereagh, Metternich, Hardenberg. 


90 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


quest that they might be forwarded, and that be 
would ask a pass for the purpose of endeavouring 
to see him. pics 
A report current in town, that a marble bust of 
young Napoleon. was brought out in the Baring, 
and that Sir Thomas Reade had recommended. the 
captain of the vessel to throw it.oyerboard and say 
nothing about it., ‘This, was asserted as a positive 
fact. to Cipriani and to’ me-by Capt. * *, who said 
that the captain of the Baring had confessed that 
insinuations to that effect had. been made to him. 
7th.—Mr. Manning, accompanied. by Captain 
Balston, came up to Count Bertrand’s, ,The for- 
mer told me that he had been direeted by! the, go- 
vernor, for what.reason he could not. divine, not 
to communicate to the Count that he had sent.a 
few presents to him, for Napoleon. ‘After they 
had_been about an-hour.at,Count Bertrand’s, Na- 
poleon came in, accompanied, by: General .Mon- 
tholon. He accosted Captain Balston first, and 
observed, ‘‘ Oh, I have seen you here before.”. He 
then asked Mr. Manning some questions... |Man- 
ning related that he had been in France in 1805, 
(I think), and was one of the persons who had been 
detained; that he had written a_ letter. to. him 
(Napoleon), stating that he was travelling for the 
benefit of the world at large, which had procured 
his release. ‘‘ What protection had you?” asked 
Napoleon, ‘“ Had you a letter from Sir Joseph 
‘Banks to me?” . Manning replied that he-had no 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA, 91 


protection whatever, nor letter from Sir Joseph 
Banks, nor had he any friends’ to: interest them- 
selves in his behalf; that he had merely written a 
letter to him stating his situation. “ Was it your 
simple letter which obtained your liberty” asked 
Napoleon... ‘* lt was my ‘simple letter,” replied 
Manning, “ that indaced you to grant it to me, for 
which Tam yery grateful, and beg to thank’ you.” 
Napoleon asked him where he had lived, &c., and 
looked at the map of the countries in the atlas of 
Las Cases, asking a variety of questions about 
the route he had taken; whether he had seen the 
Grand Lama; the manners, customs, &c. of the 
countries he had passed through. 

Manning gave him a clear and concise reply to 
every question, said that he had seen the Lama, 
whom. he described to be an intelligent boy of 
seven years old, and had performed the same cere- 
monies in his presence as were done by others 
who were admitted to it. Napoleon said, “ how 
did you escape being taken up as aspy?” “I 
hope,” replied Manning, “ that there is nothing in 
my countenance which would indicate my being a 
spy;” at which Napoleon laughed, and said, 
«How caine it to. pass, that you being profane 
a¢cording to their ideas, could gain admission’ to 
the presence of the Lama?’ Mr. Manning an- 
swered that he honoured and paid respect to all 
réligions, and thereby gained admission. Napo- 


PT 


92 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA, 


leon desired to know if he had passed for an- Eng: 
Jishman, and observed that the shape of his nose 
would indicate his being an European? The 
other replied that he had passed for a native of 
Calcutta, but he believed it was known that he 
was an Englishman; that there were some Traces 
of men there who had a similar formation of nose. 
Napoleon then observed with a smile, that ‘ Mes- 


_sieurs les voyageurs frequently told contes, and 


that the existence of the Grand Lama had been 
denied by several.” Manning answered, “ Je ne 
suis pas du nombre de ces voyageurs la; that truth 
was not falsehood,” at which Napoleon laughed, 
and asked many other questions. Manning re- 
lated, that the chief part of the revenues of the 
Grand Lama arose from presents made to him by 
the princes and others who believed in him; that 
temporally, however, he was subject to the. Chi- 
nese; that he never married, neither did his priests; 
that the body into which, according to their be- 
lief, the spirit passed, was discovered by signs 
known only to the priests. Napoleon then asked 
seyeral questions about the Chinese language, the 
late embassy, if the Russians had ever penetrated 
in that direction, and whether he intended to pub- 
lish an account of his, travels; after which he 
asked Balston some. questions about his ship, 
wished them a good morning, and departed. 


Gave Napoleon a copy of Santini’s pamphlet - ~ 


A VOICE FROM SI, HELENA. 935 


iv French, which he read, observing : as he went 
throagh it, according as the passages seemed to 
de rve it, “true,” “ partl y true,” * “4 fale, me “stuff, ? 
&e. Tae 

“He observed that they had spelled his name 
with an « (Buonaparte), and told me that when 
he first commanded the army of Italy, he’ had 
used the w in order to please the Italians} that, 
however, either the one or the other was equally 
proper; that after his return from Egypt he had 
dropped ‘it; that in fact the chiefs of the family 
and those who had been highest, had spelled their 
bames with the u, adding, “thata meaty affair 
had been made of so trifling a matter.” He con- 
cluded by remarking, that “Santini would have 
done better to have confined himself strictly to 
the truth, which would have had a much stronger 
effect on the public mind than the exaggerations 
he had promulgated, which indeed ‘appeared to 
have been framed by some person in England, 
as Santini was ‘incapable Of writing a + pamphlet 
himself.” — 
- 8th.—Mr. Cole (of the firm of Balcombe and 
Co., the purveyors,) came up to Longwood by 
order of Major Gorrequer, to acquaint General 
Montholon that the liveries of the servants must 
bé changed from green to blue, and ‘the quantity 
of gold lace upon the coats diminished, ’ 

 For'some time back complaints have been made 


94 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


by the maitre d’hétel of the badness of the mutton, 
of the fowls, the indifferent quality and want of 
variety of the vegetables, &c. Mr. Cole informed 
me that it was not their fault, as, by order of Sir 
Hudson Lowe, the purveyor was obliged to take 
the sheep from the company’s stock-yard.. That 
this day permission had been received to purchase 
from the farmers, restricting them however to a 
certain price; that the vegetables furnished: were 
received from the garden of the governor, : ; © 

9th.—An official complaint made in writing by 
Captain Poppleton to Major Gorrequer of the 
badness of the above-mentioned articles; also that 
_ Mr. Cole said that the vegetables. were: torsion 
from Plantation House garden. rm 
_ 10th.—Napoleon iin his bed-room. ; Told. him 
that I had received a Portsmouth paper, in which 
were contained extracts from a work’ published 
in London under his’ name.’ He'!looked over it, 
and observed that he bad not written\a,ling of it, 
though some parts resembled his. manner. "He 
added that there was a Scotchman, whose name 
he did not recollect, who had writtenseveral ar- 
ticles so much in his style, that when in France 
he had caused some of. his works to. ‘be’ translated 
into French, b adtoiliet 

‘I informed him that Colonel Masiranayi aid-de- 
camp to Murat, had published some anecdotes of 
his late master. “ What, does he say: of: tiie?” 


A VOICE FROM ST, HELENA. 95 


said. Napoleon. I replied, that I had not seen 

the book, but; had, been,informed by Sir, Thomas ,.}—“ « 
Reade,that be spoke ill of him; ..‘* Oh,” said he, 
laughing, “ that is nothing; Lam. well, accustomed 

tovit.. But what.does he say?” I answered, it 

was asserted that Murat had imputed the loss of 

the battle of Waterloo tothe cavalry not. having 

been properly employed, and had said,, that if he 
(Murat), had commanded: them, the French would 

. have gained the victory, ‘ It is very probable,” 
replied. Napoleon, ‘‘ I could not be every where ; 

and Murat, was) the best. cavalry,officer in the 
world... He would have. given more, impetuosity 

to the charge. .There, wanted but. very little, I 
assure you, to gain the day for me. Enfoncer 

deux, ou trois: bataillons,, and in all: probability 
‘Murat would have effected that, There were not I 
believe two such officers in the world as Murat for 
the cavalry, and Drouot for,the artillery,, Murat 
owas a most singular character... Four and, twenty 
years ago, when he was a captain, I'made him my 
aid-de-camp, and subsequently raised him to be 
what he was. He loved, I may rather say, adored 
ame. In, my presence he was as it were, struck 
-with awe, and ready,to, fall at my feet. . [acted 
‘wrong in having separated him from, me, \as with- 
out me, he was nothing., With me,-he was my 
‘right arm. Order.Murat to attack and: destroy 
four or five thousand men in. such a direction, it 


96 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


as done in a moment; but leave him to himself 
he was an imbécile without judgment. . I cannot 
conceive how so brave a man could be so déche. 
He was no where brave unless before the enemy. 
There he was probably the bravest man in the 
world. His boiling courage carried him into the 
midst of the enemy, couvert de pennes jusquau 
clocher, and glittering with gold. How he escaped 
is a miracle, being as he was, always a distin- 
guished mark, and fired at by every body. Even . 
the Cossacs admired him on account of his extra- 
ordinary bravery. Every day Murat was engaged 
in single combat with some of them, and never re- 
turned without his sabre dropping with the blood 
‘of those whom he had slain. He was a paladine, 
in fact a Don Quixote in the field; but take him 
into the cabinet, he was a poltroon without judg- 
ment or decision. Murat and Ney were the bravest 
men I ever witnessed. Murat, however, was a 
much nobler character than Ney. Murat was 
generous and open; Ney partook of the canaille. - 
Strange to say, however, Murat, though he loved 
me, did me more mischief than any other person: 
in the world. When I left Elba, I sent a messen- 
ger to acquaint him with what I had done. © In- 
mediately he must attack the Austrians. The 
messenger went upon his knees to prevent him ; 
but in vain. He thought me already. master of 
France, Belgium, and Holland, and that he must 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 97 


make his‘ peace, and not adhere to demi-merures\ 
Like a madman, he attacked the Austrians with 
his canaille, and ruined me. For at that time 
there was a negociation going on between Austria 
and me, stipulating that the former should remain 

’ neuter, which would have been finally concluded, 
and I should have reigned undisturbed. But as 
soon as Murat attacked the Austrians, the em- 
peror immediately conceived that he was acting 
by my directions, and indeed it will be difficult 
to make posterity believe to the contrary. Met- 
ternich said, ‘ Oh, the Emperor Napoleon is the 
same as ever. A man ofiron. The trip to Elba 
has not changed him. Nothing will ever alter 
him: all or nothing for him’ Austria joined the 
coalition, and I was lost. Murat was unconscious 
that my conduct was regulated by circumstances 
and adapted to them. He was like a man gazing 
at the scenes shifting at the opera, without ever 
thinking of the machinery behind, by which the 
whole is moved. . He never however thought that 
his secession in the first instance would have been 
so injurious to me, or he would not have joined 
the allies. He concluded that I should be obliged 
to-give up Italy and some ome countries, but 
never contemplated my total ruin.” 

Sir Hudson Lowe: at Longwood. Went: to 
Count: Bertrand’s, where he remained for some 
time. In the evening Napoleon sent for me, and 

VOL. 11. H 


98 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


said, that Sir Hudson Lowe had been to Bertrand, 
‘to inform him, that Lady Holland had. sent out 
some presents for Madame Bertrand's. children, 
two books for himself, and some other articles, 
.with a letter; that although it was contrary to the 
regulations, which prescribed that every thing 
should come through the secretary of state’s office, 
he would take it upon himself to send them. 
‘That Mr. Manning had also left some trifling pre- 
sents for him (Napoleon), which he. wished «to 
-know if he would accept. That there was, also 
another circumstance still more embarrassing, viz. 
that a sculptor at Leghorn had made a bad bust 
-of young Napoleon, and which he had forwarded 
to St. Helena by the Baring, in charge of a man 
mow very ill with a fever, with a letter, stating 
Abat the artist had been already satisfied, but that 
if he (Napoleon) wished to pay any more, one hun- 
dred guineas was the price, which he conceived to 
-be a large sum of money for a badly executed 
bust. That he wished to, be informed if Napo- 
leon would desire to have it. ‘* Bertrand,” con- 
tinued Napoleon, “replied, that doubtless the 
emperor would wish to see the statue of his son. 
He regretted it had not been forwarded at an earlier 
period. That it would be better to send jit that 
.very evening than detain it until to-morrow, and 
that the emperor would be happy to receive Mr. 
_Manning’s presents,” Bertrand says, that he looked 


| 
| 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 99 


disturbed, and appeared to attribute great merit to 
himself for having offered to send. up those things, 
because they had not passed through the hands of 
the secretary of state, and surprised that Bertrand 
was not abounding in thanks to him for his great 
goodness. I do not know what he meant by 
saying that a hundred guineas was. too much for 
the statue, or if he intended it as an insult, or as a 
reflection upon us. Surely no sum could be too 
much for a father to pay under similar circum- 
‘stances. ‘But this. man has no feeling.” 
-. Napoleon then asked me if I. knew any thing 
about the statue? I replied, that I had heard of 
it some days before. ‘‘ Why did you not tell me?” 
asked the emperor. I felt a litile confused, and 
answered, that 1 expected the governor would 
have sent it up. Napoleon said, “ I have known 
of it for several days. I intended, if it had not 
~been given, to have made such a complaint as 
would have caused every Englishman’s hair to 
stand on end with horror (alzare i capelli). I would 
have told a tale whieh would have made the 
‘mothers of England execrate him as a monster 
in buman shape. I have been informed that he 
has been deliberating about it, and also that his 
prime minister Reade ordered it to be broken. I 
‘suppose that he has been consulting with that 
Tittle major, who has pointed out to him that it 
would brand his name with ignominy for ever, or 
H 2 


100 A VOICE FROM 8ST. HELENA. 


that his wife has read him a lecture at night about 
the atrocity of such a proceeding. He has done 
enough however to dishonour his name by re- 
taining it so long,* and by nee allowing a doubt 
to exist of its being sent up.” ; 

The emperor afterwards spoke of his own 
family. ‘‘ My excellent mother,” said he, “is a 
woman of courage and of great talent, more of a 
masculine than a feminine nature, proud, and 
high minded.f She is capable of selling every 
thing even to her chemise for me. I allowed her 
a million a year, besides a palace, and giving her 
many presents. To the manner in which she 
.) formed me at an early age, I principally owe my 
 ieeaais elevation. My opinion is, that the 
future good or bad conduct of a child entirely 
depends upon the mother. She is very rich. 
Most of my family considered that I might die, 
that accidents’ might happen, and consequently 


* The bust had been in the island for fourteen days, = 
several of which it was at Plantation House. 

+ Madame Mére, when I had the honour of seeing “tee at 
Rome in 1819, was still the remains of a fine woman. Her 
manners were dignified and commanding, and her deportment 
such as one would expect to find in a queen, or in the mother of 
Napoleon. Her thoughts were divided between her God and her 
son. She saw but little company, and I believe that the Duke of 
Hamilton and myself were the only Britons, who had dined at 
her table. Her establishment w was splendid, though private and 
unostentatious. 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 101 


took. care to secure something. They have pe 
served a great part of their property. 
_ “ Josephine died worth about eighteen millions 
of francs. She was the greatest patroness of the 
fine arts that had been known in France for a se- 
ries of years. She had frequently little disputes 
with Denon, and even with myself, as she wanted 
to_procure fine statues and pictures for her own 
gallery, instead of the museum. Now, I always 
acted to please the people; and whenever I ob- 
tained a fine statue, or a valuable picture, I sent it 
s there for the benefit of the nation. Josephine was 
\* grace personified (la grazia in persona). Every 
thing she did was with a peculiar grace and deli- 
cacy. 1 never saw her act inelegantly during the 
whole time we lived together. She had grace 
even en se couchant. Her toilet was a perfect 
arsenal, and she effectually defended herself against 
the assaults of time.” 

** When the pope was in France,” added Na- 
poleon, “I allotted him a most superb palace, 
elegantly furnished at Fontainbleau, and one hun- 
dred thousand crowns a month for his expenses. 
—Fifteen carriages were kept for himself and 
the cardinals, though he never went out. He was 
a good man, but a fanatic. He was greatly an- 
noyed by the libels which had been published, 


102 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


See contradicted them publicly, stating, that ex- 
cept politically, he had been very well ‘treated: 
At one time,” continued the emperor, “I had it 
in contemplation to take away all his temporal 
power, to make him my almoner, and Paris _ 
capital of the Christian world.” tal 

11th.—This day was sent “up a beautiful white 
marble ‘bust of young Napoleon, about the natural 
size, and very well executed, with an inscription, 
Napoléon Francois Charles Joseph, &c., and deco- 
rated with ‘the grand cross of the legion of ‘ho- 
nour. The presents from Lady Holland and Mr. 
Manning accompanied ‘it. Napoleon did not eat 
any thing until eight o’clock in the evening. 

Some time afier the bust arrived, Napoleon 
sent for me. It was placed on the mantel-piece 
in the drawing-room. “ Look at that,” said’ Na- 
poleon, “look at that image. Barbarous and 
atrocious must the man be who would break 
such ‘an image as that. [ esteem the man capable 
of executing, or of ordering it, to be worse than 
him who administers poison'to another. For the | 
latter has some object to gain, but the former is 
instigated by nothing but ‘the blackest atrocity, 
(Vatrocita la piu nera) and is capable of commit- 
ting any ‘crime. That countenance would ‘melt 
the heart of the most ferocious wild beast. ‘The 
man who gave orders to break that image, ‘would _ 


/ A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 103 


plunge a knife into the heart of the original, if it 
were in his power.”* He gazed on the statue for 
several minutes with great satisfaction and. de- 
light; bis face covered with smiles, and strongly 
expressive of paternal love, and of the pride which 
he felt in being the father of so lovely a boy. 1 
watched his countenance narrowly, which I had 
an excellent opportunity of doing while he was 
contemplating attentively the beautiful, though in- 
animate features sculptured on the marble. No 
person who had witnessed this scene, could deny 
that Napoleon was animated by the tender affec- 
tions of a father, ohit 

Napoleon afterwards venitéd his feelings about 
the alleged order for the destruction of the bust. 
When I endeavoured to reason upon the uncer- 
tainty of the fact, and that it assuredly had not 
been given by the governor, he interrupted me 
by saying, ‘that it was in vain to attempt to 

“deny a known fact. The statue to me,” continued 
“he, was worth a million, though this governor 
contemptuously said that a hundred crime was 
a great price for it.”. 

Mr. Balcombe came up to Count Bertrand's 
about some money concerns, and had an inter- 
view afterwards with Napoleon, who walked with 
Count Bertrand and him to the end of the wood. 
“* This conversation was communicated by me to official per- 
sons shortly after it occurred. , 


104 A) VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


» 12th.—Saw Napoleon in his bath, in which le 
remained for four hours and a half. Gave him 
«© M. Macirone’s interesting facts respecting Joa- 
chim Murat.” With very little assistance from 
‘me, he read it through, making observations: 
occasionally. ‘< He will not be pitied,” said he, 
‘** because he was a traitor. He never mentioned 
to me that he was determined to defend his king- 
dom; neither had I ever told him that my inten- 
tions were to unite the kingdoms of Italy and 
Naples, take them from him, and make him con- 
stable of the empire. . I certainly made an instru- 
ment of him, to answer grand projects that I had 
in view for Italy, and intended, as I told you be- 
fore, to have dispossessed Murat of the crown of 
Naples; but the time was not come; and besides, 
I would have given him a suitable indemnification; 
_ His letter to Macirone was ridiculous, and his en- 
terprize that of a madman. _ What reason had he 
to complain of the Emperor of Austria, who had ~ 
behaved generously, and offered him an asylum, 
wherever he pleased, in his dominions, subject 
to no other restriction than that of not quit- 
ting it without permission; which was very ne- 
cessary. In the actual state of things, what more; 
in God’s name, could he desire. J, myself, never 
should have expected more in England. It was a 
generous act on the part of the Emperor of Aus- 
tria, and a return of good for evil, as Murat had 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 105 


endeavoured to deprive him of Italy; had pub- 
lished proclamations exciting insurrection amongst 
the Italians; attacked the emperor's troops like a 
blockhead without reason; and like a madman 
engaged without judgment in an expedition with- 
out a plan, and so badly arranged, that he never 
had been able to unite even his own guard. In 
his proclamations to the Italians, he never men- 
tioned my name, though he knew that ved adored 
me.” 

“ Ma bisogna dire la verité,” snistienedl he, 
‘« Murat had not acted in that double manner in 
his correspondence with me, of which he has been 
accused. The papers shewn to prove it, were 
falsified. At that time, Murat had no understand- 
ing with me. Lord Exmouth appears to have 
acted fairly and honourably, by candidly inform- 
ing him, that he would receive him on no other 
terms than as a prisoner of war. I do not be- 
lieve that he offered a thousand louis for the arres- 
tation of Murat. * * * who is described to be so 
good and honourable a character, is neither the one 
nor the other. He certainly is a person greatly 
attached to me, but he is a man of the police; you 
know,” added he, laughing, “ what kind of honour 
those gentry have. Belle armée, indeed,” repeated 
he, using an expression of contempt, alluding 
to Murat’s expression about the Neapolitan 
army. ‘You know what the Neapolitans are.— 


106 A VOICE FROM ST; HELENA. 


_ Murat undertook an expedition da coglione \al 

' fondo, to invade Naples with two hundred Corsi- 
cans at the time that it was occupied by twenty 
thousand Austrians, and terminated his life like a 
madman. He will be lamented by none, though 
at the same time he was far from being guilty of 
_ that double treachery imputed to him.” . 

» He then repeated the opinion he had formerly 
pine, had the cavalry been commanded by Murat 
at Waterloo; but added, that the nites considered 
him as.a traitor. j iy 

13th.—Saw Napoleon: in siden ditieeiatoans He 
was in very good spirits. Spoke about the possi- 
bility of his having remained in France after, the 
battle of Waterloo, in spite of the efforts of the al- 
lied powers. ‘My own opinion was,” said he, “that 
Icould not have done so, without having shed 

_ the blood of hundreds by the guillotine. 1 must 
have plunged my hands up to this in, blood;” 
stretching out one arm, and applying the finger of 
the other to his arm-pits. “ Had the legislative 
body displayed courage, [ might have succeeded, 
but they were frightened and divided, amongst 
each other; 4a Fayette was one of the chief 
causes of the success of the enemies of France. 
To have given me a chance, | must have had re- 
course to the most sanguinary measures. The 
conduct of the allies, in declariug that they waged 
war against me alone, hada great effect.. Had it 


A VOICE. FROM ST. HELENA. 107 


been ‘possible to have rendered me inseparable’ 
fromthe nation, no efforts of the allied powers 
would have succeeded; but as it was, by isolating 
me, and declaring that if I were once removed, all 
obstacles to a peace would cease; people became 
divided in their sentiments, and I determined to 
abdicate, and remove, as far as’ I was concerned; 
every difficulty. Had the French nation guessed 
at the intentions of the allies, or that they would 
have acted as they have done since, they would - 
have rallied round me. But they were overreached 
like the lambs in the fable, when the wolves de- 
clared they only waged war against the dogs; but 
the dogs once removed, mr fell oe and de- 
i the lambs.” 

“ There is a great difference of opinion, "conti, 
soil the emperor, * as to what I ought to have 
done. Many were of opinion that I ought to have 
fought to the last.. Others said, that fortune had 
abandoned me, that Waterloo had closed my 
career of arms for ever. My own opinion is, that 


‘L ought to have died at Waterloo ; perhaps a little 


earlier. Had I died at Moscow, I should proba- 
bly have had the reputation of the greatest con- 
queror ever known. But the smiles of fortune were 
at'an end. I experienced little but reverses after- 
wards; hitherto I had been unconquered. [ought 
to'have died at Waterloo, jaurais du mourir a 
Waterloo. But the misfortune is, that when a 


108 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


wan seeks the most for death, he cannot find it.’ 


Men were killed around mip,» before, behind, ites 
where, but no bullet for me.” 

A letter written to Sir Hudson Lowe by ‘la 
Bertrand, stating that he had not yet seen the 
captain of the vessel who had brought the bust, 
and expressing a wish that. he might be permitted 
to come to Longwood. 

_ Napoleon walked in the evening for some time 
with Count Montholon. 

18th.—A reply was returned by the, governor to 
Count Bertrand’s note, stating that the bust had 
not been brought out by the captain of the Bar- 
ing. A request was however again made by the 
Count, that he should be permitted to visit Long- 
wood, and on this day Captain Lamb, (a half-pay 
lieutenant of the navy,) came to see Count Ber- 
trand. On his return I asked him to favour me 
with some information about the bust. He stated, 
that it had been passed and sent on board from 
the custom-house, in charge of the gunner of his 
ship, an Italian, who formerly had been for many 
years in the British navy. That the day after his 
arrival at St. Helena, he had mentioned the cir- 
cumstance at a gentleman’s house, and had de- 
manded to-be informed of the best mode of trans- 
mitting it to Bonaparte, when he was directed to 
apply to Sir Thomas Reade, who had made nume- 
rous inquiries on the subject; amongst others, whe- 


A VOICE. FROM ST. HELENA. 109 


ther he had mentioned the circumstance to any 
person in the island, ‘to which he answered that 
he had related it; he had spoken of it at a din- 
ner party. He was then asked how he could 
think of bringing out such an article, it being con- 
trary to the instructions; and was finally desired 
by Sir Thomas Reade to say nothing about the 
matter, and also to request of those to whom he 
had mentioned it, to be equally silent. I observed 
that he must be aware of the report which was 
current in the island, relative to a recommendation 
said to have been made to him to throw it over- 
board, or break it into pieces, a contradiction of 
which I was anxious to hear from his own mouth. 
Captain Lamb replied, that he had heard the ré- 
port, which was very general, but not true, and 
professed that he. did not know ities it _— 
ae arisen from. 

On this gentleman’s return to town he alighted 
wie Sir Thomas Reade’s, and after a stay of a few 
minutes, proceeded to Plantation ss on one 
of the governor's horses. = * ‘Taismpeats 

19th —The Podargus ticiagphes the intelligence _ 
that the Conqueror, with the new admiral (Plam- 
pin,) had arrivedat the Cape. Letters received 
for Count Bertrand; General per oe we —_ 
‘hand. 

’ The admiral aie Lady Malcolm, with Major 
Boys of the marines, and Captain Jones, royal 


m0 A VOICE FROM, ST. HELENA. 


navy, paid.a visit to Napoleon, Colonel. Fagan, 
formerly judge advocate in India, had also an: in- 
terview with, him afterwards. The colonel, who 
spoke French like a native, said that Napoleon 
asked him many questions in his profession which 
puzzled him, and that he was eae shrewd 
in-his remarks. 

_Saw Napoleon in the evening. He. infaiteed 
me that he had seen Sir Pultney and. Lady Mal- 
colm, also Colonel Fagan. ‘*The admiral,” said he, 
“endeavoured to support the governor, and said 
that I might depend upon it he had sent my obser- 


‘vations on the restrictions to England., Indeed 


hesadvocated his conduct so much, that 1 told 
him he was like the rest of the English, érop 
égoiste, that not being myself an Englishman, 
their laws did not protect me, and I had no jus- 
tice to expect from them. E troppo Inglese* I 
told him that in Lord ’s speech there were 
three calumnies and ten lies, and that. intended 
to answer it. He tried to excuse him in the same 
manner the governor did, by stating that the re- 
port of the speech in the newspapers might not 
be correct, or faithful, and was not to be depended 
upon. He is mistaken, however. In France, even 
‘during the time of the revolutionary fury, the 
speeches were faithfully reported. I gave Miléd: 
one of my fine porcelain cups with a eas of 


* He is too much of an Englishman. 


———— 


A ‘VOICE FROM) ST. HELENA. 111 


Cleopatra’s needle upon it, asa mark of the 
esteem which I entertain for her, and the sense I 
have of her attentions. ‘She insisted upon taking 
itdown herself. I cannot,” added he, ‘ conceive 
how the admiral can think of attempting to excuse 
aman so unlike himself, and whose conduct [ 
know he cannot approve of in his heart.”., 
~ Napoleon then said that he had asked Colonel 
‘Fagan several questions about the military penal 
code. “ Of this subject,” added he, “1 am mas- 
ter, as I framed many of the laws myself. L-am 
a doctor of laws, and while the code Napoleon 
was forming I had repeated disputations and dis- 
cussions with the compilers of it, who were asto- 
nished at the knowledge which I possessed on the 
subject. I also originated many of the best of its 
laws. 

20¢h.—An order received by Gaptain Poppliton 
from Sir Hudson Lowe, to reply by signal, yes or 
no, whether Lady Malcolm, Major Boys, and Cap- 
tain Jones had been in with General ——— 
at the same time witlt the admiral. 

Learned that the governor appeared to be: very 
- uneasy that some observations made by Napoleon 
on Lord Bathurst's speech should have been re- 
peated. by a captain in the navy at Solomon's 
shop; which circumstance had been reported to 
him by Sir Thomas Reade immediately after. it 
occurred. ? 


112 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


An official report again made to his excellency 
by the orderly officer, of the quality of the bread 
supplied to Longwood, which was so bad,: that 
for a considerable time Napoleon had epee AR 
to make use of biscuit. 

_ 24th.—Napoleon’s cheek swelled and inflamed, 
chiefly caused by a carious tooth. © 

Some uneasiness manifested at Plantation Hiduse 
at the declaration made by two captains in the 
navy of their intentions towards Sir Thomas 
Reade, whom they accused of some practices of 
espionage towards them, which had not been war- 
ranted either by their situation or conduct. 

27th.—Lord Amherst arrived. 

28¢h.—Lord Amherst and suite, ictinipwitied 
by the governor, paid a visit to Count and Count- 
ess Bertrand. 
vernor were those of a aprrtn “When he came to 
Bertrand’s with the ambassador,” said he, “he 
merely introduced him as Lord Ambherst, and 
then, without sitting down or conversing for a 
moment like a gentleman, turned about and took 
his leave, like a gaoler or a turnkey who points 
out his prisoners to visitors, then turns the key, 
and leaves them together.. Having come up with 
Lord Amherst, he ought to have remained fora 
quarter of an hour and then left them.” 

July 3rd.—Adwiral Plampin, who ardivedst two 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 113 


orthree days ago in the Conqueror, came to Long- 
-wood with Captain Davie (his flag captain), and 
this secretary, Mr. Elliot. They were introduced 
to Napoleon by Sir Pultney Malcolm. 

Saw Napoleon afterwards, who remarked the 
singular difference of appearance between Sir 
Pultney Malcolm and his successor. ‘ Few men,” 
said he, ‘‘ have so prepossessing an exterior and 
manner as Malcolm; but the other reminds me 
of one of those drunken little Dutch schippers 
that Ihave seen in Holland, sitting at a table with 
a pipe in his mouth, a Dieatt, and a bottle of 
neva before him.” 

On my return from town, dined with the eni- 
peror éte-d-téte in his writing-room. He was in 
very good humour. Spoke about Sir Pultney and 
Lady Malcolm; asked if I had seen the new admi- 
ral; made some remarks on the late attacks made 
on the validity of his title to the crown. “ By the 
doctrines put forth by your government writers,” 
said he, “upon the subject of legitimacy, every 
throne in Europe would be shaken from its foun- 
dation. If I was not a legitimate sovereign, Wil- 
liam the Third was an usurper of the throne of 
England, as he was brought in chiefly by the aid 
of foreign bayonets. George the First was placed 
on the throne by a faction, composed of a few 
nobles ; I was called to that of France by the votes 
of nearly four millions of Frenchmen. In fact, 

VoL, II. I 


Pp - 


114 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


the calling of mean usurper is an absurdity which 
your ministers will in the end be obliged to aban- 
don. If my title to the crown of France was not 
legitimate, what is that of George the Third?” 

The dinner was served on a little round table. 
The emperor sat on the sofa, and 1 on a chair op- 
posite. J was very hungry, and did great justice 
to what was presented tome. Napoleon said that 
he should like to see me drunk, and ordered Mar- 
chand to bring a bottle of champaign, of which 
he took one glass himself and made me finish the 
rest, calling out in English several times, ‘“ Doe- 
tor, drink, drink.” 

4th.—Sir Pultney and Lady Malcolm sailed 
for England in the Newcastle frigate. 

Having mislaid some sheets of my journal, I 
have been under the necessity of chiefly trusting 
to my recollection for the following details. The 
manner in which Captain Lamb had related the 
history of the bust, had, instead of dissipating the 
suspicions at Longwood, rather convinced them 
that some such proposal or insinuation had been 
made. This was confirmed by the visit at. Long- 
wood of two of the captains of the lately arrived 
store-ships, both of whom saw Napoleon in the 
garden. One, whose name it is not now necessary 
to mention, assured Napoleon himself, and other 
residents of Longwood, that he had heard Cap- 
tain Lamb say, that some insinuations had: been 
made to him purporting that the bust should be 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 115 


thréwn overboard, the gunner who brought it con- 
fined to his ship, and nothing more said of the 
matter. Previous to this, 1 succeeded in per- 
suading Napoleon that the charge against Sir 
Thomas Reade was unfounded, and even obtained 
his permission to communicate his sentiments on 
the subject to that officer. The affair was buzzed 
about the island, and gained considerable credit. 
It was reported that the bust in question had 
been executed at Leghorn by orders of the em- 
press Marie Louise, and that she had sent it to her 
husband by the gunner, as a silent though con- 
vincing proof that her affections were unchanged, 
‘Napoleon, who was extremely partial to the em- 
press, was inclined to believe this supposition, 
which in itself was very probable, and made him 
very anxious to ascertain the truth. To accom- 
plish this object, he directed Count Bertrand to 
apply for permission to be granted to the gunner 
to come to Longwood. After some delays and 
assertions that the man was sick, during which 
time he was examined on oath at Plantation House 
and minutely searched, it was signified to Bertrand 
that leave was granted to him to go to Longwood. 
A few minutes after his arrival at Count Bertrand’s, 
and while speaking to the Countess, Captain Pop- 
pleton was sent into the room by the governor, 
with orders not to allow him to speak to any of 
the French, unless in his presence. This proceed- 
12 


116 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


ing, combined with the disingenuous manner in 
which it was executed, was considered as an in- 
sult, and the gunner was immediately directed to 
withdraw. ss 
Two or three days after Lord Amherst’s arrival, 
I had the hononr of dining in company with him 
at Plantation House. As I have lost the notes 
which I made on that occasion, I shall. merely 
state, to the best of my recollection, the purport 
of what I had the honour of explaining to his 
. lordship, viz. “that I conceived myself bound to | 
inform him, that if he went to Longwood with a 
view of seeing Napoleon, accompanied by the 
governor or by any of his staff, he would certainly 
meet with a refusal; which, though far from the 
intention of Napoleon, might by others be con- 
strued into an insult. That considered in any 
way, it was a circumstance désirable to be avoided. 
That if his lordship came up with only his own 
staff, I had little doubt but that he would be re- 
ceived, provided Napoleon should be sufficiently 
recovered from a swelling in his cheek, with whick 
he was then afflicted.” ; 
His lordship was pleased to thank me for the 
suggestion. ) 
At the end of June, or beginning of July, Coun 
Bertrand waited upon Lord Amherst, and in- 
formed him that Napoleon had been unwell for 
several days, and was at that moment suffering 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 117 


under a tooth-ach. He added, however, that if 
the emperor should be in a state to see visitors 
before his lordship’s departure, he would receive 
him. Accordingly, on the 2d or 3d his lordship 
proceeded to Longwood, accompanied by his 
suite, and by Captain Murray Maxwell, of his 
majesty’s late ship the Alceste. About half past 
three, the ambassador was introduced to Napoleon, 
with whom he remained alone for nearly two hours. 
Previous to leaving him, his lordship presented 
the members of his suite and Captain Maxwell, to 
each of whom Napoleon addressed some observa- 
tions. Mr. Ellis, the secretary, conversed with 
him about a quarter of an hour. He observed to 
Captain Maxwell, that he had taken a frigate of 
his off the island of Lissa, in the Adriatic, in 1811, 
which would amply compensate for the loss of the 
Alceste. To Mr. Griffiths, the chaplain, he also 
addressed several questions, and in a smiling way 
recommended him to his lordship’s patronage. 

- 9th—Some packages and cases containing a 
superb set of chessmen and table, two magnificent 
carved ivory work-baskets, anda set of ivory 
counters and box, all of Chinese manufacture, sent 
to Count Bertrand for Napoleon. They were ac- 
companied by a letter, stating that they had been 
made by order of the Hon. Mr. Elphinstone, for 
the purpose of being presented to the distinguished 
personage whose initials they bore, as a mark of 


118 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


- the gratitude entertained by the donor for the ex- 
traordinary humanity displayed by him, which 
was the means of saving the life of a beloved bro- 
ther.* A letter from Sir Hudson Lowe also came 
with them, stating, that when he had promised 
Count Bertrand a day or two before that they 
should be sent, he was little aware, that on open- 
ing them, he should have discovered something so 
objectionable, and which, according to the letter 
of his instructions, ought to prevent their being 
sent. | t 
It appeared that on the presents was engraved the 
letter NN, surmounted by a crown, which his ex- 
cellency esteemed to be highly objectionable and 
dangerous. Captain Heaviside, who had brought 
them from China, on having obtained permission 
to visit Longwood soon after his arrival, was or- 
dered by the governor to maintain a strict silence 
on the subject to all the French. 

In the evening, Napoleon looked at those ar- 
ticles, which he greatly admired, and signified 


* The day before the battle of Waterloo, Captain Elphinstone 
had been severely wounded, and made prisoner. His situation 
attracted the attention of Napoleon, who immediately ordered 
his surgeon to dress his wounds; and perceiving that he was 
faint from loss of blood, sent him a silver goblet full of wine from 
his own canteen. On the arrival of the Bellerophon in England, 
Lord Keith sent his grateful thanks to Napoleon for barre e saved 
his nephew’s life, 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 119 


his intention to send the work-baskets to the 
Empress Marie Louise, the box of counters to 
his mother, the chessmen and superb table to his 
son. 

11¢h.—Saw Napoleon in his writing-room, Had 
some conversation touching Ferdinand of Spain 
and the Baron Kolli. “ Kolli,” said he, “ was 
discovered by the police, by his always drinking 
a bottle of the best wine, which so ill corre- 
sponded with his dress and apparent poverty, that 
it excited a suspicion amongst some of the spies, 
and he was arrested, searched, and his papers 
taken from him. Amongst them was a letter 
from * * *, inviting him to escape, and promising 
every support. A police agent was then dressed 
up, instructed to represent Kolli, and sent with 
the papers taken from him to Ferdinand; who 
however would not attempt to effect his escape, 
although he had no suspicion of the deceit prac- 
tised upon him. While at Bayonne, I offered him 
permission"to return to Spain, informing him how- 
ever at the same time, that immediately on his 
arrival in his own country, I should declare war 
against him. Ferdinand refused to return, unless 
under my protection. No force or compulsion 
was employed to induce him to sign his abdica- 
tion; neither was he confined at the time, but had 
his friends, and as many of the nobles as he 
thought proper about him. Had he been treated 


120 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


like me in this island,’ continued he, “ the case 
would have been different; although if your Prince 
Regent were now to offer me a reception in Eng- 
land, provided I would resign the throne of France, 
acknowledge myself a prisoner of war, and sign a 
treaty as such, I would refase it, and prefer re- 
maining here, although I have already abdicated ; 
and therefore the first would be of no conse- 
quence. To sign a treaty, acknowledging that 
the injustice of the English parliament in detain- 
ing me as a prisoner of war in time of peace was 
lawful, I would never do. A treaty not to quit 
such part of England as might be allotted to me, 
nor to meddle with politics, and be subject to 
certain restrictions, I would gladly consent to; 
and moreover would desire to be naturalized as a 
British subject. The two grand objects of my 
policy were, first, to re-establish the kingdom of 
Poland as a barrier against the Russians, in order 
to save Europe from those barbarians of the north; 
and next, to expel the Bourbons from Spain, and 
establish a constitution which would have ren- 
dered the nation free, have driven away the inqui- 
sition, superstition, the friars, feodal rights, and 
immunities ; a constitution which would have ren- 
dered the first offices in the kingdom attainable 
to any person entitled to hold them by his abilities, 
without any distinction of birth being necessary, 
With the imbéctles who reigned, Spain was nearly 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 121 


useless,to me. Besides, I discovered that they 
had made a secret treaty to betray France. With 
an.active government, the great resources which 
Spain possesses would have been made’use of 
against England with such vigour, that you would 
have been forced to make a peace according to 
liberal maritime rights. Also I did not like to 
have a family of enemies so near to me, espécially 
after I had discovered this secret treaty. I was 
anxious to dispossess the Bourbons: they were 
so with me. It mattered little, whether my bro- 
ther or another family were placed on the throne, 
provided the Bourbons were removed ; in thirty 
or forty. years, the ties of relationship would sig- 
nify nothing, when the interests of a kingdom were 
under discussion.”’ 

. * Fox,” said he, “‘ was sincere and honest in 
his, intentions; had he lived, there would have 
been a peace, and England would now be con- 
tented and happy. Fox knew the true interests 
of your country. He was received with a sort of 
triumph in every city in France through which 
he passed. Fétes, and every honour the inhabi- 
tants could confer, were spontaneously offered, 
wherever he was known. It must have been a 
most gratifying sensation to him to be received 


‘jd such a manner by a country which had been 


so long hostile to his own, particularly when 
he saw that they were the genuine sentiments 


122 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


of the people. Pitt, probably, would have been 
murdered. I liked Fox, and loved to converse 
with him. There was a circumstance occurred,’ 
which ‘though accidental, must have been very 
flattering to him. As I paid him every attention, 
I gave orders that he should have free admission 
everywhere. One day he went with his family to 
see St. Cloud, in which there was a private cabi- 
net of mine, which had not been opened for some 
time, and was never shewn to strangers. By some 
accident Fox and his wife opened the door, and 
entered. There he saw the statues of a number 
of great men, chiefly patriots, such as Sidney, 
Hampden, Washington, Cicero, &c. Lord Chat- 
ham, and amongst the rest, his own, which was 
first recognised by his wife, who said, ‘ my dear, 
this is yours.’ This little incident, though trifling 
and accidental, gained him great honour, and 
spread directly through Paris. The fact was, that 
a considerable time before, I had determined upon 
forming a collection of statues of the greatest men, 
and the most distinguished for their virtues, of all 
nations. 1 did not admire them the less because 
they were enemies, and had actually procured 
busts of some of the greatest enemies of France, 
amongst others, that of Nelson. I was afterwards 
diverted from this intention by occurrences which 
did not allow me time to attend to the collecting 
of statues.” \ 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. ‘123 


* Tt would,” continued Napoleon, “ have been 
a very easy matter to have made the French and 
English good friends and love one another. The 
French always esteemed the “English for their na- 
tional qualities, and where esteem exists, love will 
soon follow, if proper measures be pursued. 
They are very nearly akin. I myself have done 
much mischief to England, and had it in contem- 
plation to do much more, if you continued the 
war; but I never ceased to esteem you. I| had 
then a much better opinion of you than I now 
have. I thought that there was much more li- 
berty, much more independence of spirit, and 
much more generosity in England than there is, 
or I never would have ventured upon the step 
I have taken.” 

J asked him his opinion of Lord Whitworth. 
“ Un homme habile, un intrigant,” said lie, “ as far 
as I could observe him. A man of address, un 
bel homme. Your ministers had no reason to 
complain of him, for he answered their pur- 
poses well. The account which was published 
by your ministers of his interview with me was 
plein de faussetés. No violence of manner or im- 
propriety of language was used by me. The am- 
bassadors could not conceal their surprise when 
they read such a mass of misrepresentation, and 
publicly pronounced it to be false. His wife, the 
Duchess of Dorset, was greatly dislikedsby the 


124 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


English at Paris.. They said publicly that she 
was sotte with pride. .There was much disagree- 
ment between her and many English ladies about 
presentation at court. She refused to introduce 
any who had not previously been presented at St. 
James's. Now there were many of your country- 
women who either could not or would not be pre- 
sented there, but were anxious to be presented to 
me, which was refused by her and her husband. 
This excited great ill-will towards them. Your 
charge d'affaires also, Mr. Merry, was disliked by 
the English for the same reason. Some of them 
threatened to horsewhip him publicly, and he 
made application to me to protect him against his 
own countrymen.” 

Napoleon then recounted the noble manner in 
which Fox had made known to him the proposal 
that had been made to assassinate him, which ge- 
nerous act he did not fail to compare with the 
treatment he now received, and with the attempts 
made upon his life by wretches paid by * * * * in 
1803, and landed in France in British men of war. 
He also mentioned that his assassination had been 
recommended in the English ministerial papers 
of the time as a meritorious action. He subse- 
quently related some anecdotes of General Wurm- 
ser. ‘* When | commanded at the siege of Man- 
tua,” said he, “‘ a short time before the surrender 
of that fortress, a German was taken endeavouring 


A» VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 125 


to effect an entrance into the town: The soldiers, 
suspecting him to be a spy, searched, but found 
nothing upon him. They then threatened him in 
French, which he did not understand. At last 
a. Frenchman, who spoke a little German, was 
brought, who threatened him with death in bad 
German if he did not immediately tell all he 
knew. He accompanied his menaces with violent 
gestures, drew out his sword, pointed it at his 
belly, and said that he would rip him up. The 
poor German, frightened, and. not understanding 
perfectly the broken jargon spoken by the French 
soldier, concluded, when he saw him point at his 
belly, that his secret was discovered, and cried 
out that there was no occasion to rip him up, 
for if they waited a few hours, they would have it 


_by the course of nature. This led to further in- 


quiries, when he confessed that he was the bearer 
of dispatches to Wurmser, which he had swal- 
lowed when he perceived himself in danger of 
being taken. He was immediately brought to my 
head-quarters and some physicians sent for. It 
was proposed to give him some purgative, but 
they said it would be better to wait the operation 
of nature. Accordingly he was locked up ina 
room, and two officers of the staff appointed to 
take charge of him, one of whom constantly re- 
mained with hing) In a few hours, the wished for 
article was found. It was rolled up in wax, and 


126 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


was not much bigger than a hazel nut. _When 
unrolled, it proved to be a despatch from the Em- 
peror Francis to Wurmser, written with his own 
hand, enjoining him to be of good heart, to ‘hold 
out a few days longer, and that he would be re- 
lieved by a large force which was coming in such 
a direction under the command of Alvinzi. Upon 
this, I immediately broke up with the greatest 
part of my troops, marched in the route indi- 
cated, met Alvinzi at the passage of the Po, to- 
tally defeated him, and returned again to the siege. 
Wurmser then sent out General * * * with propo- 


sals to treat for the evacuation of the fortress: He — 


stated, that though the army had provisions for 
four months, he was willing to surrender upon 
honourable terms.’ I signified to him that | was 
so well pleased with the noble manner in which 
Wurmser had defended the fortress, and enter- 
tained so high an opinion of him, that, although I 
knew he had not provisions for three days more, 
I was willing to grant him an honourable capitu- 
lation; in fact, that I would concede to Wurmser 
every thing he desired. He was greatly astonished 
at the good information I possessed of the deplor- 
able state of the troops, and still more with the 
good terms I offered, acquainted as I was with 
his distress. Wurmser was won by it, and ever 
afterwards entertained a great esteem and regard 
forme. After we had agreed upon the principal 


i 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 127 


conditions, I sent an officer into the town, who 
found that there was only one day’s provisions re- 
maining for the garrison. Previous to this, Wurm- 
ser used to call me un garcon. He was very old, 
brave as a lion, but so extremely deaf, that: he 
could not hear the balls whistling around him, 
He wanted me to enter Mantua after we had 
agreed upon the capitulation; but I considered 
that | was better where I was. Besides, I was 
obliged to march against the Pope's troops, who 
had made a treaty with me and afterwards broke 
it. Wurmser saved my life afterwards. When I 
got to Rimini, a messenger overtook me with a 
‘ letter from him, containing an account of a plan to 
poison me, and where it was to be put in execu- 
tion. It was to have been attempted at Rimini, 
and was framed by some of the canaglie of priests. 
It would in all probability have succeeded, had it 
not been for this information. Wurmser, like Fox, 
acted a noble part.” 

‘Napoleon then informed me of the baie 
which he made his army take when before Man- 
tua, in order to preserve their health in that 
sickly country. One of which was, burning large 
fires all night, and obliging the troops. to. keep 
by them. He spoke about the measures which 
he had caused to be taken at Jaffa. “‘ After the 
assault,” said he, “it was impossible to restore 
any kind of discipline until night. The infuriated 


128 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


soldiers rushed into the streets. in search of wo- 
men. You know what kind of people the Turks 
are. A few of them kept up a fire in the streets. 
The soldiers who desired nothing more, whenever 
a shot was discharged, cried out that they were 
fired upon. from certain houses, which they imme- 
diately broke open, and violated all the women 
they found. This, together with their having 
plundered pelisses and other articles of Turkish 
dress, many of which were infected, produced the 
. plague amongst them. : The following day I gave 
orders that every soldier should bring his plunder 
into the square, where all articles of apparel were 
burnt. But the disease had been already disse- 
minated. 1 caused the sick to be immediately 
sent to the hospitals, where those infected with 
the plague were separated from the rest. Fora 
short time, I succeeded in persuading the troops 
that it was only a fever with buboes, and not the 
plague; and in order to convince them of it, I 
went. publicly to the bed-side of a soldier who was 
infected, and handled him. This had a great 
effect in encouraging them, and even some of the 
surgeons who had abandoned them, became 
ashamed, and returned to their duties. In conse- 
quence of the advice of the medical officers, 1 
ordered that all the buboes which did not appear 
likely to suppurate should be opened. Previous to 
giving this order I had the experiment made upon. 


A VOICE FROM 8ST. HELENA. 129 


acertain number, and allowed an equal number of 
others to be treated in the usual manner, by which 
it was found that a much greater proportion of the 
oe retovered.” ; 
17th.—Saw Sir Hudson Lowe in town, who 
wae a very surly humour, and with whom 1 
had'a long conversation, part of it not of a very 


agreeable nature. He said, that it did not appear, 


“that [had made use of arguments of a nature 
sufficiently forcible to undeceive General Bona- 


parte ; and that he would write to Lord Batharst, 


that all the time General Bonaparte was so much 
in the dark respecting Ais character, no English- 
men excepting Admiral Malcolm and myself had 
access to him.” 

I informed his excellency, that Sir Pultney 
Malcolm had done every thing in his power ‘to 


‘conciliate and to reconcile matters, and had en- 


deavoured by all means to justify his (Sir Hud- 


son’s) conduct; so much so indeed, that Napoleon 


had expressed his discontent at it; as to myself, 
I had often exerted myself to the utmost of my 


ability to effect the same. I also suggested to his 


excellency, that if Captain Lamb were to make an 
affidavit of the falsity of the charge relative to the 


‘supposed proposal to break the bust, it would 


éffectually silence all calumniators. Sir Hudson 

Lowe replied, “ I judge from effects, sir. You do 

not appear to have testified sufficient indignation at 
VOL. 11. K 


‘ 


130 A VOICE FROM 8ST. HELENA. 


what General Bonaparte said and did. You ought 
to have told him, that he was guilty of a dirty ac- 
tion /” 3 
His excellency then said that Napoleon had 
caused Bertrand to write him the most imperti- 
nent letter,* which he had ever received, in reply 
to one written by him relative to the chess-men, 
and another equally so for the purpose of being 
given to the gunner of the Baring... That he was 
authorized to turn General Bertrand off the island 
for his impertinence. He then desired me to “ex- 
press to General Bonaparte, that he had sent for 
me in order to enquire who was the author of 
a report so false as that the gunner who had 
brought out the bust, had been prevented from 
going on shore and disposing of his goods, and 
had in consequence sustained losses, and suffered 
bad treatment. Also, that he was greatly astonish- 
ed at the tenor of the last letter he had received, 
more so indeed than at that of any that had been 
sent to him since he arrived on the island.” 
18th.—Saw Napoleon, to whom I conimuni- 
cated the message I had been ordered. to deliver 
by Sir Hudson Lowe. He replied, that the gun- 
ner had declared before Madame Bertrand, that 
he had been prevented from going on shore for se- 
veral days, and consequently had been obliged ‘to 
sell his little venture to Solomon, or some other 


* Appendix, No. [X., and that to the Gunner, No. X. 


A VOICE FROM. ST. HELENA. 131 


shop-keeper for half price,* and had thereby sus- 
tained a great loss. ‘‘ Ihave been informed, and I 
believe it,” continued the emperor, ‘“ that this bad 
treatment:was caused by his having brought out the 
bust, of my son, The governor has expressed 
astonishment at,\the tenor of the letters sent to 
him... I want nothing from his caprice.. He, says, 
that according to the réglemens établis en vigueur, 
he’was not authorized to send up those presents. 
Where are those regulations? I have never seen 
them. If they are new restrictions, let them be 
made known. But I never have heard that’ be- 
cause there was.a crown upon toys, they were to 
be prohibited. 1 protest against all restrictions 
which are not made. known. to me previous to 
their being put into execution. By Lord Bathurst's 
speech, he has no right to make any new, restric- 
tion, Could he not have said that he protested 
against the crown, and we should have laughed at 
it, But, no. He must give a.coup d'tpingle, re- 
fer to unknown restrictions, and, throw in insinua- 
tions that it is to his goodness. 1 amindebted for 
them. To.a dungeon, to chains upon his legs: 
and arms, T'womos'accostuma, ma al capriccio 
altrui, 2 impossibile, (a man, may accustom him; 
self, but to. another's caprice, it,is impossible,) I 

do not desire any, favour, from. him, Perhaps he 
requires that” I. should jwrite./bim, @ letter of 


* This was an unquestionable fact, and‘notorious on the island. 


K 2 


132 A VOICE FROM 8T. HELENA. 


thanks daily for the air which [ breathe. Un 
uomo che m’ammazza ogni giorno; and then de- 
sires that I should thank him for it. He reminds 
me of a German bourreau, who, while bastinadoing 
with all his might an unfortunate sufferer, cried 
after each blow, ‘ Pardon, Monsieur, pour la 
grande liberté que je prends.”” (Pardon, Sir, for 
the great liberty which I take.) 

I asked what answer I should return. “ Tell 
him,” said Napoleon, “ che to non son Coenen" a 
render nessun conto al mio boja.” 

After walking about for a moment, he said, 
with energy, ‘‘ Vous me faites des insinuations, 
cétoit la manitre dagir de tous les petits tyrans 
@’Italie. Cet homme paroit n'avoir d'autre but que 
de me tuer d coup @épingles, soit au morale, soit au 
physique. Un bourreau me tueroit d'un seul coup. 
Sa conduite est tortueuse et environnée de mystere. 
Le crime seul marche dans les ténébres. Un jour 
son prince et sa nation seront instruits et sa mé- 
chante conduite sera connue, et sil échappe a la 
justice dé la loi quil viole, il n’échappera pas a la 
justice de Vopinion de tous les hommes éclairés et 
sensibles. Il est un mandataire infidéle, il trompe 
son gouvernement, comme le montrent les vingt 
mensonges et les calomnies qui sont dans le discours 
de Lord ***, Sa conduite pour le buste de mon 

Jils, qui est prouvée, est horrible et digne'de tout ce 


quil a fait depuis un an.” 


OO — 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 133 


_ This answer he desired me to deliver, which, 
he observed, would convince him of the real opi- 
nion he entertained of his character. ) 

_ After this, he said, that he had informed Lord 
Amherst of the conduct pursued towards him. 
‘The ambassador,” said he, “declared that such 
were not the intentions of the bill; that the object 
of it was not to render worse, but to ameliorate 
my situation as a prisoner, and that he would not 
fail to make known the representations I had 
made to him, to the Prince Regent, to Lord Liver- 
pool, and to Lord Bathurst. He asked permis- 
sion to report what I said to the governor, I re- 
plied, certainly. I told him, that I had observed 
the governor taking him round the new road he 
had made, but that I supposed he had not com- 
municated to him, that I could neither quit it, nor 
go into any houses; and that a prohibition had 
formerly existed, which debarred me from speak- 
ing to such persons as | might meet. At this he 
was beaucoup frappé, (greatly struck). He- pro- 
posed that I should see the governor; I replied, 
‘ Neither your prince, nor both of your Houses of 
Parliament, can oblige me to see mon geolier et 
mon bourreau. Ce west pas Uhabit qui fait le geo- 
lier, c'est la maniére et les meurs.’ I told him that 
he had pushed matters to such an extremity, that 
in order to leave nothing in his power, I had con- 
fined myself to my room, expecting that he would 


134 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


surround the house with sentinels. 1 left nothing 
for him to effect, except violating my privacy, 
which he could not have done without walking 
over my corpse.* That | would not commit 
suicide, but would exult in being assassinated by 
an Englishman. Instead of drawing back, (récu- 
ler), it would be a consolation | to’ me in’ Pai last 
moments.” 

The emperor bbinchaded; by telling: me: that he 
had no objection that the governor should ‘be ac- 
quainted with every sentiment which he airy ‘ex- 
pressed to me. nd 

18¢4.|— Went to town in pursuance ot Sir Huda- 
son Lowe's directions, to whom I repeated the 
message which [ had been ordered to: deliver. 
His excellency commenced his reply by denying 
that he had ordered me to say, “that ‘he, the go- 
vernor, was surprised at the tenor of the two last 
notes he had received, and that he had called out 
to me, on leaving the room, to repeat the former 
only; he then said, darting a furious look:at me, 
‘«‘ General Bonaparte’s expressions convince me, 


* The emperor was so firmly impressed with the idea that an 
attempt would be made to forcibly intrude on his privacy, ‘that 
froma short time after the departure of SirGeorge Cockburn, he 
always kept four or five pair of loaded pistols,and some'swords in 
his apartments, with which he was determiried to dispatch the 
first who entered against his will. 

+ In some of the pages of my journal, this conversation is dated 
on the 19th. 


rs: 


A+ VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 135 


sir, more and more, that means have not been 
taken, to. justify my character to him. Tell 
him,” continued he not in the most moderate tone 
of voice, ‘ that to shew I am not afraid to send 
any thing home, I shall send what he has stated to 
ministers.” 

«He then demanded me to communicate any 
thing else I was charged with. When I came to 
that; part in which Napoleon (describing what he 
had related to Lord Amherst), had said, “ but 
I suppose he did not tell you that I was not per 
mitted to leave the road ;” his excellency, whose 
appearance I shall not attempt to describe, started 
up, and with a degree of violence which consider- 
ably impeded his utterance, exclaimed, “ "Tis false! 
’Tis false! 1 did tell him.” When he had reeo- 
vered a little his powers of speech, he reproached 
me, ina violent manner, with not having contra- 
dicted the assertion, also with having manifested 
little warmth in his defence. After he had ex- 
pended some portion of his wrath, I observed that 
I had attempted his defence to the best of my 
abilities, but that I did not think he ought to be 
much surprised at Napoleon’s not being upon 
good terms with him, when he considered what 
material alterations had taken place in his situa- 
tion since his arrival, all of which tended to render 
it-more unpleasant. A long discussion now fol- 
lowed, during which I recounted to his excellency 


Ll 


136. A VOICE FROM ST. HELPNA.. 


some of his own restrictions; amongst others, that 
one in which he prohibited Napoleon from speak-! 
ing; at which he again became very angry, and ‘in- 
sisted that it was not a prohibition, i¢ was only a 
request ; that it was not his fault, if General Bona- 
parte did not choose to ride out. I took the liberty, 
then, of asking the following question. “ Place 
yourself, sir, in Napoleon’s situation, would ‘you! 
have availed yourself of the permission to ride 
out, coupled with. the restrictions imposed upon. 
him?” His excellency refused to reply to. this 
question, which he pronounced to bean insult to: 
him, as governor and representative of his ma- 
jesty. He then desired me to give my’ opinion: 


respecting Lord Bathurst's speech. 1 pointed: 


out, that many of his lordship’s positions were at 
variance with the truth. After hearing my opi- 
nion, his excellency expressed much anger at “ my. 
presuming to speak so freely of a speech made by. 
one of his majesty’s secretaries of state; that I ap- 
peared to be an advocate for the French, and that 
nobody else in the island held similar opinions, or 
would dare to express them, &e.” He concluded: 
by telling me, that “1 was not permitted for the 


future to hold any conversation with General Bo- _ 


naparte, unless upon professional subjects, and: 
ordering me to come to town every Monday and: 
Thursday, in order to report to: him General Bo- 
naparte’s health and his thabits.” 


. 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 137 


' 21st.—Had another conversation with Sir Hud- 
son Lowe, of a nature nearly similar to that of 
yesterday. A long and very disagreeable discus- 
sion took place, with which I shall not fatigue the 
reader, further than by stating, that I requested of 
him to remove me from my situation. 

24th.— Went to town, according to Sir Hudson 
Lowe’s orders. His excellency made me un- 
dergo an interrogation before Sir Thomas Reade 
and Major Gorrequer, during which he again ex- 
pressed much anger, because my sentiments did 
not accord with his own. 

Finding that Sir Hudson Lowe made me in a 
manner responsible for all Napoleon’s actions and 
expressions, and took every opportunity of vent- 
ing upon me all the ill-humour he could not :per- 
sonally discharge upon his prisoner, and perceiv- 
ing that al] hopes of accommodation between the 
parties had vanished when Admiral Malcolm de- 
parted, and that all my efforts to ameliorate the 
situation of the captive were fruitless, [ determined 
' to confine myself as much as possible, to my me- 
dical duties, and to avoid all unnecessary commu- 
nication with a man, who could avail himself of 
his irresponsible situation, as a means of insulting 
an inferior officer. 

August 2nd— Went to report Napoleon’s health 
as usual. 

Saw Napoleon on my return, who observed 


138 A’ VOICE FROM ST. HELENA, 


that be had seen in the papers some extracts from 
a work written by the duke of Rovigo, detailing 
several circumstances relative to Pichegru, Wright, 
&ec. He lamented the death of Réal,*/and.re- 
marked that Savary and Réal: were the persons, 
especially Réal, (at that, time the duke of Ro- 
vigo was not in a situation to enable him to know 
personally the circumstances relative: to. those 
twvo,) who frem their employments knew the names 
of the gaolers, turnkeys, gendarmes, and others, 
and could say, ‘ such a man.was present, let him 
be examined. Perhaps he.is now iw the.service 
of the:king.’ In the exalted «situation which I 
occupied, I could know nothing of those minute 
details: Savary,” added he, “ relates, a, circum- 
stance which is perfectly true, and appears to have 
preserved some order that I. wrote on: the occasion, 
as /well.as recollected some ‘of my expressions. 
didnot like to. have it publicly mentioned, as it 
deeply implicated so near a relation to my son. I 
did: not wish to have it known, that one so nearly 
allied s-by blood: to him, could :be capable of pro- 
posing so ‘atrocious an act as that made by Caro- 
line to:me. -1t was to,make:;a second Sicilian 
Vespers; to massacre all. the English army, and 
the English i in Sicily, which she..offered to effect, 

* Réal was grand judge at the time alluded to, and his death 


had been reported in the last papers that mye at St. — 
which was:afterwards contradicted. : 


A ‘VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 139 


provided I would support and afford her assist- 
ance’after the deed was done. I threw the agent 
who was the bearer of the proposal into prison, 
where he remained until the revolution which sent 
me to Elba. He must have been found amongst 
others in the prisons that were allotted for state 
criminals.* It» was my intention, whenever ‘I 
made a peace with England, to have sent him over 
to your ministers for examination.” 

10¢h.—Had some conversation with Napoleon 
upon a report contained in one of the papers ‘re- 
lating to his removal to Malta, to-which ‘he’ did 
not give any credit, observing that he should create 
less'alarm in’ England than in Malta. ' He>re- 
marked upon the impolicy of the governor, in hay- 
ing by his’ treatment rendered’ him,’ (Napoleon,) 
an object of sympathy to Europe. The greatest 
indignation,” continued’ he, “ will be excited “by 
it.. ‘Nothing could have happened’ to lessen the 
English'so much iu the estimation of other nations. 
Jt will confirm them in the’ opinions of your go- 
vernment; ‘which the emigrants who returned 'from 
England have disseminated. They returned filled 
with ‘hatred’ against your ministers, whom’ they 

* Tt is a singular circumstance that the wretch who was thrown 
into prison for having ‘been the bearer of a confidential letter 
and message from Queen Caroline, containing a’ proposal to 
massacre the whole of the English army in Sicily, should have 


been, subsequently released by the successes of that very army 
whose destruction he had contemplated and proposed. 


140 A VOICE FROM 8ST. HELENA. 


accused of having acted in the most parsiinonious 
manner, and descending to: the most minute and 
unworthy details. That they certainly furnished 
them with money, but so barely as merely to keep 
them from starvation. That they should have 
been truly wretched, had it not been for the gene- 
rosity which they experienced from some private 
individuals, many of whom they allowed to pos- 
sess great liberality.” 

“ The Emperors of Austria, Russia, and the 
King of Prussia,” added he, “ have’ all three told 
me that I was much mistaken in believing that 
they had received such large subsidies from Eng- 
land. They alleged that they had never actually 
obtained more than one half of the sums which 
they were nominally supposed to have received, 
through the deductions made for freightage, pound- _ 
age, and numbers of other charges, and that fre- 
quently a large portion was paid in merchandize. 
Those sovereigns complained greatly of the con- 
duct-of your ministers, and J am inclined to believe - 
with some reason. Here, through a mistaken and 
scandalous parsimony, they have counteracted 
their own views, which were, that as little as pos- 
sible should be said of me, that I should be for- 
gotten. But their ill treatment, and that of this 
man, has made all Europe speak of me. He for- 
merly thought that nothing which passed here 
would be known in Europe. He might as well 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 141 


have attempted to obscure the light of the sun 
with his hat. There are still millions in the world 
who are interested for me. Had your ministers 
acted wisely, they would have given a carte blanche 
for this house. ‘This: would have been making 
the best of a bad business, silenced all complaints 
and attempts made for me, and in the end, with 
such men as Cockburn or Malcolm, would not 
have cost more than 15 or 16,0007. a year. But 
this * * * * c'est un homme qui a les maniéres igno- 
bles, Vesprit astucieux et le coeur méchant. Cock- 
burn au moins avait la marche droite et sincere. 
C'ttait un homme, un Anglais, mais, mon Dieu! 
cet homme-ci, la nature la fait pour un mauvais 
bourreau. That under-secretary doubtless said 
to Lord B. ‘ J’ai trouvé votre homme.” TI have 
little doubt but *** intentions at first were by a 
series of ill treatment to force away every French- 
man from about me, and to induce me to commit 
suicide, or to have me altogether at his disposal. 
The force of public ‘opitios has made them change 
a little afterwards.” 

«“ Ifthe Emperors of Austria and Russia,” con- 
tinued Napoleon, “ were to make me offers of 
whatever money I pleased, I would not accept of 
it. Jai eu la sottise, to put myself in John Bull's 
hands, and I must swallow whatever ‘pill may be 
prepared for me.” 

“In reply to an observation of’ incredulity ex- 


142 A VOICE, FROM STs HELENA. 


pressed: by, me as to the correctness of his;suppo- 
sition, of the probable intentions of those who sent 
him to St. Helena, he observed, ‘‘ Doctor, a man 
must be worse than a blockhead who does not 
perceive that I was sent here to be ** ******, 
either by the natural effects of ill treatment, com- 
bined with the badness of the climate, or by the 
probability of my being induced toigomintt wvicidee 
as ] have said, or by ***.. Losshs 

_“ Were I in England,” added. Hepobtis 4 ss 1 
would receive but few visitors, and never speak - 
upon political sybjects; here I do, because Lam 
here and am ill treated. To. live quietly, to enjoy 
occasionally the company of some savans, take a 
ride now and then, reading and finishing my his- 
tory, and educating my son, would: form my oc- 
cupations, Here the want of books greatly aptgnds 
the advance of my works.” 

He informed me that the gunna: He sahiain 
swers to the letter which had been written abopt 
the Chinese articles and to the gunner; but that 
he had ordered Bertrand not to bring» them to 
him until he asked for them. 

Saw his reply to Lord Bathurst's epereh,/ com- 
mencing in the following manner: ‘ Le dij. du 
parlement anglais, n'est ni une loi, ni un jugement ;” 
and proceeding to compare it with the. proscrip- 
tions of Sylla and Marius, “‘ aussi juste, aussi né- 
cessaire, mats plus barbare;” that Sylla and Marius 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 143 


issued their decrees “‘ avec la pointe encore sanglante 
de leurs épées ;” but that of the English parliament 
was issued in time,of peace, and sanctioned by 
the sceptre of a great. nation. 

§1th.—Told Sir Hudson Lowe again nd 
mentioned it to him before about a fortnight ago,) 
that Napoleon wished to have the garden freed 
from an alkalescent and fetid weed, (spurge,) with 
which it was overrun at present, aud desired that 
it should be converted into grass, or sown with 
oats or barley, as it, was useless;at present. That 
he wished to have something green to look at out 
of his window, and to see something growing about 
him. _ That if it were not done within a fortnight, 
the season would be over. His excellency replied, 
that he would go to Longwood in a day or two. 

_ 14th:—Went yesterday to Plantation House, in 
consequence of an order from the governor that, I 
should go there on, Tuesdays and Saturdays, in- 
stead.of Mondays and Thursdays in town. The 
governor, after having asked some questions; 
said, that I had on a former occasion mentioned 
that General Bonaparte told me he had made 
use of observations concerning him to Lord Am- 
herst, which he desired I would repeat. Although 
I foresaw the consequences, I did not think my- 
self authorized to refuse, as I had been permitted 
to communicate them to him; and having. previ 
ously, warned him that what he insisted upon 


144 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


might cause an access of irritation, I therefore re 

peated what Napoleon had observed, viz. “Nei- 
ther your prince nor both your houses of parli- 

ament can oblige me to see mon geolier et mon 

bourreau. Ce n'est pas a qui fait le Sooner, 

cest la manitre et les meurs.” 

Sir Hudson Lowe walked about for a few mo- 
ments, looking very angrily, and asked me to give 
him General Bonaparte’s reasons for making use 
of such expressions. I replied that this was out 
of my power. He then began, as I had foreseen, 
to vent upon me all the ill humour which he enter- 
tained towards the author of the epithets; brought 
up the old affair of the Scotch newspaper, and 
concluded by saying, “ You are not authorized, 
sir, by me, to communicate with General Bonaparte 
on any other than medical subjects; and if you 
hold any others with him, it is at your own peril; 
unless you make such communications known to 
me, and thereby free yourself from the responsi- 
bility. Your business is not to act from your 
own judgment or discretion, but to ask what at 
may be permitted to do.” 

Napoleon has been up at four o’clock for seve- 
ral mornings writing, without calling any of his 
generals to assist him. He took a walk of two 
hours, and appeared to be in good spirits.” Saw 
him on his return in the billiard-room. Had 
some conversation about Egypt, and some of the 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA, 145 


characters who had accompanied him there. He 
mentioned one Poussilguere (or Poussiére,) who 
had served under him during the campaigns of 
Italy. “ Poussilguere,” said he, “had been em- 
ployed by me upon diplomatic and other services 
from Milan to Genoa, during which time he ac- 
quired my confidence. He was then sent to Malta 
to feel the way before I attacked it. The information 
he obtained was very useful, and rendered great 
service. He accompanied me to Egypt, where I 
appointed him to an office high in the commis- 
sariat and loaded -him with favours. When I 
quitted Egypt, Poussilguere, who was left behind 
for some unaccountable reasons, conceived a great 
hatred for me, and wrote letters pleines @horreurs 
of me to the directory. I was then appointed 
first consul, which was unknown to Poussilguere, 
and was the person who opened his letters. 
Though astonished and indignant at his conduct, 


I took no notice of them. When I was made 


emperor, Poussilguere’s brother, who was a dis- 
tinguished surgeon, and well known to me, came 
to supplicate employment for him; and begged of 
me to grant his prayer, although he admitted that 
his brother had behaved to me badly and most un- 
gratefully. ' “Who is your brother?” I replied, 
“Iknow himnot. Poussilguere betrayed General 
Bonaparte, but the emperor knows'him not. I 
will grant him no favour myself,* but: if the mi- 
VOL, II. L 


146 A VOICE PROM ST. HELENA. 


nister of finance chuses to name him, I will sign 
the nomination. His brother went to the minis- 
ter, told him what I had said, a recommendation 
for a very lucrative situation was made out, which 
] signed, and he enjoyed it for several years,” 

He afterwards spoke about the Mamelukes, 
and said, that in the combats. between the French 
cavalry and them, whenever the numbers of the 
parties engaged exceeded a hundred men, the 
superiority of discipline procured the victory to 
the French, but under that number, or individu- 
ally, the Mamelukes prevailed. 

15th.—Napvleon’s birth-day, He was 5 dressed 
in a brown coat. All the generals and. ladies. 
dined with him at two o'clock; also all the chil- 
dren, excepting the two infants of Counts Bertrand, 
and Montholon, who were brought in and shewn 
for a short time. To each of the children he gave 
a present, and amused wees for some owe 
playing with them, 

_ 17th.—Saw Napoleon at pont o ied Sea was 
in extremely good humour, and very facetious, 
eracking jokes upon various subjects, and mnlieine 
me about a young lady in the island. 

Told me, that when he was at Boulogne, rn 
Bnglish sailors arrived there, who made. their 
escape from Verdun, and had \passed through — 
the country undiscovered, ‘ They had remained 
there for some time. Having) no money, they 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA, 147 


were at a loss how to effect their escape, and 
there was such a vigilant watch kept upon. the 
boats, that they despaired of being able to seize 
upon one, They made a sort of vessel .of little 
ribs of wood, which they formed with their knives, 
living as well as they could upon roots and fruits, 
This bark of theirs they covered, with c¢alico, 
which they stretched over the ribs. When finished, 
it was not more than about three feet and a half in 
length, and of a proportionate breadth, and: so 
light, that one of them carried it on his shoulders. 
In this machine they determined to attempt their 
passage to England. Seeing an English frigate 
approach very near the shore, they launched their 
bark, and attempted to join her; but before they 
had proceeded very far they were discovered by 
the dowaniers, seized and brought back. The 
story got wind in consequence of the, astonish- 
ment excited at seeing two men venture out to 
sea in sucha fragile conveyance. I heard of it, and 
ordered them with their little ship to be brought 
before me. 1 was, myself, struck with astonish- 
ment at the idea of men. trusting their lives, to 
such an article; and. asked them. if it was possi 
ble they could have intended to have gone to sea 
in that? They: replied, that to convince me of 
it; they were ready that moment to. attempt it 
again in the same vessel. Admiring the boldness 
of the attempt, and the’bluntness of the reply, I 
L 2 


148 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


ordered that they should be set at liberty, some 
Napoleons given to them, and a conveyance to the 
English squadron provided for them. Previous to 
this, they were going to be tried as spies, as seve- 
ral persons had seen them lurking about the camp 
for some days.” Mi 

“ When f made my triumphal entry into Ber- 
lin,” said Napoleon, “the mother of the Prince of 
Orange, the sister of the king, was left behind sick 
in the upper apartments of the palace, and very 
badly off, having been abandoned without money, 
and neglected by almost every body. A day or 
two after my arrival there, some of her attendants 
came to ask for assistance, as they had not where- 
withal to procure even fuel for her use. The king, 
indeed, had neglected her most shamefully. The 
moment it was made known to me, I ordered a 
hundred thousand francs to be instantly sent, and 
went to see her myself afterwards. I caused her 
to be furnished with every thing befitting her rank, 
and we had frequent interviews together. She 
was much obliged to me, and a kind of friendship 
commenced between us. I liked her conversa- 
tion. When her son, the Prince of Orange, was 
aid-de-camp to Wellington, he went over from 
Spain or Portugal to London, at the time that the 
intended marriage between the Princess Charlotte 
and him was in contemplation. From London he 
wrote several letters to his mother, giving a de- 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 149 


scription of the whole of the royal family, begin- 
ning with the queen, and going’ through every 
bratich nominatively, filled with Aorreurs and 
sottises, particularly of the **** against whom he 
appeared to be particularly indignant. He did 
not even spare * ** whom he painted as ambitious, 
and desirous of command, and that he should be 
a mere cipher and a stallion if **** to which he 
declared he never would submit. ‘There were. 
many fine and’ heroic sentiments expressed. in 
them, which, though ina romantic style, did the 
writer honour, but he tore the whole **** to 
pieces. Those letters he sent by an agent to 
Hamburgh, for the purpose of being forwarded to 
his mother. This agent was arrested, his, papers 
seized, and despatched to Paris, where they were 
examined and Jaid before me.I read them in a 
cursory manner, and laughed very heartily at their 
contents. Afterwards, in order to retaliate a lit- 
tle for all the abuse heaped upon me, I ordered 
them to be sent to the Moniteur and published, 
Meanwhile, however, the agent acquainted the, 
prince’s mother with his arrest and the seizure of 
his papers, with the contents of which he was 
partly acquainted. Before the publication was 
completed, I received a letter from her, conjuring 
nie not to make them public, stating to me what 
injury it would do to her son and her family, and 
calling to my recollection the time I had been at 


150 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


Berlin. I was touched with her letter, and counter: 
manded the publishing of the letters, which would 
have made a great noise in Europe, and have been 
extremely disagreeable to the mpage Etre 
in them.” 

’ Napoleon then spoke of the late Gees of Bien: 
sia in very high terms, said that he had an estéem 
for her, and that if the king had brought her at 
first’ to ‘Tilsit, it would in all probability have 
procured him better terms. “ She was elegant, 
ingenuous, and extremely well informed,” conti- 
nued Napoleon. “ She bitterly lamented the 
war. ‘Ah,’ said she to me, * la mémoire du grand 
Frédtrie nous a fait égarer. Nous nous crimes 
puree a lui, et nous ne le sommes pas.” 

I observed to the emperor that bis enemies had 
aceused him of having treated her very barba- 
rously. ‘“ What,” said he, “ do they say that'I 
poisoned her too?” Treplied, no; bat that they 
asserted that he had been the means of her death 
in consequence of the misfortunes which he had 
caused to befal her country. |‘ Why,” replied 
Napoleon, “ that grief for the fallen situation of her 
husband and ler country, and for the losses they 
had sustained, and the humiliated state they were 
reduced to, may have accelerated her death, is very 
probable. But that was not my fault. Why did 
her husband declare war against me?) However, 
instead of treating her barbarously, nobody could 


A’ VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 151 


have paid her more attention or respect, or have es- 
teemed her more, for which I received her thanks. 
The Princess of Salms was extremely beaatiful 
and witty; but in point of virtue and other good 
qualities, she was far below her sister. She would 
make @ charming mistress, but nota ****, She 
had ** ***” 

~ Napoleon then made some observations about 
Malta, an abode with which he declared he would 
be satisfied for some years, professing at the same 
time his disbelief of such being the intentions of 
government. He added that the best thing our 
government could do, would be to make a kind 
of treaty with him, by which he would bind him- 
self not to quit Malta for a certain number of 
years without the permission of the Prince Regent, 
with a condition that at the expiration of the time 
he should be received in England. This would 
save the nation six or eight millions of francs 
yearly. “It would,” added he, “ have been much 
more honourable for England (and indeed for the 
coalesced powers) and more humane, to have 
caused me to be shot on board of the Bellerophon, 
in the rage of the moment, than to have condemned 
ine to be exiled to such a rock as this. They 
might have excused themselves by saying, ‘ It is 
necessary for the tranquillity of Europe to put 
this man out of the way. This would have at 
once freed them from all alarm, and saved millions 


152 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


to their treasury, besides being much more humane: 
When the discussions about the sentence on Louis 
the Sixteenth took place, Condorcet declared that 
his conscience would not allow him to vote for 
death, but in place of that he voted that the unfor- 
tunate Louis should be condemned to the galleys 
for life. This proposal met with universal disap- 
probation, even from the most violent of the jaco- 
bins, and great odium was thrown upon Condorcet. 
for having voted for that, which in the opinion. of 
all, was worse than death.. Now exile here, particu- 
larly under the man they have chosen, is.infinitely 
worse than condemnation to the galleys. For 
there you have the sun of Europe, and if you have 
money, can enjoy comparatively a tolerable exist- 
ence. I recollect at Toulon” (I think he said) “a 
colonel, who had been condemned to the galleys for 
life. He was certainly confited, but he never was 
obliged to work, and had every thing allowed him, 
at his own expense, which could, render his situa- 
tion supportable... The keeper, unless. he. was like 
this governor, would never degrade a man who had 
held such a situation by obliging him.to labour, 
Besides, for money a man.can always. get. some- 
body to work for him. I therefore maintain, that 
it would have been more honourable, more ‘con- 
sistent with policy, and, above all, more humane, . 
to have caused me to be quietly fusillé on board 
of the Bellerophon. It would have been preferred 


A VOICE FROM, ST. HELENA. 153 


by. myself. | I really. think: that, Lord.* ** ima- 
gined, that by a series of ill-treatment and humilia- 
tion, they would induce me to, commit suicide, 
and for that purpose found son homme. , The'very 
idea of this, if I ever had any thoughts of doing 
so, would effectually prevent my putting ib into 
execution.” 

22nd.—Saw Napoleon at pa o'clock. He 
has continued to rise at four o'clock in the morn- 
ing, and to employ his time in reading and writ- 
ing. Pointed out to me that he had been obliged 
to. cause his coat to be turned, as there was no 
green cloth on the island, except. of, the 
French call couleur de merde d' oie. Sed i 
his detention in so horrible an abode,. ‘* J. ly avait 
quelque chose de sauvage. The * * * did not. know 
how to separate the man from the'situation. As’ 
first consul, as emperor, being at war. with Eng- 
land, I did her as much harm as I could ;, but,as 
plain. Napoleon Bonaparte now, when all the 
world is at peace, what right have they to detain 
me as praoner Itisa wreaks nation going to war 
with one man.” .. 

I haye,”. continued he, “ reflected upon. my 
conduct towards the English, and have nothing 
to reproach myself with, except not having done 
enough against them as an enemy. I ought. to 
have put their prisoners in pontons, not to, punish 
the poor prisoners, as it was not their fault, but to 


154 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


force your oligarchy to remove the French from 
those in which they had immured them.” 

He then observed, that the eyes of the English 
would soon be opened with respect to his charac: 
ter. “They will see,” said he, “ the folly and in- 
justice of keeping me in this island; an island so 
bad, that I can compare it to nothing else than the 
face of the wretch they have sent out as governor. 
This and the enormous expense will cause my’ re- 
moval.” Sas nimatNt 


L observed, that I was afraid the present aly 


turbed state of England would operate most 
powerfully against his being permitted to go to 
England. “ Bab,” replied he, “your ministers are 
not silly enough to believe that I would lose my 
character so far as to put myself at the head of a 
canaille, even if the latter were willing to place a 
foreigner at their head, which is very unlikely. 
Even in France I refused to do it. I have too great 
a regard for the reputation I shall leave to poste- 
rity to act the adventurer. No, no, it is hatred, 
and the fear they have of the information I could 


give, They are afraid I should say it was not true,* 


in reply to the histories of many political » ml 


which they have explained in their own way.”) 

“What do you think,” said he, “of albtbinge ia 

the world would give me the greatest pleasure?” 

{ was on the point of replying, removal from St. 
' ® These words were spoken in English, 


A NOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 155 


Helena, when he said, “To be able to go about 
éncognito in London and other parts of England, to 
the restaurateurs, with a friend, to dine in public at 
the expense of half-a-guinea or a guinea, and listen 
to the conversation of the company ; to. go through 
them all, changing almost daily, and in this man- 
ner, with my own ears, to hear the people express 
their sentiments, in their unguarded moments, 
freely and without restraint; to hear their real opi- 
nion of myself, and of the surprising occurrences 
of the last twenty years.” J observed, that he 
would hear much evil and much good of himself. 
“Oh, as to the evil,” replied he, “I care not 
about that. [Iam well used to it. Besides, I 
know that the public opinion will be changed. 
The nation will be just as much disgusted at the 
‘libels published against me, as they formerly were 
greedy in reading and believing them. This,” 
added he, “and the education of my son, would 
form my greatest pleasure. It was my intention 
to have done this, had I reached America. The 
happiest days of my life were from sixteen to 
_twenty, during the semestres, when I used to go 
~ about, as I have told you I should wish to do, 
_ from one restaurateur to another, living moderately, 
atid: baving a lodging, for which I paid three louis 
a month. They were the happiest days of my 
. I was always so much occupied, that | may 
say I never was truly happy upon the throne. Not 


‘1 


156 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


that I have to reproach myself with doing evil 
whilst seated there; on the contrary, I restored 
fifty thousand families to their country, and the 
improvements I made in France will speak for 
themselves. [ made war certainly; of this there 
is no doubt; but in almost every instance I was 
either forced to it, or I had some great pee 
object in view.” 

“ Had I died at Micadasty’ continued he, “ I 
should have left behind me a reputation as a con- 
queror, without a parallel in history.’ A bullet 
ought to have put an end to me there: whereas, 
when a man like me dies in misfortune, his repu- 
tation is lessened. Zhen 1 had never received a 
check. , No doubt afterwards at Lutzen. and 
Bautzen, with an army of recruits and without . 
cavalry, I re-established my reputation, and the 
campaign of 1814, ‘with such an inferior fored) did 
not lessen it.” 

_ Lobserved that the generality of the world was 
surprised that he had not made a peace at Cha- 
tillon, when circumstances were apparently des- 
perate for him. Napoleon replied, “ 1 could not 
consent to render the empire less than what it was 
when I mounted the throne; I had sworn to pre- 
serve it. Moreover, the allied powers each day 
brought forth some condition more inadmissible 
than on the preceding one. You may think. it 
strange, but I assure you that I would not sign it 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 157 


now. Had I remained on the throne after the 

return from Elba, I would have kept it, because I 

found it made, but I would not have made it my- 

self originally.. My great fault was in not having 

made peace at Dresden. My error was in having 

made that armistice. Had I pushed on at that 

time, my father-in-law would not have been against 

me.” 

| Napoleon then said, that notwithstanding the 

occupation of Paris by the allies, he should still 

have succeeded had it not been for the treachery 
of Marmont, and have driven them out of France. 
His plan was arranged: He was to have entered 
Paris in the dead of the night. The whole of the 
canuille of the city were at the same time to attack 

the allies from the houses, who fighting against 
troops acquainted with the localities, would have 
been cut to pieces, and obliged to abandon the 
city with immense loss. The canaille were all 

ready. (1 think he also said that he would have 
cut off the allies from their park of artillery). 
Once driven from Paris, the mass of the nation 
would have risen against them. ‘“ I mentioned 
this plan,” added he, “ to Baron Koller, who ad- 
mitted the danger of it.. Marmont will be an ob- 
ject of horror to posterity. As long’as France 
exists, the name of Marmont will not be mentioned 
without shuddering. He feels it,” added Napo- 
leon, “ and is at this moment probably the most 


158 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


miserable man in existence. He cannot forgive 
himself, and he will terminate his life like Judas.” 

I took the liberty of asking what he considered 
to be the happiest time of his life, since his eleva- 
tion to the throne. ‘“ The march from Cannes to 
Paris,” was his reply. 

‘‘ When Castlereagh was at Chatillon with the 
ambassadors of the allied powers, after some suc- 
eesses of mine, and when I had in a manner in- 
vested the town, he was greatly alarmed lest I 
might seize and make him a prisoner; not being 
accredited as an ambassador, nor invested with 
any diplomatic character to France, I might 
have taken him as an enemy. He went to Cau- 
laincourt, to whom he mentioned that he ‘la- 
boured under considerable apprehensions that I 
should cause violent hands to be laid upon him,’ 
as he acknowledged J had a right to do. It was 
impossible for him to get away without falling in 
with my troops. Caulaincourt replied, that as far 
as. his own opinion went, he would say that I 
would not meddle with him, but that he could not 
answer for what | might do. Immediately after, 
Caulaincourt wrote to me what Castlereagh had 
said and his own answer. I signified to him in 
reply, that he was to tell Lord Castlereagh to 
make his mind easy and stay where he was; that 
[ would consider him as an ambassador. At Cha- 
tillon,” continued he, “when speaking about the 


A VOICE FROM ST, HELENA. 159 


liberty enjoyed in Eugland, Castlereagh observed, 
in a contemptuous manner, that it was not the 
thing most to be esteemed in your country, that 
it.was an usage which they were obliged to put up 
with;, but had become an abuse, and nonls not 
answer for other countries.” 

_ I ventured to express. my surprise to Nemalaas 
that the empress Marie Louise had not made 
some exertion in his behalf. “ I believe,” replied 
the emperor, “that Marie Louise is just as much 
a state prisoner as 1 am myself, except that more 
attention is paid to decorum in the restraints im- 
posed upon her, I have always had occasion to 
praise the conduct of my geod Louise, and L be- 
lieve that it is totally out of her power to assist 
me; moreover, sheis young and timoreus. It was, 
perhaps, a misfortune to me that Thad not married 
a sister of the emperor Alexander, as proposed ta 
me by Alexander himself at Erfarth. But there 
were inconyeniences in that union, arising from 
her religion. I did not like to allow a Russian 
priest to be the confessor of my wife, as I consi- 
dered that he would have been a spy. in the Thuil- 
leries for Alexander. It has been said, that my 
union with Marie Louise was made a stipulation 
in the treaty of peace with Austria, which is not 
true. 1 should have spurned the idea. It was 
first proposed by the emperor Francis himself, 
and by Metternich, to Narbonne.” 


160 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


. “© Of all the ambassadors I ever employed,” 
added Napoleon, “ Narbonne* was the ablest. 
He had beaucoup desprit, and his moral character 
was unexceptionable. While he was at Vienna, 
France was never duped by Metternich as she had 
been before. He penetrated Metternich’s projects 
in a few days. Had such a man as Narbonne 
been sent to Alexander in 1812, it is probable 
that peace would have been made. Russia de- 
manded Dantzic, and an indemnification for the 
Duke of Oldenburg. Romanzoff persuaded Alex- 
ander that I would make any sacrifices to avoid 
war, and that the favourable moment for him. to 
make demands had arrived. After the first success 
I had gained, Alexander sent a message to me, that 
if I would quit his territory and retreat to the 
Niemen, he would treat with me. However, [did 
not believe that he was of good faith, and judged 
it to be a ruse, otherwise we might have treated. 
in person at Wilna, and settled every thing.” -. ~ 
23rd.— Yesterday Mr. Smithers, midshipman of 
the Conqueror, came up to Longwood with. a 
pass from Sir Hudson Lowe to go to Count Ber- 
* I was informed by Cipriani, that Narbonne was the natural son 
of Louis the Fifteenth, and the fruit of an incestuous intercourse 
which that /egitimate maintained with his own daughter Adelaide ; 
and that documents were in existence, and even persons living, 
who could incontestably prove it. In justice, however, I must 


say, that Napoleon, to whom I communicated the assertion, told 
me that he disbelieved the fact of the incest, but not the rest. 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 16] 


trand’s. After having passed the guard-room at 
the entrance, he was called back by the officer, 
and told that his pass was found to be for the 
21st, and consequently he could not be permitted 
to enter, as the date of the 0 had iin 
the day before.* 

At no greater distance of time than last Tues- 

day, Sir Hudson Lowe manifested great ill-hu- 
mour towards me, for having presumed to assert 
that he sometimes had given passes in which the 
day was specified, and related to him a very strong 
instance in that of Mr. Urmston. His excellency 
also officially denied the fact to Count Bertrand. 
' Previous to Mr. Smithers being permitted to 
come up, he was subjected to a long interrogation 
upon the nature of his business there; how he 
knew the Bertrands, that he surely must have 
some letters to them from Captain Hamilton of 
the navy, and many other indications of oe 
and distrust of an officer high in rank. 

General Gourgaud informed me this day, that 
at the close of the battle of Waterloo, when the 
charge’ made by the French had failed, and the 
English charged in their turn, a part of the cavalry 
of the latter, with some ¢irailleurs intermingled with 
nets p approached to within a hundred ora hun- 


* The orderly officer, when this was reported to him, took it 
upon himself to order the ‘officer of the guard to allow Mr. Smi- 
thers to enter. 


VOL, II. M 


162 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


dred and fifty toises of the spot where the emperor 
was standing, with only Soult, Drouot, Bertrand; 
and himself. Close to them was a small French 
battalion drawn up in a square. Napoleon or- 
dered Gourgaud to fire some shots from two. or 
three field-pieces which belonged to the battalion, 
to drive away the cavalry, which were approach- 
ing nearer. This was put into execution,and one — 
of those shots carried away the Marquis of An- 
glesea’s leg. Napoleon then placed himself with 
the column and wanted to charge, exclaiming; 
“Il faut mourir ici, il faut mourir sur le champ de 
bataille. At this time the English tirailleurs were 
firing at them, and they expected every moment 
to be charged. Labedoyére was galloping about 
like a madman, with his arms extended: before 
him, seeking to be killed. Napoleon was. pre- 
vented from throwing himself amongst the enemy 
by Soult, who laid hold of the bridle, exclaiming, 
that he would not be killed but taken prisoner, 
and with the aid of the others, finally ¢ ded 
in compelling him to leave the field at) the time 
there was none other than the above-mentioned 
small column ‘to oppose the Prussians, who were 
advancing. Napoleon was so fatigued, that on the 
road to Jemappe and Philipville, he would have_ 
frequently fallen from his horse, had he not been 
supported by Gourgand and two others, who were 
the only persons with him for some time. . He was 


‘ 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 163 


silent fora long time. When on the road to Paris, 
if was decided, at one moment, that the emperor 
should, instantly on his arrival, go booted and 
spurred to the senate, which would have hada 
great effect, but this resolution unfortunately was 
not acted upon. 

24th.—Went to. Plantation House, what is 
customary, I had to suffer a long interrogation 
ahd much illhumour. Amongst other matters, 
his excellency, after asking how.I came to know 
that Cipriani had had a conversation with him re- 
lative to the deficiencies at Longwood, said, “ that 
I‘had no business to have any conversation with 
the maitre d'hétel. of Longwood concerning the 
provisions allowed ; that in every thing not strictly 
medical, I was to ask Aim what I was to be per- 
mitted to do; that I was not to use my own dis- 
cretion oF judgment with respect to any conver- 
sation with General Bonaparte, not medical, or 
reply. to his questions, unless I made such com- 
wt cay known: to him, as he ee ype 
was the only judge of their propriety.” 

. Lreplied, that if he expected me to communicate 
feahiens the conversations I held with Napoleon, 
he was mistaken. That, with the exception of 
what I had frequently stated to him before, I 
should’ be‘silent. That according to the doetrine 
he» laid: down, I must communicate to him all 
that passed’; by his own words I had ‘no right 
M 2 


164 A VOICE FROM ST, HELENA. 


to employ my own judgment or discretion, and 
consequently must tell him every thing, as retain- 
ing any part of a conversation would be an exer- 
cise of my judgment. 

He shuffled for a while in reply to this, and 
brought the old threadbare subject of the Scotch 
newspaper again on the carpet. 

Had some conversation with Napoleon about 
Lord Castlereagh. ‘‘ Never yet,” said he, “ has 
there been so much political imbecility displayed 
by man as there has been by Lord Castlereagh, 
A king is forced upon the throne contrary to the 
wishes and to the opinion of the people, and then, 
as a mode of ingratiating himself with that peo- 
ple, and of conciliating them, he is compelled to 
make them pay contributions ruinous to the coun- 
try.. They have made the Bourbons Jes bourreaux 
de leur peuple, of the Vendeans and others who 
have bled for them, and by whose means they 
gained the battle of Waterloo; for had it not been 
for that business in La Vendée, I should have had 
thirty thousand men more. at Waterloo. Then 
again those Bourbons have made a_ concordat 
with the pope, which would not have answered 
in the tenth or fifteenth century... They, have 
agreed to establish by degrees all the laws of 
the church. What does this mean but the sup- 
pression of Protestantism and.of all other religions 
except the Roman Catholic? You know that the 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 165 


‘Roman doctrine is, that out of the pale of the 
church, no one can be saved. It is in fact re-es- 
tablishing all the old bigotry and superstition, 
and even the inquisition, as that was one of the 
laws of the church. The Protestants must see 
that the intention of this concordat is to deprive 
them of the liberty of worship, and to tolerate no 
‘religion but the Roman Catholic. The proprietors 
‘of national domains that once belonged to the 
‘church must tremble, as it leads to. the restitution 
of them. . The Protestants will be worse than be- 
fore the revolution, at which -time, if one of them 
‘wanted to marry, he was obliged to say that he 
was a Catholic. Though their churches were 
then in a manner tolerated, yet if they frequently 
opened them, they were visited and tormented 
‘by the police. That papaccio, that pretaccio, has 
‘been imbecile enough to give his consent to a mea- 
‘sure that will ultimately cause the assassination 
of the priests. At one time I had myself the 
greatest difficulty in preventing the people from 
accomplishing it. Oh, those Bourbons! Well 
‘may the French say, ils n’ont rien appris, ils n’ont 
rien oublié. They rest upon a sleeping lion. “I 
‘see France in a flame. I see rivers of blood flow- 
ing. You will behold a general massacre of the 
Bourbons take place, the old noblesse, the priests, 
and many an innocent Englishman and friend to 
liberty will pay the forfeit of his life to expiate the 


166 A VOICE FROM. 8S. HELENA. 


wicked policy of Lord Castlereagh. The imagi- 
nation always exceeds the reality, and the great 

- latitude given in the concordat to the king and to 
the priests to revive all the ancient superstition and 
intolerance, will set France in a flame, and _pro- 
duce another revolution of ‘ bonnets rouges, ‘oud 
@ bas les calottes.” 

25th. —- Napoleon in high spirits: Saw him 
inthe drawing-room, dressed in a grey double- 
breasted coat. He was very facetious in his re- 
marks about the governors of Benanitte; among 
de Verd islands, &c. 

Had some conversation with himn eelatine 6 
Spain. I asked if it were true that the Queen 
had said to Ferdinand in his presence, that he 
was her son, but not the son of the king, thus 
proclaiming her own infamy? Napoleon assured 
me, that she had never made use of such expres- 
sions before him, ‘That she had told him he was 
not worthy of being the son of the king. [ ob- 
served that it had been asserted that he had offered 
to give Ferdinand one of his relations in, mar- 
riage, and make him King of Naples; to marry 
another of his relations to Don Carlos, and to 
grant him a sovereignty. Napoleon replied, “ All 
those assertions are false. Ferdinand himself-re- 
peatedly asked me to give him one of my relations 
in marriage, but I never asked him.” I said, that 
in a publication of great circulation it was: broadly 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 167 
asserted, that he had given Ferdinand the choice 
between abdication and death; that’ in conse- 
quence of this, and the threats of King Charles, 
against himself and his followers, he had’ abdi- 

‘  eated, “That is also false,” replied Napoleon. 
«There was no threat made use of, or compul- 

sion. Ifindeed Ferdinand had been treated as I 

am here, or put to the torture, or deprived of food, 

it might be said that he was forced to it. Your 

*** would willingly have put me to death, but 

finding that the nation would not consent, they 

sent me here, in order that I might die a death 

slow enough to appear natural, or iu the hope that 

I might commit suicide. The fact is, that had it 

~ not been for their broils and quarrels amongst 
themselves, | should never have thought of dispos- 

sessing them.” [ said that some of the publica- 

tions against him asserted that he had been the 

contriver of the whole himself, in order to take ad- 

vantage of it afterwards. “ A man like me,” re- 

plied the emperor, “ is always either wun dio or un 
volo (a god or a devil). It is as true as is the 
Goris: that I brought over Pichegru and Georges 
to Paris purposely to ruin Moreau. When I saw 
those imbéciles quarrelling and trying to dethrone 
each other, I thought that I might as well take 
advantage of it, and dispossess an inimical family ; 
but I was not the contriver of their disputes, Had 
I known at first that the transaction would have 


>. re ee ~~ 


168 A VOICE FROM ST, HELENA. 


given me so much trouble, or that it would even 

have cost the lives of two hundred men, I never 

would have attempted it; but being once embark- 

ed, it was necessary to go forward.” 

_ He spoke about the battle of Esling (or Eylau); 

and observed, that it admitted a great deal to be 

said on both sides. He had remained on the field of 

battle, but had retired in the night, and it might be. 
thought, that he had sustained a reverse. Lutzen* 

and Bautzen, he observed, he had most decidedly | 
gained. ‘‘ When only seventeen,” said Napoleon, 
** I composed a little history of Corsica, which I. 
submitted to the Abbé Raynal, who praised, and 

wished that I would publish it; adding, that it 

would do me much credit, and render great ser- | 
vice to the cause then in agitation. I am,” conti-. 
nued Napoleon, ‘“ very glad that I did not, as it 

was written in the spirit of the day, ata time when » 
the rage for republicanism existed, and contained | 
the strongest doctrines that could be promulgated. 
in support of it. It was full of republicanism, and 

breathed freedom in every line, too much so indeed; 


I have since lost it. When at Lyon, in 1786, gained » 


a gold medal from the college on the following 
theme: ‘ What are the sentiments most advisable 
to be recommended, in order to render men happy.’ 
When [I was seated on the throne, a number of 


* General Gourgaud informed me, that at Latzen, the je empe- 
ror had-only two regiments of cavalry. : 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 169 


years afterwards I mentioned ‘this to Talleyrand, 
who sent off a courier to Lyon to procure’ the 
treatise, which he easily obtained, by knowing 
the theme, as the author's name was unknown. 
One day afterwards, when we were alone, Tal- 
leyrand took it out of his pocket, and thinking 
to please and pay his: court to me, put it into 
my hands, and asked if I knew it. I imme- 
diately recognized the writing, and) threw it irito 
the fire, where it was consumed, in spite of Talley- 
rand’s endeavours to save it. He was greatly 
mortified, as he had not taken the precaution of 
causing a copy to be made previous to shewing it 
to me. I was very much pleased; as the style of 
the work was similar to that on Corsica, abound- 
ing in republican ideas, and exalted sentiments of 
liberty, suggested by the warmth of a fervid ima- 
gination, at a moment when youth, and the rage of 
the'times had inflamed mymind. The sentiments in 
it were too exalted ever to be put into practice.” 
-Lasked his opinion about Robespierre. “ Ro- 
-bespierre,”’ replied Napoleon, “ was by no means 
the worst character who figured in the revolu- 
tion. He opposed trying the queen. He was 
not an Atheist, on the contrary, he had publicly 
‘maintained the existence of a Supreme Being, 
in opposition to many of his colleagues. Nei- 
ther was he of opinion that it was necessary to 
exterminate all priests and nobles, like many 


170 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA, 


others. Marat, for example, maintained; that to 
insure the liberties of France, it was necessary 
that six hundred thousand heads should ‘fall: 
Robespierre wanted to proclaim the king, hors 
de la loi, and not to go through the ridiculous 
mockery of trying him. Robespierre was a fa- 
natic, a monster, but he was incorruptible, and 
incapable of robbing, or of causing the deaths 
of others, either from personal enmity, or a de- 
sire of enriching himself. He was an enthusiast, 
but one who really believed that he was act- 
ing right, and died not worth a sous. In some 
respects, Robespierre may be said to haye been 
an honest man. All the crimes committed by 
Hebert; Chaumette, Collot D’Herbois, and others, 
‘were imputed to him. Marat,” continued he, 
“ Billaud de Varennes, Fouché, Hebert, and seve- 
ral others, were infinitely worse than Robespierre. 
It was truly astonishing,” added Napoleon, “ to 
see those fanatics, who, bathed up to the elbows 
in blood, would not for the world have taken a 


piece of money, or a watch, belonging to the vic- 


tims they were butchering. There was not an 
instance, in which they had not brought the. pro- 
perty of their victims to the comité of public 
safety. Wading in blood at every step, they be- 


-dieved they were doing right, and scrupled to 


commit the smallest act bordering upon disho- 
nesty.. Such was the power of fanaticism, that 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 171 


they conceived they were acting uprightly, ata time 
when a man’s life was no more regarded: by them 
than that of a fly, At the very time that Marat 
and Robespierre were committing those massacres, 
if Pitt had offered. them two hundred millions, 
they would have refused it with indignation. They 
even tried and guillotined some of their own num- 
ber, (such as Fabre d’Eglantine), who. were guilty 
of plundering. . Not so Talleyrand, Danton, Bar- 
ras, Fouché: they were figurants, and would have 
espoused any side for money. Talleyrand, cest 
le plus vil des agioteurs, homme corrompu, sans opi- 
nion, mais homme d'esprit. A figurant ready to 
sell himself,.and every thing, to the best bidder. 
Barras was such another. When I commanded 
the army of Italy, Barras made. the Venetian am- 
bassador pay to him two hundred thousand dol- 
lars, (I think he said), for writing a letter, begging 
of me to be favourable to the Republic of Venice, 
with which I,” (here he made use of a most signi- 
ficant gesture,) ‘ [ never paid any attention to such 
letters. From my first career, [ always cont: 
manded myself, Talleyrand, in like manner, sold 
every thing. Fouché in a less degree; his einen 
was in an inferior line.” 

' TF asked how it had been possible that Barrére 
had escaped during the different ebullitions of the 
Revolution? ‘‘ Barrére?—parceque c'est un homme 
sans caractire, A man who changed and adapted 


172 A VOICE FROM: ST.*HELENA. 


himself to every side. He has the reputation of 
being a man of talent, but I did not find him so, 
T employed him to write, but he did not display 
ability. He used many flowers of rhetoric, butno 
solid argument. Nothing but coptionerie wrapped 
up in high sounding language.” 


“Of all the sanguinary monsters,” added. the 


emperor, “ who reigned in the revolution, Billaud 
de Varennes was the worst. Carnot, c'est le plus 
honntte des hommes. He left France without @ a 
sous.” 

'“ Madame Campan,” continued Napoleon, had 
a very indifferent opinion of Marie Antoinette. She 
told me that a person, well known for his attach- 
ment to the queen, came to see her at Versailles, 
on the 5th or 6th of October, where he remained 
all night. The palace was stormed by the popu- 
lace. Marie Antoinette fled, undressed, from her 
own chamber to that of the king for shelter, and 
the lover descended from the window. On going 
to seek: the queen in her bed-room, Madame 
Campan found that she was absent, but disco- 
vered a pair of breeches, which the favourite had 
left behind in his haste, and which were imme- 
diately recognized.” 
~ © After the events in Brumaire,” said hej om | 
had a long conversation with Sieyes, during which 
I entered considerably into the state of France, 


and divers political matters. Sieyes went imme-~ 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA, 173 


diately after to sup with some stern, republicans, 
his most intimate friends. After the servants had 
left.the room, he took off his cap, and throwing it 
upon the ground. ‘ Messieurs,” said he, ‘ilin’y 
a‘ plus de republique, elle est déja morte. I have 
conversed to-day with a man who is not onlya 
great general, but of himself capable of every 
thing, and who knows every thing. He wants no 
councillors, no assistance; politics, Jaws, the art 
of governing, are as familiar to him as the manner 
of commanding an army. He is young and de- 
termined. The republic is finished. :“‘ But,” cried 
the republicans, “if he becomes a tyrant, # faut 
le poignard de Brutus, &c.” ‘“‘ Hélas, mes amiis, 
alors nous tombenons dans lesm mains dos Bourbons, 
ce qui est pire.” 

“ Fouché,” added he, “never ‘ean: my iis 
dant. Never did he approach me without bend- 
ing to the ground. For him, I never had esteem. 
As.a man who had been a terrorist, and a chief of 
jacobins, I employed him as an instrument to dis- 
cover, and get rid of the jacobins, Septembrizers, 
and others of his old friends. By meéans of him 
I was enabled to send into banishment to the 
isle of France two hundred of his old) associate 
Septembrizers, who disturbed the tranquillity of 
France. He betrayed and sacrificed his old cama- 
rades and participators in crime, He never was 


174 & VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


ina situation to demand ‘my confidence, or éven 
to'speak to me without being questioned, nor had 
he the talents requisite for it. Not so Talleyrand. 
Talleyrand really possessed my confidence for a 
long time, and was frequently acquainted. with 
my projects.a year or two before I put them into 
execution: .Talleyrand is a man of great talent, 
although wicked, unprincipled, and so covetous of 
money, as’ not to care by what means he obtains 
it. His rapacity was so great, that I was obliged, 
after having in vain warned him: several times, to 
dismiss him from his employments. Sieyes also 
possessed my confidence, and was a man of great 
talent, bat, unlike Talleyrand, Sieyes was an‘up> 
right man. He loves money, but he will not:try 
to obtain it otherwise than by legitimate means; 
unlike the thes; who will grasp a it in ae 
form.” | av sh 
:96th.-»"The folldwinig uiibervetionss raleeotan 
raihnideys to:China were delivered by Napoleons /. 
-» It appears, that your ambassador, Lord Ma: 
cartney; was) obliged in. 1793; to submit to» the 
ko-tou; without doing which! he would not have 
béenoreveived: | Your ministers} who must have 
foreseen this, and in fact;) who’ did foresee difé 
ficulty in etiquette, had in sending out’ Lord 
Amherst, authorized: him to, comply. with its 
and it appears, that his: private opinion was, that 


A VOICE FROM sT. HELENA, 175 


he ought to perform it, and that in refusing to de 
so; he suffered himself to be guided by bad ad- 
visers. o ot Dew 
© It is anerror, but still one which is very ge- 
nerally believed, that an ambassador represents 
the sovereign. An ambassador, however, doés 
not represent his sovereign, as in fact none of the 
stipulations of affairs which he signs are valid 
until after a ratification; and as to his rank in 
etiquette, there never has been an example of so- 
vereigns having treated them as equals, never hav+ 
ing returned their visits; never having given way 
for them, nor treated them as they would havé 
treated a foreign sovereign. The false idea that 
ambassadofs represented the sovereign is a tradi 
tion of the feodal customs. According to which, 
atethe rendering of homage, when a great vassal 
was prevented from tendering it in person, lie 
caused) himself to be represented by an ambas- 
sador. In 'this case the ambassador really ire+ 
ceived the honours due ‘to ‘his master... The char 
racter of an ambassador is of the same nature as 
that: of a minister plenipotentiary or an ‘envoy, 
with this difference, that an ambassador is’ in:the 
first degree, a minister, the second, and an-envoy, 
the third; and in negociations, these three have the 
same rights; whatever they stipulate or sign tiust 
besubmitted for the ratification oftheir prince; but 
in etiquette there is a great difference; the ambas+ 


176 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


sador in precedency ought to be treated like the 
first lord in the country, like princes or dukes, 
and ministers of state. The minister plenipo- 
tentiary like nobles of the second rank in prece- 
dency at court, and envoys like those of the third: 
As to charge d'affaires, they are not accredited 
with the sovereign, but with the minister. 

“ The English and Russian ambassadors had @ 
right to the same distinctions, and ought to have 
followed the same etiquette as was practised by 
the princes and the chief mandarins. Now, these 
last performed the o-tou, and therefore the am- 
bassadors' ought to have done the same; and 
the emperor of China had a right to require: it! 
It has been said, that a French captain named 
Rock, who had been in China during the'reign of 
Louis XIV., had refused to perform the ko-tou: 
But it must. be considered, that this officer was 
not an ambassador, nor a minister plenipotentiary, 
nor an envoy, and he was at liberty to.act as he 
pleased, equally as the Chinese government was 
at liberty to consider him as being of more or 
less importance. But a man charged with a di- 
plomatic mission ought to) have performed: the 
ko-tou; and could not refuse it without being want- 
ing in respect to the emperor, in the same manner 
as this last could not refuse to receive him, with- 
out shewing disrespect to his a, of ambas- 
sador.” 


A’ VOICE FROM ST. HELENA; 177 


ot Lord Macartney, and it appears Lord Am- 
herst; thought of divers expedients, which had 
been also tried by the Russian minister, They 
proposed that a mandarin of equal rank to the 
ambassador should perform the ko-tow before the 
picture of the King of England, or that by a pub 
lic declaration the Chinese monarch should | pro- 
mise, that if he sent an ambassador to England, 
he should perform the. so-tou. The Chinese re- 
jected these proposals, and with good reason. If 
a Chinese ambassador were received in London, — 
he would have no right to perform the ko:tow; 
bat he ought to follow the same étiquette in the 
presence of the King of England as that observed’ _ 
by the princes, the ministers of state; and the 
knights of the garter, when they are admitted be- 
fore the throne, which would be the English /o- 
tou. These proposals were therefore unreasoné 
able; as the principle we have advanced naturally 
evinces. A third suggestion was made; which was 
not to perform the ko-tou, but to follow exactly 
the etiquette of England, which is, to place one 
knee upon the ground close to the throne, in pre“ 
senting the credentials, It certainly is an extra+ 
ordinary presumption for you to attempt to regu- 
late the etiquette of the palace of Pekin by that 
of, St. James’s; the simple principle which has 
been laid down, that in negociations as well as in 
etiquette, the ambassador does not represent the 
VOL. 1. N 


178 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


sovereign, and has only a right to experience the 
same treatment as the highest grandee of the place, 
clears up the whole of the question, and removes 
every difficulty.” : 

- “ Only one reasonable objection presents itself 
to the: mind, to wit, that the ko-tou is a religious 
act, that such religious act has something idola- 
trous in it, and is consequently contrary to the 
principles of Christianity. The mandarins per- 
fectly comprehended the force of this objection, 
and repelled the idea, by declaring in an official 
manner, that the ko-tou was not a religious act, 
but simply a law of etiquette, which ought. to 
have removed every scruple. Russia and Eng- 
land should instruct their ambassadors to submit 
to the ko-tou, upon the sole condition that the 
Chinese ambassador should submitin London and 
Petersburg to such forms of etiquette as are prac- 
tised by the princes and grandees.”, ©. 

» “ Your embassy cost you some hundred thou- 
sand pounds, which have been thrown away, and 
in place of being the means of approximation, will 
be a foundation for separation and of ill blood be- 
tween the Chinese and you, and all this by a ridi- 
culous misunderstanding. In paying respect to 
the customs of a country, you make those of 
your own more sacred; and every homage which 
is rendered to a great foreign sovereign in. the 


_AY VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 379 


forms: which are in use. in his own country, is bee 
coming and honourable. Besides, had not your 
ministers an example of it in what: has always 
taken place with the Porte, which has constantly 
obliged all ambassadors to submit to the etiquette 
in-use there?:»The ambassador is not admitted to 
the feet of the sublime sultan, unless he is clothed 
in a caftan, and is obliged to. perform: such cere- 
‘monies as: the civilization of the Porte, and» its 
greater or lesser degree of power, have prescribed 
and changed; but which still preserve traces of 
their original character. . Is there any great diffe- 
rence between prostrating one’s'self, in order te 
perform the o-tou, and kissing the dust at the 
feet of the sultan?: You say that you might awe 
them by means of a maritime armament,. and thus 
force the mandarins to submit»to the European . 
etiquette. This idea is madness. Youwould be 
‘wery badly advised indeed, if you were to call to 
arms a nation of two hundred. millious of inhabit- 
ants, and to compel them in their own defence to 
build ships against yours. Every sensible man in 
‘your country therefore can consider the refusal 
‘to perform the ko-tow no otherwise than as un- 
-justifiable, and unfortunate in its consequences.”! 
_ ' September 1st.—Y esterday the Maria transport 
arrived from the Cape, with mails. A letter from 
young Las Cases was sent to Madame Bertrand, 
-- stating that they had at nee eeprom iarion 


4 


t 


180 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


to quit the Cape, and were on the point of em- 
barking on board of a brig for England, but were 
ignorant if permission to land would be granted 
them ; that his father was very unwell, and ex- 
pressed his fears that he would fall a victim to his 
complaints before he arrived, as there was no me- 
dical person in the brig. He added, that no letter 
had been received from Longwood since his father 
and himself had arrived at the Cape. A letter 
also arriyed fo Count Bertrand from Messrs, 
Baring, Brothers, and Co. of London, informing 
him, that two years ago the sum of 12,000/. had 


‘been deposited in their hands for his use. 


Napoleon has been in good spirits for several 


days, and has taken rather more exercise than 
formerly. On the 30th, he went to the sentry-box 


on the left of the house, where he remained for 
some time looking at the progress which had been 


made in a new road, greatly to the surprise of the 


sentinel, who stood gazing at him at the distance 
of a few yards. 


In one of the Cape newspapers which I rebeenl 


there was an article, stating that his sister Caroline 


had married a certain General Macdonald. Upon 
this Napoleon remarked, that after the recent as- 
sassination of her husband, he did not think it 


possible that his sister would marry; especially in 


so public a manner, unless she were mad, or had 
been fo rie with a pistol at her throat; “ espe- 


A VOICE FROM 8T. HELENA. 181 


cially,” said he, “« when I consider that my sister 
is a woman arrived at an age when her passions 
are no longer brulantes; that she has four children, 
and is possessed of a strong, masculine under- 
standing, and talents superior to the generality of 
her sex. However,” continued Napoleon, “ there 
i$ no accounting for the actions of a woman.” 
He then made some remarks upon a diatribe, 
which had been published about him in the Cou- 
rier, and observed, that now scurrility and ob- 
Joquy would rather serve than hurt him. That 
those attempts to flétrir son caractére would now 
be unavailing, in consequence of the free commu- 
nication of the English with France. ‘ The vast 
number of English,” said he, “ who have had 
access to the continent, will long ago have disco- 
vered and published that I am not that monster I 
have been described in the English and French 
libels. They have found out their mistake, and 
will blush at the idea of having been so grossly 
deceived. I would desire no better vindication 
of my character than their opinion. The time for 
libels against me is past. A moderate criticism 
upon my actions, well managed, well written, and. 
not, too highly exaggerated, would be infinitely 
more injurious to me than all the tories diatribes 
inthe Quarterly Review style.” 

Some extracts of a pamphlet drone _-tees 
published by the duke of Rovi b 

oe a 

= 


182 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA, 


of Captain Wright, now attracted his observation: 
“If,” said he, “ Wright was put to death, it inust 
have been by my authority. The dukede Rovigo 
mistakes, in throwing out insinuations against 
Fouché: tf he was put to death in prison, I or 
dered it. Fouché, if even so: inclined, never 
would have dared to do it. He knew me too welli 
But the fact is, that Wright killed himself, and I 
do not believe that he was even personally ill 
treated in prison. That Fouché may have threat: 
ened him, with a view of extracting: discoveries, is 
possible. Sydney Smith has acted in a manner 
unworthy of himself, and unworthy of a man of 
honour, in the epitaph which he wrote uport 
Wright. For init, he throws out insinuations, or 
at least leaves room to suppose, that he was se- 
cretly dispatched, though he does not dare to say 
it openly. After having made every search and 
inquiry in his power, after having exhausted all 
his means in endeavouring to prove that he was 
murdered, after having had an opportunity of ex- 
amining the gaolers and turnkeys, and finding that 
nothing of the kind had happened, he ought, like 
a man of honour, to have openly declared, ‘ that 
there was no proof to admit of such au aceusa- 
tion,’ instead of making insinuatious, especially: 
when his old enemy, against whom he had so 
often fought, was in the hands of his countrymen. 


Sydney Smith, above all men, knew, from having 


ESE ————— 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA.’ 183 


been so long in the Temple, that it was impossible 
to have assassinated a prisoner, without the know- 
ledge of such a number of persons as would have 
rendered concealment impossible; and also must 
have been aware that nobody could have entered 
the prison unless by an order from the minister of 
police.” 

| Nevertheless,” added he, “Sydney Smith dis- 
played great honour in informing Kleber of the 
refusal of Lord Keith to consent to the conven- 
tion of El-Arish. Had he delayed it for twenty- 
four hours longer, Kleber would have evacuated 
the forts to the Turks, and would have been 
obliged to surrender to the English. He treated 
the French prisoners of war very well. Un intri- 
gant. He, however, committed gross faults, in 
not having confined himself to operations purely 
naval; except in the instance of Acre, where he 
acted perfectly right, in sending men and officers 
to assist the Turks. He neglected cutting off 
communications by sea, which he might have done 
had he attended more closely to his squadron. 
By this oversight, he allowed me to escape. At 
Acre, he caused his ships to fire broadsides at my 
troops at such a distance as to be harmless; in- 
deed, on the contrary, it rendered us essential 
service, as there was a scarcity of shot, and 
every soldier who picked up one of the English 
balls received five sous. However, notwithstand- 


ie LD 


184. A ‘VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


ing,” continued Napoleon, “ that Sydney Smith 


has ill-treated me, I should still have a pleasure 
in seeing him. I should like to receive ce gaillard 


Ja. He has certain good qualities, and as an old 
enemy, 1 should like to see him.” 

“Have you ever heard,” said he, ‘ that Lord 
Wellington was the person who first proposed to’ 
send me to St. Helena?’* I replied, that I had 
heard so, but did not give the report any credit. 
‘Tf it be true,” said he, “ it will reflect but little 
honour upon him in the eyes of posterity.” resi 

2nd.—Went to Plantation House according to 
Sir Hudson Lowe's direction. After acquainting 
him with Napoleon's state of health, I proceeded. 
to ask him, by General Bertrand’s desire, informa- 
tion respecting the measures necessary to be taken 
towards obtaining a certificate of life for Countess 


* It is said that the Duke of Wellington returned to England 


from India in a frigate commanded by Captain, (now Sir George) 


~ Cockburn, and remained at St. Helena for some days, during 


which time he narrowly escaped death by drowning, having been 
upset in a boat in one of the squalls so prevalent at that anchorage ; 
also that when Napoleon was at Elba, his Grace suggested to the 
congress, that he should be removed from thence to St. Helena, 
urging the latter place to be the best adapted for his perpetual 
imprisonment, from his own local knowledge. I merely give this 
report as an on dit, though I know that it is believed by many. 

If true, however, perhaps the “duke may esteem it to be one of 
his most brilliant achievements, and only surpassed by the mani- 
festation of generosity and humanity he displayed i in the fate 
of his old antagonist, Ney. 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 185 


Bertrand, and a power of attorney for the Count, 
and begged to know whether Mr. Brooke, (the 
secretary to the council), was not the person who 
performed the duties of notary public. Sir Hudson 
Lowe replied roughly, “ Let Count Bertrand ask 
Captain Blakeney.” Soon afterwards, however, 
he said, that he would not let me’ retarn without 
an answer, and desired me to say that there was 
no public notary on the island; that Mr. Brooke 
was not vested with powers sufficient to allow 
him to take such a deposition; that to legalize acts, 
they must be signed by him as chief magistrate of 
theisland. He then asked, “‘ What motives. could 
Count Bertrand have, in wishing to perform it be- 
fore Mr. Brooke? Why not have asked me, as 
- chief. magistrate?” J replied, that one of Count. 
Bertrand’s motives, was to spare to Madame Ber- 
trand the inconvenience and trouble of going five 
miles distance from Longwood, in the bad wea- 
ther which prevailed, especially as she was suck- 
ling an infant, and in an extremely delicate state 
of health. That Count Bertrand, in the supposi- 
tion that Mr. Brooke performed the duties of notary 
public, had desired me to inquire, and if so, to 
‘ask permission for him to come to Longwood. 
“ Those are not his motives, sir,” said Sir Hudson 
Lowe, “ he wants to get the Marquis Montchenu 
to Longwood, in order to have an opportunity of 
conversing with him, before Mr, Brooke, who does 


186 A VOICE FROM S17. HELENA, 


not understand French. Do you not think, sir, 
that that is their motive?” I replied, that it had 
never occurred to me, that such was their inten- 
tion or motive. ‘Then sit does. you but little 
credit, sir. You are very sharp at finding out, 
and observing every thing to their advantage ;” and 
added, that I.was an instrument in their hands, 
I observed to his excellency, that. if asking for in- 
formation from himself, constituted me au instru- 
ment, I must plead guilty. That 1 was:at a loss 
to conceive why they should have recourse to so 
much trouble, to have a conversation with Mar- 
quis Montchenu in Longwood, when. they had 
frequently met and conversed, for a long time, 
with all the commissioners outside of it, as) he 
must well know, without any British officers being 
present. His excellency said, very gruffly, that the 
less communication I had with them, (the French), 
unless on professional subjects, the better... After 
repeating his insinuations, and sarcastically ex- 
pressing lis surprise that I should not have dis- 
covered their real motive, (which I could have 
told him, was solely the invincible repugnance 
every body at Longwood had to his presence) he 
asked if I had any thing to communicate from Ge- 
neral Bonaparte? I replied in the negative. . He 
then asked how many conversations with him I 
had had, and for how long? I replied, that I did 
not recollect how many, or how long. They might 


A Voice FROM 'ST. HELENA. 187 


have lasted for an hour, perhaps longer and! took 
my departure. . 

'8rd.— Found the emperor in the Galartuggeeit 
reading alond the Old Testament. In very good 
spirits’ Told me that he had seen Mr. Cole 
at’ Madame Montholon’s a few days since, and 
had taken him for a Jew. ‘“ I asked Madame 
Montholon,” said he, “ what Jew is that? Vraie- 
ment il a air d’Isauc. Il appartient a la famille 
@ Abraham.” 
' Napoleon’ then made some observations upon 
the formalities which the governor obliged Ber- 
trand’ to go through, in order to get the bills 
which Las Cases had left upon London cashed, 
and the examination which every little bill, ac- 
count, ahd receipt, went through: “ Even the bills 
and salaries of the servants,” said he, “ are mi- 
nutely examined, and every trifling sum obliged to 
be accounted for. Useless vexations ; as every 
man of sense must know, that it would not be by 
means of any sinall sum that [ could get here, that 
I could escape; and that though I have no money 
here, 1 have it at the extremity of my fingers. But 
this man, ha la rabbia di mischiarsi di tutto.* If 
he had his will, he would order me to breakfast at 
a certain hour, dine at another, go to bed at a time 
prescribed by him, and come, himself, to see it 
carried into execution. All will fall upow bim- 


' * Has the rage to meddle in every thing. 


188 & VOICE FROM ST, HELENA. 


self one day. He does not know that what passes 
here, will be recorded in history, ed 2 cost imbecile 
che non sa che li ministri non hanno mai torto, (he 
is imbecile enough, not to feel that ministers are 
never wrong), He sent a letter to Bertrand, in reply 
to the one written by him about the new restric- 
tions, which convinces me more than any thing 
he has ever yet done, that he is un imbecile che 
non ha senso commune, If I had paid him for it, he 
could not have made a communication which would 
have pleased me more. There was nothing else 
wanting to verify and authenticate the tyranny 
uiider which I labour, JU avoue des choses atroces. 
He says that he has authority to rip up the cover 
of a book, or to examine any piece of furniture in 
such a manner as to render it unserviceable either 
for ornament or utility, to search for letters. Next 
to his restrictions, I hold this letter precious.* 
By his reasoning, he ought not to send up a loaf 
of bread, or a joint of meat, or a pair of shoes, as 
letters might be concealed in them, and frequently 
have been in the soles of the latter. What I said 
in ridicule of Lord Bathurst’s speech, he writes in 
earnest to us. Nothing but the publication of 


that letter is: wanting to convince the ministers: 


that he is an imbecile. Ah, if 1 had had only to 

do with suchas him, I. should not be here. Ah! 

poor country,that is obliged to employ such as 
* This letter willbe,found in the Appendix, No. XI. 


~* 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 189 


him. If I were at the head of the government, I 
should estimate his service to be worth an pea 
ment of 1501. a-year.” 

_ He then made some observations upon a sre: 
ject mentioned in some papers to:be contemplated 
by ministers, to lend two millions for the use of 
the poor, which he pronounced to be absurd; 
England to recover herself must renew her com- 
merce; in a few words, she must no longer be 
a continental power. She must proceed in her 
proper sphere, as an insular power possessing the 
command of the sea. ‘“‘ You must not continue to 

_ be all gentlemen,” said he, “ as Lord Castlereagh 
wishes. You must return to your ships. You 
want old Lord Chatham for a prime minister. 
You require able men. My opinion is, that if 
something be not soon done, you will be obliged 
to act as I did in Holland—reduce the interest of 
the funds to two per cent. So well assured and 
convinced am I that there will be a bankruptcy, 
more or less serious, that I would not place money 
im the English funds. This distress of yours is one 
of the consequences of the holy alliance. All the 
continental powers will endeavour to bridle (raf- 
Jrenare) you, and unite against you as they have 
done against me, when I was more powerful than 
allof them puttogether. The only way to prevent 
it is by placing yourselves in such a situation as to 
command respect, and to make them court you, 


190 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


instead of you courting them ; which can never be 
the case as long as you have an army on the con- 
tinent. As long as your ministers say, John Bull 
is not sick, so long will things go wrong. As soon 
as they come forward and say, ‘ Certainly there 
is deep distress. There wauts a radical change. 
We have had great successes which we have 
abused, and of which we have not availed our- 
selves,’ then there will be some hope. But the 
manner in which they now act, is like a physician 
telling me, when I feel myself very ill and my legs 
swelling; that there is nothing the matter with me; 
or like one replying to John Bull, when he com- 
plains that he has nothing to eat, ‘ Oh, you have 
too good an appetite. You must not indulge it. 
Repletion is a bad thing,’ unit 
* Cipriani informs me,” said he, ‘ that the gover- 
nor took great pains to make him comprehend that 
some Burgundy sent here some time back came 
from him. 1 ordered him never to bring me any 
more of it. Ido not blush to drink the wine or 
eat the bread of John Bull, mais je ne veua: rien 
prendre des mains qui me sont devenues si odieuses 
(but I will accept nothing from hands that are 
become so odious to me).” Tema 
He observed that he had contracted’a spol 
by having sat for a quarter of an hour yester- 
day on the steps in front of the billiard room 
and had been sneezing and coughing all the eyen- 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 191 


ing... Made some remarks on the tempaccio, and 
told me, that since breakfast yesterday he had 
eaten nothing until the same meal this day. _ 
.oHe said that Count Montholon had met Ma- 
dame Sturmer, and found that she was not so 
handsome as Betsy (Miss E. Balcombe); that she 
had Ja tournure dune grisette. . 

_.He afterwards made some observations upon 
Talleyrand. . “ Talleyrand,” said he, “ maintained 
to.me that assassination was sometimes justifiable, 
or at least that it ought to be winked at, and al- 
lowed to remain unpunished. He urged that 
such a practice was common to all revolutions or 
grand crises. That in revolutions, there were 
certain faults which the tribunals ought not to 
notice, and added, that if it had not been for la 
lanterne of the constituent assembly, the revolu- 
tion would not have succeeded., That some eyils 
ought to be tolerated, because they prevented 
others that were greater.” 

_ 4th.—The weather has been extremely wet for 
some days, and. Napoleon ordered that a fire 
should be kept in the four rooms which he is 
accustomed to use himself. As he cannot bear — 
the smell of coals, there was, consequently a 
great deficiency of wood. Found Novarre break- 
ing, up a bedstead and some shelves to burn. 
Cipriani applied to Captain Blakeney to send 
a Jetter to the purveyors requesting that. they 


— << 


192 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


would send up three thousand weight of wood, to 
be paid for by themselves, as the governor wonld 
not allow more than three hundred weight daily, 
being about a third of what was wanting, in con- 
sequence of the great humidity of Longwood. ~ 
‘Saw Napoleon at breakfast in his bath. Ex- 
pected to have found him discontented on account 
of the occurrences of the morning, but he was ix 
a very good humour. He was eating some len-. 
tils, of which he asked the English name, and if I 
had ever seen any before. I replied that I had seen 
some in Egypt, but none in England. “That arch. 
libeller, Pillet,” said he, laughing, “ asserts that 
you have none in England, and, in fact, that you 
have no good vegetables (/égumes).” I replied that 
it was equally true with the rest of Pillet’s false- 
hoods. That in no country in Europe were there 
better vegetables or a more plentiful supply. Na- 
poleon laughed at the warmth with which] &x- 
pressed myself, and said, “ Oh, that atrocious 
libeller, Pillet. You English do not like to hear 
any thing bad of your own country, though you 
are so fond of abusing other nations, I fancy that 
if Pillet had gone to England after the publication 
of that book, he would have had his brains beaten 
out by you.” I said that he would certainly have 
been treated with the contempt which he deserved. 
Napoleon then remarked, that the northern people 
required the bottle to develope their ideas ; that the 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 193 


‘English appeared in general to prefer the bottle to 
the ladies, as was exemplified by our allowing them 
to go away from table, and remaining for hours to 
drink and intoxicate ourselves. I replied that al- 
though .we did: sit sometimes for hours after the 
ladies withdrew, it was more for the sake of con- 
versation than for wine, of which last there was not 
so much drank as formerly ; that moreover it was 
optional to retire immediately after’ the ladies or 
to remain. He appeared to doubt this, and made 
me repeat it. After which he said, that were he 
in England, ‘he would. ahany leave with the la- - 
_dies. » “It appears to me,” said he, “that you 
donot» ‘pay regard enough to the ladies. If your 
objectiis to converse instead of to drink, why not 
allow them to be present. Surcly conversation is 
never so lively or so witty as when ladies take a 
part in it. If 1 were an Englishwoman, I should 
feel very discontented at being turned out by the 
men to wait for two or three hours while they 
were guzzling their wine. Now in France society 
is nothing unless ladies are ae They are 
the life of conversation.” re 
- Lendeavoured to make it appear that our con- 
versation after dinner frequently turned upon po- 
litics, and other matters, with which ladies seldom 
meddled ; moreover, that: in’ well-regulated so- 
cieties, the gentlemen soon followed them. This did 
not, however, satisfy him. He maintained that it 
VOL. Il. ce) 


194 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


was a custom which could not be justified, that 
women were necessary to civilize and to soften 
‘the other sex. 

He spoke about Maréchal Jourdan, of sthintn 
4nilitary talents he had a poor opinion. I ob- 
served that I had been told by some English offi- 
cers who had been present at the battle of Albuera, 
that if Maréchal Soult had advanced after the at- 
tack made by the lancers, he would have cut the 
English army to pieces, Napoleon acquiesced in 
this, and said that he had censured Soult for 
having neglected to do so. He then adverted to 
the English mode of besieging towns, and said _ 
that Lord Wellington, at sieges, was le bourreau 
des hommes; that the immense sacrifice of men at 
Ciudad Rodrigo and Badajoz was by no means 
compensated by the capture of those places. He 
observed that the storming of Bergen-op-Zoom 
was a most daring attempt, but that it ought not, 
or could not have succeeded, the number. of the 
garrison being greater than that of the assailants. 
1 observed that the failure was in part to be attri- 
buted to one of the generals not having taken the 
precaution to communicate the orders which had 
been given to him to any one else; so that when 
he was killed or mortally wounded, the troops 
did not know how to act. Napoleon replied, 
that even if no accident of the kind had occurred, 
the attempt ought not to have succeeded, unless 


A VOICE FROM 8T. HELENA. 195 


the party attacked became, as sometimes hap- 
pened, panic struck. Graham he observed. had 
been commissary with the army at the time of his 
first career of arms at Toulon. ‘ A daring old 
“man,” said he, and asked if he were not the same 
who had commanded in the affair near Cadiz. . 
» 6th.—Had some conversation in the morning 
with Napoleon relative to the deficiency of fuel at 
Longwood, and with General Montholon on the 
same subject. 

Went to Plantation House by order of Sir Hud- 
son Lowe, to whom I communicated the parti- 
culars of the deficiency of fuel, and the observa- 
tions | had been desired to make upon the sub- 
ject. Had a long discussion with his excellency,. 
and explained that there were twenty-three fires. 
in all at Longwood, which he thought much too 
numerous. He answered in his accustomed man- 
ner, “that they had no business with so many.” I 
éxplained to him that Longwood was very damp, 
and that the French ladies and children required 
constant fires. He said that “Lady Lowe had no 
fire in her room.” 1 observed that the French were 
natives of a more southern climate than ours, and: 
consequently more susceptible of cold, and that 

_ there could be no comparison made between the 
comfort of such a building as Plantation House, 
and:Longwood. Hisexcellency said, that “he did 
not seeiany necessity for so many fires, and that he 
: 0 2 


196 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


had seen a fire burning in the Countess Bertrand’s 

room in the middle of summer.” I told him I had 

no observation to make upon that circumstance. 

I observed that it was necessary to regulate the. 
quantity of wood by the seasons, as what was too 
much in summer was too little in winter, and ex- 
plained to him that I had done every thing in my 

power to explain to the French, that he thought 

the allowance which he had ordered for Long- 

wood was sufficient, as he had made it nearly. 
double of what was consumed at Plantation 
House. I also told his excellency that Napoleon. 
could not bear the smell of coals; and suggested, 

that instead of sending wood to the soldiers in 
camp, coals might be furnished, and the wood. 
sent to Longwood ; to which he replied, that “ he. 
did not like to humour any person’s whims,’’ 

Saw Napoleon in his bath. .After some con- 
versation respecting the deficiency of fuel, he said. 
that he had seen Admiral Plampin, who had 
brought him a book which he, (the admiral,) said. 
had been sent out by Lord Bathurst, which, added . 
Napoleon, “ I suppose his lordship has sent in. 
order to discover the author, as in the letter which 
the admiral said he saw, it was attributed to Ben-.. 
jamin Constant, or Madame de Staél.” ' 

Napoleon then observed that he had spoken to. 
the admiral about ships of war, and their interior). 
economy. ‘ The admiral says that a seventy-four: 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 197 


gun ship will take about eighty tons more water 
bymeans of the tanks. Had I known this in 1806 
or 1808, I would have sent an army of thirty thou- 
sand men to invade India. I had made several 
calculations about the possibility of sending so 
large a body of men to India, but always found 
that they would have been short of water for a 
month. I asked what his plan was? “ In Brest,” 
said the emperor, “I had at one time as many as 
fifty-six sail of the line, and often forty-six. In 
forty of these line-of-battle ships, I intended to 
have dispersed thirty thousand soldiers, eight 
hundred in each, and only four hundred sailors. 
There were to have been a proportionate number 
of frigates, and other smaller vessels. Ten of the 
line-of-battle ships would have been old and of 
little value. They were also to take on board six 
or eight hundred dismounted cavalry, and a por- 
tion of artillery, with every thing necessary for an 
army to take the field, and be provisioned for four 
months. They were to make the best of their 
way to the Isle of France, where they would have 
watered and provisioned afresh, landed their sick, 


and taken on board some other troops to replace’ 


them, with three thousand blacks to form colo- 
nial regiments. From thence they were to have 
proceeded to India, and to have disembarked in 
the nearest possible place, so as to have allowed 
the Mabhrattas, with whom I had an understand- 


198 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


ing, to join them. They were to form the cavalry 
of the army. A few of the French were also to 
be mounted, and all the horses they could pro- 
cure purchased. After landing, they were to 
have burnt the ten old ships, and divide their 
‘crews amongst the rest, who would have been 
thus full manned. They would then proceed in 
different directions, and do you all possible mis- 
chief in your settlements. I had,” continued he, 
‘an understanding with the Mahrattas and others, 
in India, by the way of Bassorah, Bagdat, Mocha, 
Surat; their communications were made to the 
consuls at Aleppo, through the ambassador in 
Persia, &c. I had frequently earlier intelligence 
from India than you had in England. The king 
of Persia was favourably disposed towards us. 
All this plan, however, was frustrated by the cal- 
culations I had made, which shewed me that the 
ships must fall short of water by a month. Had 
I known of those tanks, L certainly aroutel have 
‘made the attempt.” 

Napoleon then calculated: the —_ of tons 
which would have been gained by the tanks, and 
found that the ships would have had more than 
sufficient water. ‘ For a power which is inferior 
by sea,” said he, “it is an invention of great im- 
‘portance, as it will prevent eo Ope 
‘going into harbour to water.’ PaO 

I mentioned Toussaint (Lista celeneey 66 ae 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 199° 


served, that amongst other calumnies, some of his 
enemies had asserted that he had caused him to be 
put to death privately in prison. “ It does not 
deserve an auswer,” replied Napoleon, ‘ What. 
possible interest could | have in putting a Negro 
to death after he had arrived in France? Hadhe, 
died in St. Domingo, then indeed something might 
have been suspected, but after he had safely ar- 
rived iv France, what object could have been, in 
view ?” fs <. , 

“ One of the greatest follies I ever was guilty 
of,” continued the emperor, “ was sending that 
army out to St. Donfingo.. I ought to have pre- 
vented the possibility of its being effected. 1 com- 
mitted a great oversight and fault in not haying. 
declared St. Domingo free, acknowledged the 
black government, and before the peace of Amiens 
sent some French officers to assist them. Had 
I done this, it would have been more consonant to 
the principles under which [ was acting. It 
would have done you incalculable mischief.. You 
would have lost Jamaica, and your other colonies 
would have followed. Having once acknow- 
ledged them, I could not have sent an army out 
there during. the peace. But after the peace, I 
was continually beset with applications from pro- 
prietors of estates in the colony, merchants, and 
others, Indeed, the nation had da rage to regain 
St. Domingo, and I was obliged to comply with 


200° A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


it; but had I, previous to the peace acknowledged 
the blacks, I could under that plea have refused 
to make any attempts to retake it, in doing which, 
Tacted contrary to my own judgment.” 
6th.—Informed Count Montholon by direction 
of Sir Hudson Lowe, that the latter had regu- 
lated the quantity of fuel necessary for Longwood 
by a comparison with that consumed at Planta- 
tion House; and. thought, that by giving twice’as 
much coal as was used there, and three hundred 
weight of wood daily, he had allowed a sufficiency. 
That, however, if any application had been made, 
he would have increased the quantity. I also 
shewed him a letter from Major Gorrequer, 
stating the quantity used at Plantation House. 
Count Montholon replied, that they were not 
bound to regulate the quantity of fuel they thought 
it necessary to burn at Longwood by that con- 
sumed by Sir Hudson Lowe at Plantation House, 
where there were only four or five fire-places, and 
there were twenty-three at Longwood. That, more- 
over, they were natives of a warmer and a drier ‘cli- 
mate than the English, and stood in need of more 
heat; that the dampness of Longwood rendered 
fires absolutely necessary -for the preservation of 
their health. That both his own ‘and the coun- 
tess’s clothes were spoiled by the damp, in spite 
of the fires. which were used. As to asking: for 
more, he did not like to subject himself to'slight- 


ee 


A VOICE FROM 8T. HELENA. 201 


ings or refusals. Napoleon for some days has 
eaten no dinner. Told me, that he intended to 
accustom himself to only one meal a day. Men- 
tioned in the course of conversation, that he once 
had it in contemplation to have sent five thousand 
men to invade Surinam; and asked me, (as I had 
been there,) if I thought it would have succeeded? 
I‘replied, that 1 thought not. | First, on account 
of the difficulty of approaching the coast, as large 
ships could not come nearer than seventeen or 
eighteen miles, and the channel for vessels, (not 
drawing more than eighteen feet water,) was only 
practicable at high water, was very difficult, intri- 
cate, and required the aid of a skilful pilot. » Be- 
sides, that the country itself was full of marshes 
and very inaccessible. That there was a garrison 
of three regiments, besides’ the colonial militia. 
Fort Amsterdam was strong; and could for some 
time sustain a regular siege: © 

- The weather has not been so bad this Presi as for 
some time past. Napoleon went out as far as 
Count Bertrand’s. ‘“ Veramente,” said he, yester- 
day, when speaking of the weather, “ “mon 2 — 
meaciann ; 

~) 7th—Napoleon. onnieiinen of rheumatie pains 
and slight head-ach, which he attributed, and with 
reason, to the dampness of the climate and the 
house. ‘ Every evening,” said he, “ when I leave 
my little sitting-room, where there is a fire, and 


202 A VOICE FROM ST, HELENA. 


enter ‘my sleeping-room,* where there is none, 
I experience a sensation as if I were going into 
adamp cellar. If it were not for the room that 
Cockburn built, which is light, airy, and built of 
dry wood, where I walk about and exercise, I 
should have been under ground. before now. But 
that is I suppose what your oligarchy wants, and 
is of a piece with their treatment of the prisoners 
in the pontons, an act the most cruel as well 
as the most impolitic that was ever practised. 
Nothing ever done by your ministers enraged the 
French and other nations against them so much as 
their system of pontons. 1f humanity were out of 
the question, good policy ought to have made them 
treat prisoners well. It is incredible what effect 
the good treatment of prisoners in France had 
upon other nations, especially the Russians and 
Germans. I often experienced it to my advan- 
tage, as thousands of them threw down their 
arms, who otherwise would have fought despe- 
rately, saying, “‘ ne will go into Bourgogne to 
drink good wine.” 

L observed, that latterly in the prison-ships in 
England there was less mortality than amongst 
those confined in the depdts on shore, which was 
a proof that they were notill treated, because sick- 
ness and deaths always followed the ill treatment 
of prisoners. Napoleon replied, “the most. bar- 


°)% Napoleon had changed his bed-room some time before. 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 203 


barous and unnatural measure ever adopted by 
one nation against another, was that of putting 
poor wretches who were not brought up to the 
sea on board of ships, there to remain ten or twelve 
years without stirring out or walking upon the 
grass, exposed to the stink of the mud at low 
water, and huddled up as they were. It was a 
crying injustice, and one which, mark me, will 
yet be revenged upon the English nation. Of the 
prisoners in France, [, with their own consent, 
formed battalions of pioneers, who laboured on 
the fortresses and other public works, for which 
they were paid a certain sum daily. Amongst 
them, there were some English. Directly after- 
wards, a letter was sent by order of the English 
government, to know if it were true that English- 
men were made to work as pioneers, expressing 
great anger, and desiring that it might be imme- 
diately put a stop to. 1 ordered an answer to be 
returned, stating, that an offer had been made to 
all the prisoners in France, that a certain number 
of them would be permitted to volunteer to work 
as pioneers, for which they would receive so much 
pay daily. That it was not made to the English 
in particular, . No force was employed, and 
that some English, amongst others, had. .volan- 
teered to work, for which they were paid; that 
I begged the English government would do 
the same with any prisoners ‘of mine who would 


204 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


volunteer. However, they would not allow the 
Frenchmen to work; 1 suppose your oligarchy 
was afraid that they would disseminate their prin- 
ciples of equality amongst the people of England.” 

He then made some remarks upon the Manu- 
scrit venu de S* Héléne, and observed, that there 
was such an ignorance of chronological events 
displayed in it, such as putting the battle of Jena 
after Tilsit, and others of a similar nature, and so 
many mistakes as to time and place, that it would 
make a corporal in the old French army laugh. 
“ Notwithstanding this,” added he, “it was writ- 
ten by a man of esprit, though in several passages 
he appears not to have had sers commun. In some 
places, his assertion of the motives which actuated 
me is correct. What he says on the subject of 
my nobility is correct. What he says about my 
intentions and wishes to do away with every thing 
which had been established since Charlemagne, is 
also right. That the nobility I formed was that 
of the people is true, as 1 took the son of a 
peasant, and made him a duke ora marshal when 
I found that he had talents. That I wanted to 
introduce a system of general equality, is true, 
and that every person should be eligible to every 
situation, provided he had talents to fill it, what- 
ever his birth might be. That I wanted to do 
away with all the ancient prejudices of birth is 
also correct. That laboured to establish a govern- 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 205 


ment of the people, which though dur, was still 
_ that of the people, is also true. That I ought to 
have deposed for my own security, when I had it in 
my power, the house of Brandenburgh, and all the 
ancientorders of sovereigns; and that they almost 
always combined against and attacked me, is also 
right. Probably I ought to haye done so, and I 
should have succeeded. It is true that I wished 
to establish a government of the people. It is a 
work which will much displease the oligarchy, 
because they do not wish that any person except 
one of themselves should be eligible for any im- 
portant situation. With ¢heir will, birth, and not 
talents or capability, should regulate the choice, 
A worse, a more despotic or unforgiving govern- 
ment than-an oligarchy never existed. Offend, 
them once, you are never pardoned, and no treat- 
ment can be too cruel for you when in their power. 
The pamphlet is written with that lightness pe- 
culiar to Frenchmen, and consequently contains 
many mistakes. The Edinburgh Review will 
find, out directly that 1 am not the author of it. 
La Reveu d Edinburg le coulera en bas. They will 
take it to pieces as I have done. The editors of it 
will probably make similar remarks to those in, 
the notes* I made yesterday, probably not so. 

* ‘Those notes were given by Napoleon tome, and published in 


the appendix to the ninth volume of the Memoirs of eaehnons 
dictated by himself. \ 


206 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA, 


strong, in consequence of not being so well ac- - 
quainted with the secrets as I am. I see by the 
sketch* they have published of my life, that they 
take pains to ascertain the truth. Most of it is 
true; and it is difficult for me to imagine’ from 
whence they had their information on some parts: 
of my early life, which were very little sarge to 
any except my own family.” (sta 

«“ That work,” continued he, ' was ‘not written 
by Madame de Staél, or if it be, it was the work 
of a few hours, and was sent to the press without 
any corréction. But there are in it fautes trop 
grossitres for Madame de Staél. The sentiments 
expressed in it are such as Madame de Staél 
would talk; and though new in England, were 
for several years the subjects of vevqpireaen in 
France.”’ 

* The author,” continued he, “ has waldo a great 
mistake in saying, that after Jena, I never did any 
thing worthy of my former actions. The greatest 
military manceuvres I ever made, and those’ for 
which I give myself most credit, were performed 
at Eckmiihl, and were infinitely superior to Ma- 
rengo, or to any other of my actions. It is the 
work of some young homme d’esprit, who has hur- 
ried it to the press without having submitted it 


* The sketch alluded to came from the classical pen of John 
Allen, Esq. Napoleon had read it with great attention in my 
presence, and made some pencil marks upon particular passages. 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA, 207 


to the revision of any of his friends. It is however 
composed. with good intentions towards me. If I 
had written a work of the kind, it would indeed 
be different. Every line of it would be a sub- 
ject of discussion for vations.” 

“Freeing the work from its mistakes ae er- 
rors,” added he, ‘ it wotild be valuable. The 
author says that there will be a revolution in Eu- 
rope. That is not at all improbable. He says, 
that it was perhaps necessary to place a Bourbon 
on the throne in 1814; but that it would have 
been advisable to have left me after, my return 
from Elba. Perhaps he is. right: in both.” He 
added, that such a work, really written by him, 
would make a great noise. “ It will be, or per- 
haps is. written,” added he, * but it will be for 
my son and for posterity” 

_ It only rested with me,” said he, “ to ef We. 
posed both the King of Prussia and the Empe- 
ror of Austria. When I was at Schoenbrunn,” (I 
think he said) “ the Duke of Wurtsburgh fre- 
quently insinuated to me that the only means to se- 
cure the good faith of Austria would be to depose 
his brother Francis, and place the crown on his 
head, These offers were repeated to me afterwards 
through a minister, with an offer of his son as 
hostage, who should be placed as my aid-de-camp, 
with every other possible guarantee. [ reflected 
upon it for some time; but the marriage. with 


208 (A VOICE FROM. ST. HELENA. 


Marie Louise put a stop to any further consider- 
ation on the subject. I was wrong in not having 
accepted of it. Nothing would have been easier 
to execute.” 

I asked, if he believed it to have bees written. 
by the Abbé de Pradt. “No,” replied the empe- 
ror, “1 do not think that he is the author. De 
Pradt,’’ continued. he, “.may be said to be une 
espece de fille de joie qui préte son corps to all the 
world for payment. Once, when he’ was giving 
vent to his customary bavardage and extravagant 
projects in my presence, I contented myself with 
humming a part of the air: : 

Od courez vous donc monsieur P Abbé 

Vous allez vous casser le nez, 
which disconcerted him so much, that he Lieln not 
another word to utter.” 

Speaking about the badness of the asian, died 
the offer said to have been made by’ Sir Hudson; 
Lowe to build a new one, Napoleon observed that: 
he had only refused the offer of making additions’ 
to the present wretched old house of Longwood, 
and the design to build another on that miser- 
able situation. “The governor,” said he, ‘asked 
me if I had heard that wood had arrived to build. 
a new house, but that I must not. believe: that:a 
house had been sent out; that I might perhaps: 
have seen such an assertion in the papers; but 
that only materials had come out. I told him: 


A’ VOICE FROM 8T. HELENAD 0 


that Idid not believe what I saw in the papers; 
more especially any thing relating to myself. He 
said, that if I made choice of a spot to build a 
house upon, I might have. it; but on condition 
that it was’ approved of by him; without which - 
1 could not have it where I pleased.’ I was 
not so silly as not to have known this before. 
He then made an offer of building additions, but 
with a very bad grace. I told him, that I did 
not wish to subject myself to the inconvenience 
of having workmen continually to annoy me with 
their noise. That the English government ought 
to provide me with a house already built, and not 
one to be built. After this, he wrote a letter to 
Montholon on the same subject, who replied by 
my desire, that if he intended to build a new house 
for us, let it be built in a place where there was 
shade and water. Nothing could be-more plain 
than this. It is a fine prospect certainly that he 
now holds out. With all the activity of Cockburn; 
the construction of a new house would take three 
years, and with this man, I dare say six; and 
that a house might be healthy, it ought not.to be 
inhabited for eighteen months after being built. I 
shall be dead long before that time. ‘This I also. 
told him. Plantation House is the only one in 
the island fit for me. The ‘governor having a 
house himself in town, could easily retire there for, 
six months, until improvements were made here, 
VOL. II. P 


210 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


and haying the command of every thing himself, 
without being obliged to ask permission from any 
body, he could soon render this habitable for 
some months in the year, which is all that it is 
adapted for, He could retire to town in the winter 
season.” 
_ Napoleon then said, that the English servants 
in the house had laughed at the French for eating 
lentils, and asserted, that in England they fed 
horses with what the French eat here. He laughed 
very heartily while saying this; and at an anec- 
dote which I related about Dr. Johnson, who I 
informed him, had in the first edition of his Eng- 
lish dictionary, defined oats to be “ food for horses 
in England, and for men in Scotland.” 
- Count Montholon called Captain Blakeney* 
and myself this day to look at the state of his 
apartments. The rooms, especially the countess’s 
bed-room, the children’s room, and bath room, were 
certainly in a shocking state, from the extreme 
humidity of the place. The walls were covered 
with green fur and mould; damp and eold to the 
touch, notwithstanding the fires which were con- 
stantly kept in them. I never saw a human habi- 
tation in a more mouldy or humid state, in which 
opinion the orderly officer agreed. 

* Captain Blakeney had replaced Captain Poppleton as or- 
derly officer on the departure of Captain P.’s regiment from St. 
Helena, 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 211 


 8th--Saw Napoleon, who informed me that 

after I had left him yesterday, he had fownd hitn- 
self very unwell with head-ach and general pains 
in his limbs; and had taken a warm bath, mpich 
had been very beneficial to him. 

He was in very good spirits, spoke for-a long 
time about the Manuscrit de S" Hélane, and ob- 
served, that it must have been written bya person 
who had heard him reason, and was acquainted 
with his ideas. He added, that he thought he 
knew the author, whom he supposed to be a man 
who had figured in the revolution, and now lived 

He asked imany questions about the number of 
bottles of wine we had drank at our party the 
night before last. Blamed Mr. Boys’s conduct, 
for having preached in allusion to the admiral.* 
Said that a mati’s conscience was not to be ame- 
nable to any tribunal ; that to person ought to be 
accountable to aby earthly power for his religious 
opinions. “ Had you not persecuted the Catholics 
in Ireland,” added ‘he, “in all probability the 
greatest number of them would before now have 
become Protestants ; but persecution strengthens 
them in their betief. Even Pitt himself was aware 


* Mr. Boys had thought it a duty to mention something from 
the pulpit, in censure of an official person, for hating set an 
example of immorality to a sniall colony, by publicly living with 
a woman not his wife, and for absenting himself from ehureh. 


— 


212 A VOICE FROM ST, HELENA. 


of the necessity of giving the Catholics oe or 
vileges with the Protestants.” 

» 9th.—Races at Deadwood. The commissioners 
all present. None of the French from Longwood 
attended, except the children and some of the do- 
mestics. 

- During the interval between the beet Sir Hud- 
son Lowe sent for me, and asked if “some of 
General Bonaparte’s horses were not on the race- 
ground?” I reptied in the affirmative. . His excel- 
lency asked how they came there? I replied, 
that I had borrowed the horses from General 
Gourgaud, one of which I had lent to Miss Eliza 
Balcombe, and the other to the surgeon of the | 
Conqueror: Sir Hudson immediately broke out 
into not. the most moderate expressions, and his 
gestures attracted the attention of many of the 
spectators, He characterized, my having dared 
to lend any of General Bonaparte’s horses without 
his (the governor's) permission, to be the greatest 
piece of presumption he had ever witnessed. I 
observed, that I had come to St. Helena to learn 
that it was a crime to borrow a horse for the use - 
of a young lady; neither had [ known that it was 
necessary to go to Plantation House to ask per- 
mission from him to borrow a horse belonging to 
the Longwood establishment. Sir Hudson replied, 
that “I had no. business to form any opinion 
about it.” ‘ 

This was evidently only a pretext to beve an 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 213 


opportunity of venting his pitiful vengeance, as 
not a week passed that horses were not sent down 
to town, and frequently to Sir Thomas Reade’s, 
for Dr. Livingston and others to ride up to Long- 
wood, without it having ever been signified that it 
was ‘necessary first to apply to Sir Hudson Lowe 
for permission. » Besides, Gen. Gourgaud always 
directed that a horse should be in the stable at my 
command.’ 

A little before the Boinalemiols of the races, ‘the 
three commissioners, Madame Sturmer, and Cap- 
tain Gor, came in as far as the inner gate of Long. 
wood, where they remained for some time, during 
which the governor approached and looked in at 
the outer gate. Shortly afterwards, Count and 
Countess Bertrand, Count and Countess Montho- 
lon, and General Gourgaud, went out to walk, 
and met the commissioners outside of the gate, 
with whom they had a long conversation. They 
afterwards proceeded together to Hut’s Gate. It 
was nearly dark before they returned. 

Napoleon in high spirits; looked out of a win- 
dow at the races, with which he was much pleased. 
Told me that he had done every thing in his 
‘power to establish the same in France. 
' 12th.—Went to Plantation House, in conse- 
quence of orders communicated to me by Captain 
Blakeney. After some conversation relative to the 
late discussions respecting the quantity of fuel 
allowed to Longwood, Sir Hudson Lowe entered 


214 A VOICE FROM 8T. HELENA. 


again upon the heinous crime [ had been guilty of 
in lending one of the horses of the Longwood.esta- 
blishment to a young lady; to which I replied as 
f had done before, which he said was quite in the 
Longwood style. He then asked in. am abrupt 
manner if 1 had not received some books from Dr. 
Warden? Lreplied, that I had received seven or 
eight monthly publications, containing reviews 
of his work. ‘“ Did you not receive one, ‘sir, 
with, a view of Longwood?’* I replied; yes, * It 
is very extraordinary,” said Sir Hudson, ‘that 
you did not inform me of, it.”. I replied, that I 
was not bound to tell him of any or every, book I 
received or purchased; that I was, in the habit of 
having books and pamphlets of various descrip- 
tious from England, which I was: not: obliged. to 
give any account of. Sir Hudsom said,,that I 
ought to have done so, and asked if 1 had lent 
any of them to the French, or if they had seen 
them. Lreplied, that to my knowledge the French 
had not seen them; that they were at present in 
my imner apartment. He said, that ‘fit was; very 
extraordinary: I should:-have had these pamphlets 
for two months, without being able to tell:whether 
the French had seen them; and that might have 
books in my rooms, to be shewa to)them, ofia.very 
improper tendency, which they might read in myab- 
‘sence;” and after harping for a long time on those 
* A few days before I had lent this pamphlet to an officer of 
‘the staff. ’ ; 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 215 


unlucky pamphlets, he said he supposed I had no 
objection to lend them to him. I replied, certainly 
not; that they should be sent to him on my re 
turn. They consisted of the Monthly Review, 
Gentleman’s Magazine, Eclectic Review, British 
Ladies’ Magazine, European Magazine, and New 
Monthly. His excellency then said, that Count 
Las Cases had given a pretty strong bint in the 
letter he had sent to Longwood from the Cape, that 
he was in want of the money which he had lent 
them, which it did not appear to be convenient for 
them to understand. After which he made a long 
and abusive harangue upon the “ Character of 
Bonaparte,” extracted from the Quarterly Review, 
which publication his excellency appeared to con- 
sider as a sort of political gospel. i) 
14th.—Napoleon in very good spirits. Asked 
many questions about the horses that had won at 
the races, and the manner in which we trained 
them; how much [had won or lost; and about the 
ladies, &c. ‘* You had a large party yesterday,” 
continued he. “How many bottles of wine? Drink, 
your eyes look like drink,” which he expressed 
in English. “Who dined with you?’ I men 
tioned Captain Wallis amongst others. “ What, 
‘is that the lieutenant who was with Wright?” I 
replied in the affirmative. ‘“ What does he say 
about Wright’s death?” I said, “He states his 
belief that Wright was murdered by orders of 


216 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA, 


Fouché, for the purpose of ingratiating himself with 
you. That six or seven weeks previous, Wright 
had told him that he expected to be murdered -like 
Pichegru, and begged of him never to believe that 
he would commit suicide ; that he had received a 
letter from Wright, about four or five weeks before 
his death, in which. he stated that he was better 
treated, allowed to subscribe to a library, and to 
receive newspapers. Napoleon replied, “I will 
never allow that Wright was put to death by 
Fouché’s orders. If he was put to death privately, 
_ it must have been by my orders, and not by those 
of Fouché.  Fouché knew me too well. ‘He 
was aware that I would have had him hanged 
directly if he attempted it, By this officer's own 


words, Wright was not au secret, as he says that) ’ 


he saw him some weeks before his death, and that 
he was allowed books and newspapers.. Now| 
if it had been in contemplation to make away 
with him, he would have been) put aw secret for 
months before, in order that people might not be 
accustomed to see him for some time previous, as 
I thought this * * * intended to do in November 
last. Why not examine the gaolers and turnkeys? 
The Bourbons have every opportunity of proving 
it, if such really took place. But your ministers* 
themselves do not believe it. The idea I have of 
what was my opinion at that time about Wright, is 
faint ; but as well as I can recollect, it was, that 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 217 


he ought to have been brought before a military 
commission for having landed spies and assassins, 
and the sentence executed within forty-eight hours. 
What dissuaded. me from doing, so; I. cannot 
clearly recollect... Were I in France at this:mo- 
ment, and a similar occurrence took place, the 
above would be my opinion, and I would write 
to the English government, ‘Such an officer of 
your's has been tried for landing brigands and. as- 
sassins on my territories, 1 have caused him to 
be tried by a military commission. - He has, been 
condemned to death. The sentence has been car- 
ried into execution. If any of wy officers in your 
prisons have been guilty of the same, try and exe- 
cute them.. You have my full permission, and ac- 
quiescence. Or if. you find hereafter any, of my 
officers: landing assassins on your shores, shoot 
them instantly. This affair of Wright's,” added 
he, ‘‘ made so little impression upon me, that when 
Lord Ebrington spoke about it at Elba, I did not 
recollect it. My mind was so much occupied 
with grand objects, that I had little time to think 
of a poor English captain. Had the Bourbons, 
_ Moreau, or the Vendean chiefs been put to death, 
then indeed I might have been suspected. I might 
have tried and executed the Vendean chiefs for 
having carried arms against the country. They 
are all alive. My opinion is, if I had known 
Wright had. been one of Sydney Smith’s officers, 


218 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


and that hehad fought against meat Acre, Ewould 
have sent for and questioned him about the siege 
and released him. I recollect perfectly well sees 
ing am officer wounded and carried off at Acre, 
whose bravery I admired at the time. 1 think 
that. I should have released him, if 1 had found 
him to be that officer. It appears also that he 
killed himself when he was wpon the point of being 
released, as I see that the court of Spain had int 
terceded for him. When yow first spoke to me 
on the subject, ] imagined that Wright had: killed 
himself purposely to avoid giving evidence against 
your ministers; and I attached a degree of heroism 
to. the aet, which I gave him great credit for; but 
since I see that it was.a long time after, and when 
I was at: Ulm, at the head of a hundred and fifty 
thousand men, and three hundred leagues. from 
Paris. It requires but a trifling circumstance to 
make you English kill yourselves.” Hs 
Napoleon then rallied me upon my dead 
attention to Miss:***, and said, I ought to marry 
her. T replied, that I was neither rich enough, 
nor young enough, to have pretensions to so fine 
‘a lady, He now recounted some of his own 
love adventures. “The most beautiful female: J 
ever saw,” said he, “was an Irish girl, Mademoi- 
selle G**s; whether she had been born in Ire- 
land, or was only ofan Irish family, } am not cer- 
tain. I was during Josephine’s time, and long be- 


bad 
~ 


& VOICE FROM 8ST. HELENA. 219 


fore I married Marie Louise. One day, when I was 
hunting in St. Germains, some of the court in- 
triguers threw her in my way, and contrived it so, 
| that’she came with a petition in her hand to deli- 


ver tome, When she presented herself, and said 
she hada petition, every one made way for her, as 
Phad given orders, that persons bringing petitions 
should invariably be allowed to approach me. 
Bhe fell at my feet; and presented it. She was 
eovered ‘with a veil, that did not conceal the 
beauty of her countenance, which was really hea- 
venly. Certainly. 1 was taken with her charms, 
and although I saspected there was some intrigue, 
I was not displeased. . 'Phree or four times after: 
wards, [ saw and conversed with her. D used to 
take little liberties. with her, such as patting her 

cheeks. A’t this: time a letter from her mother to 
her was brought tome from the secret post-office. 
This mother was an old) intriguer, and gave her 
daughter directions which elucidated her charac- 
ter.. There were instructions relative to: her con- 
duct towards me in many particular instances. 
1 was now convinced, that it was not proper for 
me to countenance this proceeding, and although 
1 was assuredly smitten with her, for she was:as — 
beautiful as an angel; I gave such orders: as: pre- 
vented her ever having the means of being again 
admitted to my presence. Since that time, 1 have 
been informed, she really had aregard for me, and 


. 


+) 


. 
* : 


; 220 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


would have been faithful.. She is now married. to 
M.***, a very rich man, but, still, I am led» to 
believe, preserves an affection forme.” |» «+ 

_ The evening before I left Paris for Waterloo,” 
continued Napoleon; “a beautiful Englishwoman 
came to the palace, and asked to see me. . She saw 
Marchand, who told her that it was impossible. 
She said, she was an English lady, and a friend 
of Mademoiselle G **s, whom I well knew, and 
that she was persuaded I would see her;.that-I 
could not: refuse to see a young lady, who loved 
me, and: admired my character. Marchand. told 
her, that I was to leave Paris the next morning, 
and could not be disturbed. . At hearing this, she 
appeared to be much afllicted, and with some re- 
luctance she went away. . Perhaps she was'some 
beautiful intriguer, or one who had la téte montée 
for me. When once a woman has Ja téte moniée, 
all the world will not prevent her from attempt 
ing to sueceed in her designs. Soon after I had 


taken Vienna, the Austrian Princess * ** got her. 


head full of me, from hearing me so much talked 


of. ‘She was. one of those princesses, of whom you. 
know there are so many in Germany. Nothing 


would * ******,+ For this purpose she came: 
to. Schoénubrunn, and insisted upon seeing me. 
+ The following quotation from Douglas, ier no wd hed 

plain the designs of this'innamorata., wy 
« As ladies wish to be, who love their lords.” 


vx ee 


¢ 
a : os 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 221 


— 
. 


Murat, who was a fine handsome fellow, tried 
to gain her affections, but she rejected him with 
disdain. I ordered her to be admitted and repre- 
sented myself as Maréchal Duroc. She could 
speak very little French or Italian, and 1 could 
not converse in German. I told her not to speak 
so loud, as the emperor would hear her, and pointed’ 
out Duroc as emperor; but she was not to be de- 
ceived. She had seen me pass by a house where 
she was, and cried, no, no, vous; vous, empereur. 
She was extremely handsome, and very candid in 
her confessions.” in 

. Napoleon then spoke about the 4 asser uaa 
to have been made by Lord Castlereagh, in the 
House of Commons, respecting him; viz. that he 


had made out alist of the richest heiresses in 


France, whom he was in the habit of ordering:-to 
marry such of his generals as he pleased. That 
none of them could marry without his leave, and. 
were obliged to espouse any persons, to whom he. 
thought proper to give them. These assertions he 


declared to be wholly false. ‘ So far from being 


true,” added Napoleon, “it was not in my power - 


to get even Caulaincourt married to a lady! to 


whom I wished. to see him. united. She was 
the daughter of * * *, who was president of the 
chamber, .a banker, and enormously rich, which 
he had chiefly acquired, it was supposed, by a 
“**"**** She was a beautiful girl, and he 


222 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA: 


intended giving her a large portion. I asked the 
father myself, as a favour, to give her in marriage 
to Caulaincourt, but he gave me a positive refusal. 
At that time, Caulaincourt was one of my greatest 
favourites. So much for Castlereagh’s veracity.” 
19th.—Went to Plantation House, in obedience 
to directions to go there, received from Sir Hud- 
son Lowe through Captain Blakeney, and to take 
with me a report of the state of health of Na- 
poleon. On my arrival, Sir Hudson Lowe asked 
for the report, which stated, that with the exception 
of a few slight catarrhal attacks, his health had 
been tolerable. Sir Hudson Lowe asked if they 
had been of any consequence, to which 1 answered 
in the negative. The governor observed, that 
others, besides me, had made reports relative to 
General Bonaparte’s health. That Madame Ber- 
trand had told the commissioners that he was 
extremely unwell, that because they saw him 
standing in the viranda, they must not believe 
that he was in good health. J repeated, that he 
had suffered some itdisposition, but not of a seri- 
ous nature. Sir Hudson Lowe then said, that he 
had heard a great deal, though not all of the con- 
versation which had passed between the French 
and the commissioners, and that all of the former, 
except one, had abused the opportunity: That 
every time Count Bertrand had had an opportunity 
of speaking to them, he had abused it; that this last 


, 


A. VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 223 


was the only time that Montholon had had an 
opportunity of speaking to them, which he (Sir 
Hudson) asserted, he had fully availed himself of 
by cramming them with misrepresentations, ; 
20th.—Saw Napoleon in his bath. At first he 
was rather dull and out of spirits. Complained 
of pain in the right cheek, shooting from the dis- 
eased tooth. Gums spongy and bled upon the 
slightest touch. Ankles and legs a little swelled. 
Great want of sleep at night. Explained to me 
several reasons which convinced me that Corvisart 
had been right in prescribing to him exercise on 
horseback, which I strongly recommended my- 
self, and in as forcible.a manner as possible. Na- 
poleon replied, that under the present restrictions, 
liable to be insulted by a sentinel if he budged off 
the road; he could never stir out, neither did he 
think that I myself, or any other Englishman 
placed in his situation, would avail himself of the 
privilege to ride, fettered with such restrictions. 
To this observation of his, I made no reply, for 
if I had expressed my real sentiments as a man, 
and not as a surgeon, I must have said that I 
agreed with him in opinion; and contented myself 
with recommending antiscorbutic vegetables, &c. 
* Di qua un poco non mi vedrete pit, Dottore ; 
vorrei che fosse questa sera, una maniera d’**** * 
as certain, but more barbarous than the stiletto. 


S 


224 A. VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


Sento che la macchina seneva giornalente. How- 
ever, that.is what he was sent for. In succeeding 
ages the **** will pay for it. Sur le rocher le 
plus affreux dans le monde, they send out a man 
to impose restrictions which never have been prac- 
tised in the revolutionary tribunals under Marat. 
Even there, the condemned, while permitted to 
live, were allowed newspapers and books. They 
did not expire in agonies, protracted so long as to 
make it appear a natural death. 7Z'hat refinement 
of cruelty was unknown to Billaud de Warenanes 
or Collot D’Herbois. 

‘I ask you,” continued, Napdleon, “ can 1 you 
lend me a newspaper or a book? Can you even 
lend me a work upon science?” | 

Shortly afterwards he spoke about Catholic 
emancipation, which if effected, he pronounced 
would be of great, benefit to. the English on the 
continent, and be a most wise and politic measure 
for our ministers to adopt. 

He then made some biecnneiions about Mr. 
P——e’s having sold his wife,* which he said 
would reflect but little credit on the governor; and. 
that, had such a circumstance occurred in France, 
the Procureur Général would have. prosecuted 
the offending parties. That it appeared to bea 
most disgraceful circumstance, especially when, 


* This circumstance actually happened at St. Helena. 


A’ VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 225 


as it appeared to be, it had been sanctioned by 
the two organs of communication of the governor, 
civil and military. 

- Napoleon then observed that he was at a loss 
to conceive from whence the Edinburgh Review 
had obtained so much accurate information’ re- 
specting him. ‘That circumstance,” said he, “ of 
the déjeiné de trois amis, I never told to any per- 
son. It is true that I was the author, and that it 
produced great effect in France, but I do not re- 
collect ever having disclosed it to any one. There 
are, however, some mistakes in the Review. I 
never knew Barras at Toulon. My first acquaint- 
ance with him commenced at Paris, after the siege 
of Toulon. . 

_ * My marriage with Marie Louise,” added Na- 
poleon, “ produced'no change in me. I was pre- 
cisely the same as. before. Never was woman 
more astonished than Marie Louise was after her 
marriage, when she observed the few precautions 
that I took to insure my safety against any at- 
tempts upon my life. When she perceived that 
there were no sentinels except at the outer gates 
of the palace; that there were no lords sleeping 
before the doors of the apartments; that the doors — 
were not even locked, and that there were no guns 
or pistols in the rooms where we slept, ‘ Why,’ 
said she with astonishment, ‘ you do not take 
half so many precautions as my father, who has 

VOL, I, @ 


TE 


226 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


nothing to fear. I am,” continued Napoleon, 
‘too much of a fatalist, (trop fataliste,) to take 
any precautions against assassination. When I 
was in Paris, I used to go out and intermingle 
with the populace without my guards, receive 
their petitions, and was frequently surrounded by: 
them so closely that I could not move.” 

- Linquired of the emperor in what engagement 
or engagements he considered himself to have been 
in the greatest danger? He replied, “ In the com-. 
mencement of my campaigns. At Toulon, and: 
particularly at Arcola. At Arcola, my horse was 
shot under me; rendered furious by the wound, 
the animal seized the’ bit between his teeth, and 
galloped on towards the enemy. In the agonies 
of death, he plunged into a morass and expired, 
leaving me nearly up to my neck in the swamp, 
and in a situation from which I could not extri- 
cate myself. I thought at one moment .that the 
Austrians would have come and eut off my head, 
which was just above the surface of the morass, 
and which they could have done without my hav- 
ing been able to offer the least. resistance.» How- 
ever, the difficulty of getting at me, and the ap- 
proach of my soldiers, who rescued me, wen 
them.” 

I asked if he had not heen feceqitnnty slightly. 
wounded? He replied, ‘several times, butscarce- 
ly more than once had | occasion for surgical as~ 
sistance, or any fever in consequence of a wound. 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 227 


At Marengo a cannon-shot took away a piece of 
the boot of my left leg, and a little of the skin,” 
said ‘he, shewing the mark to me, “ but I used no 
other application to it than a piece of linen dipped 
in salt and water.” I asked about a wound of 
which there was a deep mark in the inside of the 
left thigh, a little above the knee. He said, that 
it was from a bayonet. I asked if he had not had 
horses frequently killed under him, to which he 
answered, ‘eighteen or nineteen im the Course" of 
his life. 

Phe regiment de la Fére,” said Napoleon, “ in 
which I had commenced my career, behaved so 
badly to the inhabitants of Tarin, that I was ob- 
liged to reduce them. I accordingly had them 
marehed to Paris, assembled on the parade, 
ordered the colours to be taken ftom them by 
some colonels, and lodged in the charch of,” (the 
Invalids, I think he said,) “coveréd with mourning. 
I divided the officers who had not behaved so badly 
as the principal actors, amongst other regiments: 
Sonie months afterward8, I formed the reginient 
again under different officers, and the colours were 
taken from the church with great pomp by a 
number of colonels, each tearing a piece off, which 
they burnt, and new ones’ were pe in seg 
stead. ”» 

“When I was about seventeen’ years of age,” 
said he, “ I narrowly escaped being drowned in 

a2 


228 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


the Seine. While swimming, cramp seized me, 
and after several ineffectual struggles, I sunk. I 
experienced at that moment all the sensations of 
dying, and lost all recollection. However, after 
I had sunk, the current carried me upon a bank 
of sand, on the edge of which it threw me, 
where I lay senseless for I know not how long, 
and was restored to life by the aid of some of my 
young companions, who by accident saw me lying 
there. Previous to this, they had given me up 
for lost, as they saw me sink, and the current of 
the river had carried me down to a considerable 
distance.” +3 
While looking over a number of papers (chiefly 
Portsmouth), he observed an article stating that 
*** had made large purchases in the north of 
Ireland. ‘“ Ah,” said Napoleon, ‘“ some of my 
money has gone to pay for those estates. After 
the abdication ateFontainbleau, upwards of forty 
millions of francs, my private property, was seized 
and taken from my treasurer near Orleans. Of 
this money, about five and twenty millions were 
divided amongst T ***, M**, H**, and, C ***. 
The money thus seized included the marriage 
portion of the empress Marie Louise, which had 
been paid'in sovereigns of gold, an old German 
coin. The remainder was placed in the French 
treasury. The whole of these. sums had been 
guaranteed to me by the treaty of Fontainbleau. 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 229 


The share which C ** obtained was very large, 
and the exact amount of it is known to me.” 
‘The talents requisite in a good general then 
came under his observation. “The mind of a 
general ‘ought to resemble and be as clear as 
the field-glass of a telescope, et jamais se faire 
des tableaux. Of all the generals who preceded 
him, and perhaps all those who have followed, 
Turenne was the greatest. Maréchal Saxe, a 
mere general, pas d’esprit; Luxembourg, beau- 
coup; le grand Frédéric, beaucoup, anda quick 
and ready perception of every thing. Your Marl- 
borough, besides being a great general, avait aussi 
beaucoup d esprit. Judging from Wellington’s ac- 
tions, from his despatches, and above all from his 
conduct towards Ney, Ishould pronounce him to 
be un homme de peu desprit, sans générosité, et 
sans grandeur d’dme.. Such I know to be the opi- 
nion of Benjamin Constant and of Madame de 


Staél, who said, that except as a general, he had ~ 


not two ideas. Asa general, however, to find his 
equal amongst your own nation, you must go back 
to the time of Marlborough, but as any thing else, 
I think that history will pronounce him to.be un 
homme borné.” ; ! 

‘21st.—At about six minutes before ten o’clock 
at night, three distinct shocks of an earthquake 
were felt at Longwood. The whole.of the house 
was shaken with a rumbling, clattering noise at 


230 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


first, as if some heavy body, like a loaded waggon, 
was dragged along the upper apartments, succeed- 
ed by an evident tremulous motion of the ground, 
the glasses rattling on the table, and the pictures 
recediiig from the walls.. The duration of the 
whole might have been from sixteen to twenty se- 
conds, as Captain Blakeney and myself, who were 
sitting together at the time that it occurred, had 
sufficient time from its commencement until it was 
over to reason and reciprocally ask from what it 
could proceed, before we guessed at the right cause, 
which we discovered simultaneously before it 
ceased. No mischief was done.* Generals Mon- 
tholon, Gourgaud, all the household attendants 
and English servants came out. No alarm ap- 
peared to exist amongst them. General Montho- 
lon informed me, that his son Tristan, who was 
asleep, was awoke by the shock, and exclaimed 
that somebody was endeavouring to throw him 
out of the bed. General Gourgaud also felt three 
distinct shocks. Upon inquiry being made of 
some of the sentinels about the house, they replied, 
that they had not experienced any thing extraor- 
dinary. This may be accounted for by the fact 


* Although Napoleon was in bed, which he did nat leave 
during the time of the shocks, some veracious person wrote to 
England that “ Bonaparte endeavoured to escape. out of the 
House, but was stopped by the sentinels,” which’ falsehood was 
eagerly inserted in some of the ministerial papers. 9°) 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. Q31 


of the wind having been so strong at the time, that 
they were obliged to use considerable exertion 
in walking against it. The sensation was very 
strongly felt in our kitchen, about forty yards from 
the house, and at the guard-room, about five hun- 
dred yards distant, particularly by those men who 
were lying down on the ground. 

Very little mischief was done in the island. It 
appeared that the direction of the shocks was 
perpendicular. Had it been lateral, James Town 
must have been overwhelmed with immense mas- 
ses of rock. 

22nd.—Saw Napoleon i in his bed-room. When 
l entered it, he was employed in making some 
calculations. He raised his eyes, looked at me, 
and said, smiling, “ Well, Mr. Doctor, tremble- 
ment de terre last night.” I observed that I had 
experienced three distinct shocks. After he had 
remained a short time at his calculations, he got 
up, and said that he was in bed at the time it 
occurred. “ At the moment of the first shock,” 
continued he, “I imagined, and said to myself, 
some accident has happened to the Conqueror; 
she has taken fire and is blown up,* or else some 
powder magazine on the island has exploded. At 
~ second shock, rs ei I immediately per- 


* When this surmise was mentioned a short time afterwards 
to Admiral Plampin, the following remark was made :—* Ay, 
ay, the d——d rascal supposed so, because he wished it!” 


232 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


ceived what it was, and said it was an’ earth- 
quake.” I asked if he had heard the rumbling 
noise which accompanied it, and that 1 thought 
the duration of it had been from sixteen to eighteen 
seconds, Napoleon replied that he thought it 
had lasted altogether about twelve seconds. He 
mentioned that he had felt the shock of an 
earthquake once before at Ferrara, at break of 
day. Some more conversation about  earth- 
quakes then took place, during which | mentioned 
that a shock had been felt in St. Helena in the 
year 1756, and another in 1782. I said that it 
was likely the fanatics and the superstitious in 
the island would attribute the earthquake to his 
presence; for the Portuguese had said that the © 
strong and destructive south-east wind which 
prevailed at Madeira in 1815, when the Northum- 
berland arrived off Funchal, and had done so 
much mischief, had been produced by his arrival. | 
He laughed very heartily at this, and observed, 
that to make a good tale of it (the earthquake) it 
ought to have occurred immediately upon his ar- 
rival, or a few days after. 

Napoleon then said that he had heh indi 
Lord Moira had demanded twenty thousand :ad- — 
ditional European troops in India. ‘I do not— 
believe it,” said he, “ but if there is any necessity 
to send troops to India, it is owing to the imbe- | 
cility of your ministers in having given up any 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. — 233 


possession beyond the Cape to the French. If 
true, it has been most probably caused by some 
intriguing French adventurers, of whom there 
are now so many thousands without employment, 
who, joining necessity to their hatred of you, have 
stirred up the Mahrattas against you. . Instead of 
having given up Pondicherry and the Isle de 
Bourbon to the French, you ought to have acted 
as the Romans did to the Carthaginians, and said, 
‘ You shall not stir beyond such a latitude,’ not 
for ever, because that would be an injustice, but 
for ten years or longer, until your fears for the 
safety of the Indias are over. My opinion is, 
that your having given up Pondicherry and Bour- 
bon to the French, will cost you ten thousand more 
Europeans in India, without benefiting France in 
the position she is, under those imbeciles the Bour- 
bons. Even when J was in power, | would not 
have given a quattrino (a farthing) for those pos- 
sessions, had it not been for the hopes that I al- 
ways entertained of driving you out of India; to 
effect which, and to maintain a correspondence, 
the isle of France or of Bourbon was so necessary. 
Every year I received ambassadors from the Na- 
bobs and other Indian princes, especially those of 
the Mahrattas, imploring help from me, and offer- 
ing to drive you from India, provided I would 
assist them with fourteen or sixteen thousand in- 
fantry, artillery, and officers. They offered to 


234 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


‘find all the cavalry if I would send officers to in- 
struct their troops. The hatred they expressed 
against you was astonishing. Every year I had 
those proposals through different channels. Very 
frequently by the isle of France, mercantuzzi (petty 
merchants) came with letters for me, in Danish 
vessels, and sometimes over land, which they 
had concealed about them. Several came in dis- 
guise by **. Possibly you may have some in- 
terested views in giving up Pondicherry, thinking 
that thereby you may smuggle some of your India 
goods by French tenders into France. But this 
cannot be of sufficient weight against the great in- 
jury arising from the proximity to your Indian 
possessions of a rival nation like the French. Your 
having given up that colony, will also excite envy 
and a desire to recover all they formerly had, 
whereas, if they had none, they would forget 
that they ever had had any possessions in India. 
You ought not to have allowed the French or any 
other nation to have put their nose (mettere il naso ) 
beyond the Cape. You ought to monopolize the 
whole China trade to yourselves. Instead of going 
to war with the Chinese, it were better to make 
war with the nations who desire to trade with 
them. You ought not to suffer the Americans to 
send a ship there. You give up Batavia to the 
Dutch, who, next to the French, it was your inte- 
rest to shut out from India. The Dutch use a large 


A VOICE FROM 8T. HELENA. 235 


quantity of tea, which should be supplied by 
you. The first and grand object of every nation 
is to consider its own interests, especially when 


every other country gains something. After my 


fall, you might have had any thing you liked to 


ask for, but whilst other nations were acquiring 


territory, you abandoned your first interests, and 


even neglected to make a treaty favourable to 


your commerce, for which you are now suffer- 
ing, and will suffer, and the expedients you have 
put into execution will only procrastinate the 
evil day.” 

25th.—Napoleon sent for me in the evening 
about eight o’clock. Found him in his bed-room. 
He complained of slight head-ach and pain in the 
right side of the face, which he said he had felt 
immediately upon going into the garden, in conse- 
quence of the effect of the wind, and which had 
prevented him from staying out more than a 
quarter of an hour. He had some nausea, and 
eat scarcely any thing at dinner. After I had re- 
commended him what I thought advisable, he 
asked me (as he had done sometimes before) of 
what kind of temperament I took him to be, what 
was necessary to be done to keep him in a state of 
good health? I replied, that 1 conceived him to be 
of a temperament which required much activity ; 
that it was necessary for him to employ both his 
physical and mental faculties almost constantly, 


236 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


and that without the exercise of both the mind and 
the body, it was my opinion he could not long re- 
main in health. That he was a man who required 
to stir much about. ‘ You are right,” replied the 
emperor, ‘‘ such has been necessary to me through 
my life, such is now, and such will be as long as 
the machine holds. Exercise of the mind [almost 
daily take in my writings and otherwise; and ex- 
ercise of the body I should take even in this island, 
were I not in the hands of a boja. But under the 
present system it can never take place. Never 
can I put myself in the way of being insulted by 
sentinels, or receiving a fusillade if I stirred off 
the high road.” 

' 26th.—Saw Napoleon at nine o’clock. He com- 
plained of a sensation of soreness in the lower ex- 
tremities. His legs, especially the left, swelled, 
and the ankles pitted upon pressure. Appetite de- 
ficient. Some nausea at times. Gums spongy. 
In addition to exercise, &c. 1 recommended the 
continuance of a greater quantity of antiscorbutic 
vegetables. He objected to taking a dose of phy- 
sic, which I advised, not on account of any dread 
which he had of it, or of its bad taste, but because 
he was of opinion, that the more medicine was 
administered, the more one stood in need of it. 
“Take a dose of medicine once,” said he, “and 
in all probability you will be obliged to take an 
additional hundred afterwards.” 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 237 


He then eat his breakfast before me, which con- 
sisted of two or three radishes, a little toast and 
butter, followed by a little café aw lait. 

- 28th—Saw Napoleon at eleven, a.m. Appeared 
to be in nearly the same state as yesterday. Ankles 
edematous; appetite bad ; eat nothing since break- 
fast yesterday. His body has been rendered so 
extremely sensible to external impressions, that 
the slightest exposure to wind or cold produced 
a catarrhal or rheumatic affection. I proposed 
to call in Mr. Baxter, giving as a reason, that 
when a person of so much consequence and in 
such peculiar circumstances was even slightly in- 
disposed, it was proper to call in the first medical 
advice. Napoleon replied, ‘‘ There is no neces- 
sity for it. Ifall the colleges of medicine in France 
and England were assembled, they would give 
the same advice that you have done, viz. to take 
exercise on horseback. I myself know as well as 
any physician what is necessary for me. It is 
exercise. Calling in Baxter to me would be.like 
sending a physician to a man who was starving 
with hunger, instead of giving him a loaf of bread. 
I have no objection to your making known to him 
my state of health if you like, and I am well aware 
that he will say exercise. As long as the present 
system is in force, I will never stir out.” When 
I again urged the subject, “ What,” said he, 
‘would you have me render myself liable to be 


238 A VOLCE FROM ST. HELENA. 


stopped and insulted by a sentinel, as Madame 
Bertrand was some days ago, at ten minutes past 
six in the evening, and while it was still day- 
light? If I had been in her place, it would. have 
occurred, as the sentinel had orders to stop every 
body. It would have been a fine subject for 
this governor to have written upop to London, and 
to have stuck a caricature in the print-shops, of 
Napoleon Bonaparte stopped: at the gate, with a 
sentinel charging his bayonet upon him. It would 
have been very amusing to this * * *; and the 
Londoners would have laughed. Until matters 
are put on the footing they were in Cockburn’s 
time, which were approved of by his government, 
or an equivalent given, I shall never stir out. The 
bill is positive; no alterations ought to have taker 
place, except such as were ordered by the Prince 
Regent and the privy council, and signed by the 
Regent or Lord Liverpool ; not by Lord Bathurst. 
I consider all restrictions not made by thenvas 
pall. Force certainly can execute any thing, and 
to avoid the possibility of being insulted, I have 
shat myself up; and until I know toa: certainty 
what restrictions there are, and by whow made, I 
_ shall not venture out, or expose myself to the ca- 
price of my enemy. By prohibiting me to speak 
to such persons as’ I might meet, he offered to: me 
the greatest insult which could be given to man 
It’ is true that he has since taken it off; but ifthe 


A YOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 239 


has the power to make restrictions as he pleases, 
he may renew it to-morrow upon some pretext. 
To a man who has the power of doing what he 
likes, a pretext will never be wanting.’ You may 
tell him what I have said, and that I believe the 
intentions of NHN KH ® and * *** * were and 
are to put an end to me, by inducing disease from 
confinement, and that such are not the intentions 
of the Prince Regent, of Lord Liverpool, or Lord 
Sidmouth. For the restrictions sur la morale im- 
posed by him upon a man like me, have the same 
effect in imprisoning me, as chains and irons on 
the legs would have upon galley slaves. To-rob- 
bers and galley slaves, physical restrictions are 
imposed—aua gens éclairés, moral ones. There is 
not a little lieutenant im that regiment who would 
go out if subjected to the restrictions imposed upom 
me. Lasked the ambassador, “Would you; my 
Lord, go out under the restriction of not speaking 
more to.any person you met, than, How do you do? 
unless in the presence of an officer? (It is true 
that he has taken this off, but he may put it on 
again according to his caprice.) Would you go 
out under the restriction of not bemg able to move 
to the right or to the left of the road? Would you 
stir out under the obligation of coming in again: 
at six o’clock in the evening, or otherwise rum the 
risk of being stopped by sentinels at the gates'? 
He replied instantly, “ Non, je ferais comme vous, 


240 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


je resterais dans ma chambre.” There are different 
ways of assassinating a man; the pistol, the sword, 
poison, or morally assassinating, as **.* * * * 
and ** * * * are doing to me. It is the same 
in the end, excepting that the latter is the most 
cruel. When the admiral, who was a man d’ux 
caractere dur, was here, you recollect what a dif- 
ferent kind of life I led. I rode out four or five 
times a week, saw company, and even invited 
English officers, ladies, and others to dine. In 
the admiral I had confidence. His word I be- 
lieved, and not the slightest suspicion of sinister 
design ever entered my head, parcequ’tl avait la 
marche droite et sincere, rien de tortueuse ou de 
tracassante. Though I disagreed with him, and 
thought he was un homme dur, still 1 felt confi- 
dence in his character and in his integrity. Had 1 
any intention of committing suicide, as this geolier. 
insinuates, I should have done it in the beginning, 
when, from not having been accustomed. to it, I 
must have felt it most oppressive. Besides, if I 
intended it, a pistol would be my resource. Je 
n'aime pas la longue guerre. What inconvenience 
ever occurred during Cockburn’s time by: my 
riding out? The intentions of * * * * * * are to 
impose restrictions of such a nature, that L with- 
out degrading my character, and rendering myself 
an object of contempt in the eyes of the world, 
must imprison myself; thereby in the course of 


c 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 241 


time to bring on disease, which, in a frame impaired 
by confinement and the blood being decomposed, 
must prove mortal, and that I may thus expire in 
protracted agonies, which may have the appear- 
ance of a natural death. This is the plan, and is 
a manner of assassinating just as certain, but more 
cruel and criminal, than the sword or the pistol.” 
“The only one of us,” added he, “who goes 
out, I may say, is Gourgaud, and he has been 
stopped upwards of fifty times. Had I been in 
his place, the same thing would have happened to 
me. Once during the admiral’s time I was stop- 
ped, but he instantly metteva Visola sotto sopra, 
(turned the island topsy turvy,) on account of it; 
_ and I clearly saw that he was really displeased, 
and that he took every precaution to prevent the 
recurrence of a similar circumstance. Now this 
brute would, on the contrary, be pleased with it, 
or with any thing else that would have a tendency 
to lessen or to degrade my character.”’ 
- “ T am well convinced,” added Napoleon, “ that 
the barbarous manner in which I am treated will 
be revenged by the blood of some innocent Eng- 
lishmen. By the argument and doctrines of your 
ministers, that it is useful to keep me_ here, every 
act, however atrocious, may be justified. Would 
it not have been useful to me to have procured. the 
assassination of Nelsen or Wellington? Would it 
VOL. I. R- 


242 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA, 


not now be useful to the French nation to get rid 
‘of all the allied troops by poisoning the bread and 
the water? Would it not be useful to them to as- 
‘sassinate Wellington? It is not the uéility of an 
‘act which is to be considered, it is its justness ; 
‘for by the former principle every species of crime 
may be apparently justified, as being useful, and 
therefore necessary. It is the doctrine of Hea 
rand.” 

Soon after this Sir eiddved Lowe came ‘to 
Longwood, and having made some inquiries’ re- 
specting Napoleon’s health, asked if I had ‘had 
any particular conversation with him upon the 
subject of his complaint? In reply, I communi- 
‘cated to him the foregoing conversation, avoiding 
the repetition of the epithet bourreau. His ex¢él- 
“Tency called Major Gorrequer to be a witness to 
some parts of it, viz. that about Lord Amherst, 
which he said he did not believe, and the inten- 
tions which Napoleon attributed to certain per- 
“sons, and asked, if I had made any reply? I said, 
No. He observed, that a reply might easily have 
been made, if I had been disposed to do so, but 
that it appeared I was of the same way of thinkihg 
as General Bonaparte asserted Lord Amherst had 
‘been; and asked if. such were the case? I an- 
~swered, that as a medical man, I had’ strongly re- 
commended Napoleon to take exercise on horse- 


A+VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 248 


‘back. -This did not satisfy Sir Hudson Lowe, 
‘who in an angry tone and manner, repeated his 
question. I replied, that as my opinions, when 
given in reply to his questions, had latterly caused 
_ .so much anger, I must beg leave to decline giving 
any, unless upon medical subjects: that more- 
sever, my opinion was of little consequence, add- 
‘ing, that as a medical man, I had strongly recom- 
mended exercise.. This reply greatly displeased 
‘Sir, Hudson Lowe, who observed that it was in 
ovaia to expect any thing good from a person pos- 
:sessed of such sentiments. That he had no confi- 
dence in any person about General Bonaparte. 
‘After a tolerable long harangue, in which he ac- 
jcused Napoleon of having crammed the ambas- 
vsador’s head with calumnies, and purposely de- 
layed seeing him until the day before his depar- 
‘ture, in order that he, (Sir Hudson,) might not have 
can opportunity of refuting them; he concluded 
-iby saying, “ Do you not think, sir, that General 
! Bonaparte has treated me most shamefully in that 
~business?” I replied, that Napoleon had been so 
unwell as not to be in a situation to receive stran- 
ugers ; that until the last moment, he had been un- 
\decided whether to receive his lordship or, not: 
band that Lord Amherst had been at his, (Sir Hud- 
son’s) house for several days, during which he 
- -aiiust have had ample opportunities of making his 
R 2 


244 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


lordship acquainted with every particular. That 
if 1 was rightly informed, Lord Amherst had 
seen and conversed with him for some hours after 
the interview his lordship had with Napoleon, 
with whom he had been only about two hours. 
This reply excited his excellency’s wrath, who, 
looking at me with an expression of countenance 
I shall never forget, said, “ if it were not that it 
would be made a subject of complaint, [ should 
immediately, and without waiting the orders of 
government, send you off the island, sir. _ I have 
received no official intelligence from government 
concerning your appointment; you are not of my 
choosing; you are only permitted to visit General 
Bonaparte as a medical man.” I observed that I 
was acting according to his own instructions, by 
confining myself to medical subjects. He repeated 
his threat of sending me off the island; to which 


_ Tanswered by telling him that a dismissal from 


St. Helena would not give me the smallest uneasi- 
ness, After this, Sir Hudson went down to Count 
Bertrand’s, where he remained about half an hour. 
On his return he sent for me, and after saying, 
that General Bonaparte had been represented by” 
Count Bertrand to be in a much worse state of 


health than I had mentioned, ordered me to send 
- him a written report of his health. 


About four o’clock, Count Balmaine, with Ba- 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 245 


ron and Madame Sturmer, came as far as the inner 
gate of Longwood, where they met General and 
Madame Bertrand, who with the little Arthur, 
and a maid-servant, were walking out. Shortly 
afterwards General Montholon joined them. They 
remained together for nearly an hour, walking be- 
tween the guard room and the inner gate. It was 
amusing to observe the gestures of Sir Thomas 
Reade, who was all the time standing at, or moving 
before Captain Blakeney’s duor with a telescope 
in his hand; especially at a time when a thick fog 
came on, which completely obscured them from 
the knight’s view, who was vainly endeavouring 
to penetrate it with his glass. 

Sir Hudson Lowe's visit to Count Bertrand, I 
am informed, was to offer that a soldier’s barrack. 
should be put up at Longwood for Napoleon to 
walk under, as a substitute for the deficiency of 
continuous shade. Some conversation also took 
place about the restrictions, in which observations 
of a nature similar to those of Napoleon to me in 
the morning, were made to Sir Hudson Lowe by 
Count Bertrand, who also informed his excellency 
of the opinion expressed by Lord Amherst. 

Saw Napoleon in the evening. He was in 
much the same state as in the morning. Told me 
that he had seen Madame Sturmer through his 

_glass, and passed some commendations upon the 
rosy bloom of her cheeks. 


246 A VOICE FROM 8T. HELENA. 


29th.—Signal made for Captain Blakeney to 
proceed to Plantation House. Sent my report of 
Napoleon's health by him, and made application 
for some sea-water to be sent to Longwood “a a 
bath for the use of Napoleon. , 

Saw Napoleon, who was in much better apieiue: 
He had eaten freely of antiscorbutics. His gums 
were a little better. The lower extremities nearly 
the same in point of size, but not so painful. 

Had a jocular conversation with him about 
patron saints. He asked who was my patron 
saint,— what was my Christian name? I replied, 
that my first was a family name; that 1 was cal-/ 
led after Barry, Lord Avonmore, an Irish peer. 
“ But,” said he, laughing, ‘“‘ you must have some 
patron saint to befriend you, and plead your 
cause in the next world?” I mentioned my second 
Christian name. ‘ Ah!” said he, “ then de will 
plead for you. St. Napoleon ought to be very 
much obliged to me, and do every thing in his 
power for me in the world to come. Poor fellow, 
nobody knew him before. He had not even a 
day in the kalendar. I got him one, and_per- 
suaded the Pope to give him the fifteenth of - 
August, my birth-day. 1 recollect,” continued he, 
“when I was in Italy, a priest preaching aboat a 
poor sinner who had departed this life. His soul 
appeared before God, and he was required ‘to give 
an account of all his actions. The evil and the 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 247 


good were afterwards thrown into opposite scales, 
in order to see which preponderated, That con- 
taining the good proved much the lightest, and in- 
stantly flew up to the beam. His poor soul was 
condemned to the infernal regions, conducted by 
angels to the bottomless. pit, delivered over to 
devils, and thrown into the flames. ‘Already,’ 
said the preacher, ‘ had the devouring element 
covered his feet and legs, and proceeded upwards 
even unto his bowels ; in his vitals, oh! brethren, 
he felt them. He sunk, and only his head ap- 
peared above the waves of fire, when he cried out 
to God, and afterwards to his patron saint. ‘Oh! 
patron,’ said he, ‘ look down upon me; oh! take 
compassion upon me, and throw into the scale of 
my good deeds, all the lime and stone which | 
gave to repait the convent of ——.’ His saint in- 
stantly took the hint, gathered together all the 
lime and stone, threw them into the scale of good, 
which immediately preponderated ; the scale of 
evil sprung up to the beam, and the sinner’s soul 
into paradise at the same moment. Now you see 
by this, brethren, how useful it is to keep the con- 
vents in repair, for had it not been for the lime 
and stone bestowed by this sinner, his poor soal 
would even now, children, be consuming in hell 
fire; and yet you are so blind as to let the con- 
vent and the charch, built by your forefathers, fall 


248 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


to ruin.’ At this time,” continued he, laughing, 
“these canaglie wanted to get a new convent 
built, and had recourse to this expedient to pro-. 
cure money, which, after this, poured in upon 

them from all quarters.” 

Napoleon then began to rally me about my 
profession. ‘“‘ You medical people,” said he, “ will 
have more lives to answer for in the other world 
than even we generals. What will you say for your- 
self,” said he, laughing, ‘“‘ when you are called to. 
account for all the souls of poor sailors you have . 
despatched to the other world? or what will your 
saint say for you, when the accusing angel pro- 
claims, ‘ such a number you sent out of the world, . 
by giving them heating medicines, when you ought . 
to have given cooling ones, and vice versa; so 
many more, because you mistook their complaints, 
and bled them too much; others because you did | 
not bleed them enough; numbers. because they 
were canaille, and you did not pay them as much | 
attention as you would have done to the captain - 
or the admiral, and because you were over your » 
bottle, or at the theatre, or with a fine girl, and 
did not like to be disturbed, or after drink (in — 
English), when you went and distributed medi- 
cines, a dritto ed a torto, (right and wrong). How 
many because you were not present at the time 
a change in the complaint took place, when a me- — 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 249 


dicine given at the moment might have saved 
them?) How many others because the provisions 
were bad, and you would not complain through 
fear of offending the fournisseurs ?’” 

I replied by observing, that on the score of con- 
science I was perfectly easy in my mind ; that 
human nature was liable to err; that very likely 
I had made mistakes, but not intentional ones; 
nor had I ever paid less attention to the canaille 
than to the officers; and endeavoured as much as 
possible as I perceived that he was half in earnest, 
to uphold the honour of my profession. 1 also 
explained to him, that in our service, the surgeons 
could gain nothing by not complaining of the 
Sournisseurs, &c. Napoleon answered, that cer- 
tainly a man ought always to be judged by his’ 
intentions ; but that there were abuses in all de 
partments, which were principally kept up by 
people being either interested, or afraid to com- 
plain ; that he had endeavoured to eradicate them 
as much as possible, in which he had effected 
much; but had not been able perfectly to succeed. 
“« My opinion,” continued he, “ is, that physicians 
kill as many as us generals. When they despatch — 
a number of souls to the other world either through 
ignorance, mistake, or not having properly exa- 
mined their complaints, they are just as cool and 
as little concerned as a general with whom I am ac- 


-_ 


250: A VOICE) FROM ST. HELENA. 


quainted, who lost three thousand men in storming 
a hill. . Having succeeded, after several desperate. 
attempts, he observed, with great sang froid, ‘Ob, 
it was not this hill | wanted to take; it was ano- 
ther; this is of no utility,’ and returned back again 
to his former position.” I remarked that it ap- 
peared he thought physicians to be as bad and as 
ignorant as they are described to be in Moliére 
or Gil Blas. He laughed, and said, “ I believe 
that there are a great many of Moliére’s physi- 
cians. Of surgery, I have quite a different opi- 
nion; as. there you do not work in the dark. 
There you at least have daylight, and your senses. 
to guide and assist you. You recollect having 
heard of Sieyes?” I replied in the affirmative. 
“ Sieyes,” continued he, * before the revolution, 
was almoner to one of the princesses. . One day, 
when he was performing mass in. the chapel before 
herself; her attendants, and a large congregation, 
something occurred which made the princess get 
up and retire. Her example was followed by her 
ladies in waiting, and by the whole of the nobility, 
officers, and others, who attended more out of 
complaisance. to her than from any true sense of 
religion. Sieyes was very busy reading his bre- 
viary, and for some time did not perceive it. 
Lifting up his eyes, however, from his book, lo! 
he observed that the princéss, nobles, and all'the 


A VOICE FROM 8ST. HELENA. 251 


others comme il faut, had disappeared. With aw 
air of displeasure and contempt he shut the book, 
hastily descended from the pulpit, exclaiming, * J 
do not say mass for the canaiille ; and went out of 
the chapel, leaving the service half finished. Now,” 
said he, laughing very heartily, “ many of you 
physicians would leave a patient half cured, be- 
eause he was one of the canaille.” 

- He then spoke of Larrey. ‘ Larrey,” said he, 
“was the most honest man, and the best friend 
to the soldier that I ever knew. Vigilant and 
indefatigable in his exertions for the wounded, 
Larrey was seen on the field of battle, after an 
action, accompanied by a train of young surgeons, 
endeavouring to discover if any signs of life re- 
mained in the bodies. In the most inclement 
weather, and at all times of the night and the day, 
Larrey was to be found amongst the wounded. 
He scarcely allowed a moment's repose to his as- 
sistants, and kept them eternally at their posts. 
He tormented the generals, and disturbed them 
out of their beds at night whenever he wanted ac- 
commodations or assistance for the wounded or 
sick. They were all afraid of him, as they knew 
he would instantly come and make a complaint 
to me. He paid court to none of them, and was 
the implacable enemy of the fournisseurs.” 

Speaking about service on board of ships of 


252 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA, 


war at sea during the winter, especially of a certain 
class, I remarked, that the seamen were better off 
in point of being able to warm themselves at a + 
than the officers. ‘‘ Why so?” said Napoleon., J 

replied, “ Because they have the advantage of the 
galley fire,* where they can warm and dry them- 
selves.” “ And why not the officers?” I said, 

that it would not be exactly decorous for the 
officers to mix in that familiar way with the men. 
“ Ah! la morgue aristocratique, la rage aristocra- 
tique,” exclaimed Napoleon. “ Why, in my. cam- 
paigns I used to go to the lines in the dévouacs, 
sit down with the meanest soldier, converse, laugh, 
and joke with him. I always prided myself on 
being homme du peuple,” (the man of the people). 
T observed that a man in his exalted situation 
might do without impropriety that which, if done 
by an inferior officer, especially on board of a ship, 
might produce too much familiarity, perhaps con 
tempt, andbthereby relaxation of discipline.‘ La 
morgue aristocratique,’ cried Napoleon again, 
“ you are the most aristocratical nation in the 
world. Had | been one of those principiott: in. 
Germany, your oligarchy would. never have sent 
me here. But because je suis Thomme du peuple; 
because I may say that I raised myself from, the 
canaille to the greatest height of power without 


* The galley is the kitchen on board of a man of war. 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 253 


the aid of the aristocracy or hereditary rights; 
because a long line of nobles or of petty princes 
did not distinguish my name; because in fact I 
was not one of them, they determined to oppress 
and humiliate me when in their power. Lords 
Bathurst and Castlereagh, la canaille de Uaristo- 
cracte, are the persons who have ordered all these 
attempts. John Bull will comprehend that I am 
oppressed, parceque je sors du peuple, in order 
to prevent any of them from presuming to elevate 
themselves to a level with the aristocracy.” 

He concluded by observing, “ that the governor 
always took a witness with him to Bertrand’s, for 
the purpose, he supposed, of testifying to every 
thing that he thought proper to assert. That in 
all probability he made a proces verbal as he liked, 
and got the other to sign it. That therefore, to 

“prevent his making conversations, he had ordered 
‘Bertrand to write an official letter* to him, stating 
their grievances and what they wanted.” 

30th.— Napoleou much in the same state. Went 

to Plantation House to report. Found that. Sir 
Hudson Lowe had gone out. Met, him at Long- 
wood on my return.’ Informed him of the, state 


of Napoleon's health ; and in reply to some of his 
’ observations, told him that there was nothing im- 


mediately dangerous, but that edematous swel- 
'* Appendix, No. XIL 


; 


al 


254 A’ VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


lings of the extremities taking place with a man 
of Napoleon's time of life and of his temperament 
and present habits, were always to be looked upon 
with a suspicious eye, as such were frequently the 
primary.symptoms of dropsy. t 
-\ His excellency said, that his principal object in 
coming to Longwood ‘had ‘been to obtain an-an- 
‘swer from Count Bertrand, to an offer which he 
had made on the 28th of the month, to put up a 
soldiers’ barrack seventy feet long, which might 
be formed into a temporary gallery to walk in, until 
an answer arrived from England relative to build- 
ing the new house. That he could get no reply 
from Bertrand, but a shrug of the shoulders. 
‘That Count Bertrand had been very violent in his 
language, and had not merely asked for one or two 
‘things, but had insisted “that every thing should 
‘be put upon the same footing as during Sir George 
‘Cockburn’s ‘time. That the emperor would «iot 
stir out unless perniission were given’ to him (Béer- 
‘trand):to admit persons by his pass into ‘Long- 
‘wood. That he should write and hold’ correspon- 
dence with whoever ‘he liked, go where he liked, 
‘enter what houses he liked, in fact do what» he 
liked in the island without any restriction.” He 
‘then asked if I had heard any thing from him of 
“the conversation which they had held with the 
commissioners? I replied, that “‘ I had not heard 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 255 


him mention even their names.” His excellency 
said, that “* it was very extraordinary, as General 
Bonaparte had made some very strong remarks 
about them to Mr. Balcombe.” 
Saw Napoleon again in the evening. He conm- 
plained of pain in his teeth and cheeks, which 
he attributed to having taken a walk in the gar- 
den for ten minutes. Proposed to him that the 
‘barrack should be erected. - He replied, that-he 
stood in néed of exercise in the open air, and nét 
in acovered gallery. That. he had caused a gal- 
lery of a league in length to be built at ——)in 
‘France, but’ tliat it had not answered the purpose. 
‘Moreover that insummer, the billiard-room :be- 
-came so ‘hot at five o'clock in the afternoon from 
the rays of the sun’ penetrating through it, as: to 
render it impossible to remain there; that a 
“wooden barrack would be worse: that it would 
therefore be useless to erect it, as: the shade of the 
‘treés was what was desired.” f 
October 1st —Saw Napoleon ‘in: his bed-eaien 
at eight, a. m. ‘He complained of a-dull, pain 
(dolore sordo) in the right hypochondriac region, 
immediately under the cartilages of the ribs, which 
he said he experienced yesterday morning for the 
“first time. - Sensation inthe right shoulder, which 
‘he described to be more of numbness than of pain. 
_, Slight inclination'to cough. |Wantof rest atnight. 


256 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


He said that he felt as if he wanted to lean or 
press his side against something (vorrei appog- 
giarmi qualche cosa contra). Gums spongy, and 
his legs a little swelled. Pulse 68. Appetite 
tolerable. Said he felt something in the right 
side which never was there before. Told him that 
it might probably be owing to costiveness, and _re- 
‘commended a dose of physic, which I said would 
also be proper if it were the commencement of 
liver complaint, the prevailing disease of the island. 
That if it increased, and were accompanied, by 
other symptoms, there could not be a doubt ofits, _ 
being hepatitis ; in which case it would be neces- 

sary to have recourse to proper remedies, which 

1 specified, together with abstinence from wine. 
and a suitable diet, He shook his head at the 

proposal of physic. I told him that if it were 
hepatitis, it must not be neglected, as if not taken 

in time, it would terminate fatally. He replied, 
“* Almeno avro questa consolazione, che la mia morte 

sara un disonore elernale alla nazione Inglese, 
which has sent me to this climate to die under the. 
hands of a * **,” - L observed that he ought not. 
to accelerate his own death by refusing to take 

proper remedies. He replied, ‘“ Ce, qué est écrit, 
est écrit, from above,” looking up. “ Nos journées 

‘sont comptées.” 1 answered, that according to, that | 
doctrine, all medical aid was useless... He made 

no reply. 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 257 


With respect to diet and abstinence from wine, 
hé observed that he was a man who had never 
committed any excesses either in eating or drink- 
ing. That he drank very little wine; however, 
that he found ‘the little he took was absolutely 
necessary, always finding himself better after it, 
and was convinced that if he left it off, he should 
sink rapidly. He then went into a salt-water 
bath, and had a long conversation with me upon 
medical subjects. 

- 2nd.—Napoleon felt relieved by the salt-water 
_ bath yesterday. Continued much in want of rest, 
Recommended exercise on horseback, &c. 

Saw him again at ten in bed. His legs were a 
little more swelled than in the morning. He would 
have taken another bath, but there was no water. 
Had eaten scarcely any thing. Slight head-ach. 

’ 8rd.— Examined the right side, and perceived 
that it felt firmer to the touch than the opposite 
one, There was also a tumefaction evident to 
the sight, which when pressed hard, gave a little 
pain. Napoleon said, that this was observed 
about two montlis since. That he had thought 
nothing of it, and attributed it to obesity, but that 
now, from its being attended with pain, he imagined 
it might be connected with enlargement of the 
liver. * 

* Asit is not the intention of the author to tire the reader with 

VOL. 1. s 


’ 
258 A’ VOICE FROM 8ST. HELENA. 


_ Lrecommended calomel, frictions to the extre- 
mities, diligent use of the flesh-brush, hot salt- 
water bath, acontinuanceof antiscorbutics,a gargle, 
exercise on horseback, &c. _ Napoleon said, that 
the governor had written to Count Bertrand yes- 
terday, stating, that he (Napoleon) might go off 
the road, and down into the valley, but that the 
same privilege was not to be extended to his offi- 
cers, unless with him. “ Mere tracasserie,” said 
he, when I recommended him to profit by it, 
“ It would only expose me to more insults ;» for 
the sentinels do not know mie, and. every old 
soldier who wished to fulfil:his duty, so as to 
clear himself of all responsibility, would say, 
‘ Halte la, is General Bonaparte amongst you? 
Are you him? Oh, then, if you are him, you may 
pass.’ Thus should I be exposed to daily insults, 
and be obliged to give an account of myself. to 
every sentinel who thought it right to fulfil his 
duty properly. Besides, he has no right to impose 
more restrictions upon questi signort, than upon 
me. By the paper which they have signed, they 
only agree to subject themselves to: such’ »re- 
strictions as are or may be imposed upon: me. 
Moreover, I do not recognize his right tonimpose 
the detail of a medical journal, the enumeration of the Menps 


toms will, for the future, be discontinued, unless where abso- 
lutely necessary, Ir yond ai ates * 


AL wf 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 259 


any other restrictions than those made by Admiral: 
Cockburn, which were approved of by his govern- 
ment, unless he shews that they are signed by the 
Prince Regent, or by the ministers. For if he 
has the power to impose what restrictions he likes, 
he may, according to his eaprice, or upon some 
pretext, which, to him, would never be wanting, 
lay them on again or make them worse than be- 
fore. This is one of the reasons that I have not 
taken exercise, in order to leave nothing in his 
power to inflict. I do not choose to subject my- 
self to the caprice of a man whom I do not trust, 
and who is ny personal enemy. Besides I never 
would go out without sending Gourgaud to ascer- 
tain that there was no a of being stopped and 
insulted by sentinels.” 

-T asked. permission to’call in Mr. Baxter to see 
him. He:said; that if the symptoms increased, he 
probably would, as I wished it, provided that the 
governor did not interfere with it, se sene mischia, 
mai, (if he did interfere, never). 

- 4th —Went to Plantation House, according to 
order, and gave Sir Hudson Lowe a written re: 
port of the state of Napoleon’s health. After hav- 
ing read it; he said, that there were too many 
details in it; and that I must make out one which 
could be made public. Said that he had received 
a long letter from Count Bertrand, containing ar- 

s 2 


260 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


guments similar to those which | was in the habit 
of using, and in which there was an allusion to 
Lord Liverpool, which when coupled with cir- 
cumstances that had taken place some time ago, — 
looked as if there were some correspondence in 
that quarter. I said, that Napoleon had always 
declared, that he believed Lords Liverpool and 
Sidmouth to be better disposed towards. him than 
any others of the English ministers. That, indeed, 
J had never heard him speak ill of any of the 
English ministers nominatively, excepting Lords 
Bathurst and Castlereagh. 

5th_—Saw Napoleon in the morning, who was 
much in the same state as before. 

Count Montholon, Count Balmaine, and Cap- 
tain Gor, had a long conversation together. 
- 6th.—Napoleon nearly the same. Again re- 
commended him exercise most strongly, and told 
him, that if he deferred it much longer, the swell- 
ings in his legs might increase so much, as to 
render him incapable of taking it. That if he 
mounted on ‘horseback, and rode, L was con- 
vinced all the swellings in the lower extremi- 
ties would soon disappear. He assented ‘to, 
this, but declared, that until things were put on 
the footing they had been in Sir George Cock- 
burn’s time, or equivalent, he would notgo out. 
That he was determined to leave nothing in the 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. +261 


power of a man who had been mad enough to pro- 
hibit him from speaking, and who, at his caprice, 
might” order him to be blindfolded, to prevent 
his making a reconnaissance. That the restric- 
tions were chiefly upon the morale, and not phy- 
sical; as he might go into the wood. when he 
liked, but that considering the person he had to 
deal with, he was convinced that if he did, he 
(the governor) would find some pretext to insult 
him, and he would leave nothing in his power, 
unless matters were put as they had been.before, 
which would be an acknowledgment, that he was 
not to be subject to his caprice.” 

I took the liberty of observing, that he was like 
a man tumbling down a precipice, who would not 
lay hold of a rope within his grasp, by which he 
might save himself from inevitable death.* He 
laughed at this comparison, and said, “ Que le sort 
se fasse, nos journées sont comptées.” 

7th—Napoleon nearly the same. Observed, 
that the governor had insinuated, that he (Napo- 
leon) wanted to kill himself. ‘ Had I intended 
this,” continued he, “I would have fallen’ upon 
my sword long ago, and died like a soldier. But 


_ © The reader will, I trust, agree with me in opinion, that I was 
bound, as his medical adviser, to endeavour to prevail upon my 
‘patient to use any remedy I thought would be beneficial to his 
malady ; for this purpose only I recommended exercise. 


262 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


to purposely kill myself by the slow agonies, of a 
lingering disease, I am not fool enough to attempt. 
Je nai jamais aimé la longue guerre. (I never 
loved tedious warfare.) But there is no death, 
however slow and painfal, that I would not pre- 
fer to dishonouring my character.. A man who 
was once capable of imposing the restrictions of 
the 9th of October, and the 14th of March, is 
capable of laying them on again, or even worse, 
according to his caprice or his fears, real or ima- 
ginary. If | were to go out and be once insulted 
by a sentinel, it would have the effect. of doing 
more injury to my health than six months con- 
finement. But this manis insensible to any moral 
feeling. He thinks that he has got some Corsi- 
can deserters or corporals to deal with. Crest 
un mélange dimbécilité et d'astuce. Before I had 
gone out a week, he would make some insinua- 
tions, as he perpetually does, to the commission- 
ers, and say that I had abused the Resign 
he had given,” 

A large sealed packet addressed to the Earl of 
Liverpool, given by Count Bertrand to Captain 
Blakeney, ne which a receipt was taken. 

Communicated the substance of what Napo- 
leon had said to Sir Hudson Lowe, to whom I re- 
peated, that whenever Sir George Cockburn made 
any regulations relative to the French, he was ac- 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 263 


customed to discuss the matter with Count Ber- 
trand or Montholon, by means of which they were 
enabled to make arrangements in a manner likely 
to give the least offence. Sir Hudson said; that 
his own measures had been approved of by the 
British government, and. that most of the letters 
which he had received, commenced by stating, 
that the Prince Regent approved of, and’ had 
commanded, that such and’such measures should 
be adopted. 

8th —Napoleon walked out for a aloes time in 
the garden. Being so little accustomed to exer- 
cise, this fatigued him so much, that he was 
obliged to sit down on the steps before the vi- 
_ randa. He was, however, in better spirits than 
yesterday, and felt benefited by the salt-water 
baths, and such of the other remedies as he pega 
consent to use. 

9th.—Not so well. Got cold sleberdes and 
complains of pains in the lower extremities, and 
had been very unwell in the night. “Iwas going 
to send for you early in the morning,” said he, 
‘but then I considered this poor devil of a doctor 
has been up all night at a ball, and has need of 
sleep. If I disturb him, he will have his eyes so 
heavy, and his intellects so confused, that he will 
not be able to form any. correct opinion. Soon 
after this I fell into a sehipintion and felt much 
relieved.” sf 


264 A VOICE FROM ‘ST: HELENA. 


-, Immediately after I had left him, he-went-to’ 
bed again, where he remained for some hoursy °° 
10¢h.—Napoleon in rather bad at eae" 
somewhat less swelled, &c. Ds 
“The governor,” said he, ‘“ was at Bertrand) 
yesterday, and professed his wish to accommodate, 
but he has already done the same so often, with- - 
out having come to any conclusion, that he will 
probably end as before. I ordered Bertrand to 
send for the little Major (Gorrequer), talk the» 
matter over with him, and explain what we want. 
I conceive, that the only guarantee I have for my 
life consists in having some communication with 
the officers of the army and navy, and ‘the inhas 
bitants. For had communication existed before; | 
this governor would not have been able to have 
continued his absurd restrictions so Jong as ‘he ~ 
has; although the place is small .and«wretched, 
and the inhabitants nearly slaves’ to arbitrary) 
power, still the public opinion would have: had” 
some weight. Rumour would have reached Eng- 
Jand, and John Bull would not have suffered con=" 
duct so.disgraceful to his country. What I want.) 
is to have no mystery or secrecy used about me. 
Whenever there is mystery, there are always bad — 
intentions. Every thing ought to be conducted’so | 
that it might be printed, and then nothing would » 
be printed. 1 care not if the-house I live in were © 
made of glass. So ought the proceedings with re- 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 265 


spect to meto be conducted. You recollect, that 
during the admiral’s time, no attempts were made 
tosend letters to England, nor.ever would, had he 
remained, because the situation was tolerable. 
One could live then. I have explained to Ber- 
trand my wishes relative to the receiving of visitors, 
and told him to communicate to the governor that 
he may easily arrange the matter by sending upa 
list himself of such persons as ‘he will permit to 
visit Longwood, and to require that no insinua- 
tions shall be made to prevent them from coming, 
as. has been the case hitherto. We can send 
every thing we please to Europe, and always 
could. With respect to the commissioners, as 
policy enters into that, I leave it to him. I have 
told, him already, that I would with pleasure re- 
ceive the Austrian, his wife, and the Russian, as 
private persons. If, however, political reasons 
oppose it, I care not for it, though nothing can be 
more ridiculous than to see those commissioners 
unable to come inside of the inner gate of Long- 
wood, when they are permitted to come as far as 
it, and hold conferences with us as long and as 
often as they please, which must excite for the au- 
thor of such absurdities the ridicule and contempt 
of every beholder. All that I desire is, that it 
may be clearly understood and explained to those 
commissioners, that political reasons alone pre- 


266: A VOICE FROM ST, HELENA. 


vent their being received at Longwood, and that 
they may not be crammed with such lies as have 
been told to them up to this day. They say they 
have been informed by the governor that it is all 
my fault; that 1 have refused to see them. That 
there does not pass a week in which, this man 
does not make insinuations to them, and that 
such is the mystery and secrecy observed, that 
they thought themselves in Venice or Ragusa, in- 
stead of an English colony: Every week produces 
hints and insinuations that they have abused this 
or that privilege. There is nothing:in the world 
makes a man hate another so much as insinua- 
tions; especially when they. come :from one in 
power, because he cannot. repel or answer them; 
With respect to strangers, let him, when a:ship ar- 
rives, send a list of such as he will allow to come 
here—I mean of the greater number, and not pick 
out one or two favorites. If he suspects any of 
them let him say so, and no notice will be taken 
of ‘them, or Jet him not place their names onthe 
list... If. Iysee strangers at all it shall be from my 
own will, and not because he likes it. Let him do 
this—let him leave off his insinuations, and above 
all, let there be no mystery, and Ishall bie con- 
rigor a1 
» Had some éonvebsatibn nvith the emperor siiter 
Neat about Talleyrand. ‘“* When | returned from 


A: VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 267 


Italy,” suid he, ‘‘ I went to live at a small house in 
the Rue Chantereine (I think). A few days, after- 
wards the municipality of Paris ordered. that it 
should be called Rue de la Victoire... Every one 
sought to manifest the national gratitude to me. 
It, was. proposed to give me a fine hotel, in Paris, 
and a magnificent estate. Although I had, main- 
tained and paid the army for two years, and even 
paid the arrears for some time posterior, and sent 
more than thirty millions to the treasury of France 
—I was scarcely worth three hundred thousand 
francs. The directory, however, influenced pro- 
bably by jealousy, would not consent, and. said 
that my services were such as could not be re- 
warded by money. Every description, of .per- 
sons tried to see me. The enthusiasm was,au 
comble. 1 rarely however. associated with others 
than Kleber, Desaix, Caffarelli, and some. savans. 
The directory gave me a splendid féte. Talley- 
rand, who was minister, of foreign affairs, gave 
another, I remained but a short time at either, 1 
was afterwards nominated to the command of. the 
army of England, which in fact was named so,to 
deceive your ministers as to, its real. destination, 


which was Egypt.” 


*'Talleyrand had been bishop, of A ataats deus 
the revolution, and was one of the, three bishops 
who swore to the civil constitution of the clergy. 
He was afterwards sent to England, but becoming 


268 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


suspected during the fury of the revolution, he 
fled to America, where he remained until after the 
13th Vendémiaire, when his name was erased from 
the list of emigrants, He insinuated himself into 
the confidence of the directory, and was made 
minister of foreigu affairs, and as such had con- 
stant communication with me. It was then cus- 
tomary to celebrate the anniversary of the execu- 
tion of Louis the Sixteenth, at which Talleyrand 
wished that I should attend. I replied, that I had. 
no public functions ; that I did not like the cere- 
mony; that fétes were celebrated for victories, 
but that the victims left on the field of battle were 
lamented with tears; that celebrating the death of 
aman, was not the policy of a government, but 
that of a faction. Talleyrand maintained that it 
was just, because it was politic; that all countries 
had rejoiced at the death of tyrants, and that my 
presence was expected. After a long argument 
it was arranged that the institute should attend, 
which I was to accompany as a member of the 
class of mechanics to which I belonged. Although 
I avoided public notice, the multitude, which paid 
no attention to the directory, but had waited to 
see me go out, filled the air with cries of ‘ Vive 
le général de Varmée d’Italie.’ Never yet,” added 
he, “was there‘a general who was more beloved 
-by his troops. - tales 

“To shew you the confidence that I had in the 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 269 


disposition of the army,” said he, “I need only 
recount to you an event which will be consecrated 
by history. Five or six days after my landing at 
Cannes, the advanced guard of my little army met 
the advance of a division marching from Grenoble 
against me. Cambronne, who commanded my 
troops, wanted to address them, but they would 
not listen to him. They also refused to.receive . 
Raoul, whom I sent afterwards... When I was in- 
formed of this, I went to them myself, with afew 
of my guard, with their arms reversed, and called 
out, “ The first soldier who pleases, may come for- 
ward and kill his emperor. It operated like an. 
electric shock, and ‘ Vive l'empereur’ resounded 
through the ranks; the division and my guards 
fraternized, all joined me, and advanced together 
to Grenoble. Close by Grenoble the brave Labe- 
doyére, a young man, animated by the noblest 
sentiments, and disgusted by the conduct of the 
misérables, against whom France’ had fought and 
bled for so many years, joined me with his regi? 
ment. At Grenoble, [ found the regiment,’ in. 
which, twenty-five years before, 1 had. been cap* 
tain, and some others, drawn up on the ramparts 
to oppose me. No sooner did they see me, than 
enthusiastic cries of Vive l’empereur were heard, 
not only from them, but from the whole of the’ 
national guard and the populace; the gates were 


270 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


torndown, and I entered in triumph. What is’ 
singular,;and which strikingly shews the senti- 
ments of the troops, is, that in a moment the six 
thousand men by whom I was thus joined, mount- 
ed ‘old: tri-coloured cockades, which they had 
kept asa treasure, when the army had been 
obliged ‘to adopt the’ Bourbon anti-national flag. 
I advanced to Lyons, where I was joined by the 
troops charged to defend it against me, and the 
Count d’Artois was happy to escape, escorted by 
a single dragoon, from the city he had commanded’ 
a few hours before. To all his intreaties, offers, 
and prayers, Vive empereur was the reply.” 
While sitting on the steps of the viranda this 
day, Napoleon observed Mr. Stokoe walking with 
me in the garden, and ordered him to be called. 
He asked him several’ questions‘in Italian. 
Sir Hudson: Lowe and Major Gorrequer were 
for some time at Count Bertrand’s this day.) ~~ 
Sir Thomas Reade told me that Sir Hudson 
Lowe had received a sealed parcel from Bertrand, 
addressed: to Lord Liverpool, which he would 
forward, although he knew that it contained com- 
plaints ‘against himself: That le did’ not care 
what complaints they made.’ That if it were not 
for: the «dd commissioners, things would’ be 
better) “He then asked me if I had much conver 
sation with them? I said, very little, that T had 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 271 


observed a marked alteration in their conduct to- 
wards me latterly; instead of asking me numerous 
questions as before, they rarely spoke, except 
upon common place subjects. He observed, that 
“ it was very likely they (the commissioners) — 
would tell the French the tenor of my reports'on 
Bonaparte’s health, as the French had repre 
sented him to be worse than I had described him 
to be.” 

Major Gorrequer came to Longwood by sigue 
and had a long conference with Count Bertrand. 

‘11th.—Saw Napoleon in bed at seven, a.m. 
Complained of having been restless all night, and 
of increase of pain in his side and shoulder. | Had 
a return of palpitation, &c., which he attributed, 
and probably with reason, to his having sat in the 
sun for some time yesterday. I recommended 
such remedies as were proper,’ some of, which he 
put in practice. 

Saw him again at three. He had been im’ the 
hot bath, and found much relief from it, “His ap- 
petite was considerably diminished. 9) > 

. Sir Hudson Lowe at Longwood, very busy’ ‘in 
measuring the distance at which the an gael were 
posted. ) bo 

A ship arrived from the Cape with stores, ' anda 
mail from England. 

- 12th.—Saw Napoleon with his legs in a ei of 


272 A VOICE FROM. ST. HELENA. 


hot water.. Told me that he felt uneasy, and dé 
cattivo umore (in bad humour). 

Sir Hudson Lowe had a long interview with 
Count Bertrand, the latter endeavoured to explain 
to him the point in dispute, viz. that being obliged: 
to,send all letters through him open to such’ per- 
sons resident on the island, as he (the governor) 
might allow to visit them, was considered an use- 
less humiliation. If he wished to forward a letter 
privately to England, or to carry on an improper 
correspondence with an individual or individuals — 
in the island, he (Bertrand) having the power of 
inviting a certain number of persons to visit Long- 
wood, and to retain them there some hours (as 
the governor said he would grant,) would surely. 
embrace that, as the proper moment to give them 
such letters, or otherwise to communicate impro« 
perly with them, rather than hazard the compro- | 
mising of himself and them, by sending a sealed let 
ter, containing improper communications through 
the orderly officer, which, should suspicions arise, 
might be opened, and ruin the person to whom: it 
was, addressed. Sir Hudson Lowe, however, 
would not understand this.. Count Bertrand also 
mentioned to him that the emperor considered.» 
free, intercourse with the inhabitants as the only 
guarantee he had for his life. piiem 

., When ;Major _Gorrequer.- was; at Counts Ber- 


A’ VOICE FROM sT. HELENA. 273 


trand’s'on the 10th, the latter informed him that 
the governor’s proceedings had been so illegal, 
and involved in such mystery and obscurity, that 
some of the officers of the 53d regiment, con- 
ceiving that there might be criminal intentions in 
view, had signified to them not to be afraid, for that 
in the 53d regiment there were neither assassins 
nor executioners to’ be found. Also that Sir 
George Cockburn. had said soon’ ‘after the ar- 
rival of Napoleon, “if I put sentinels in such a 
manner, and insist upon such and such measures, 
this man will shut himself wp and never stir out. © 
Hewill not live six months. I will not be the 
means of assassinating any body. I will arrange 
matters so that he shall have liberty, and at the 
saine time not afford the least chance of escaping 
from: the island, which is all that I can effect, or 
jndeed care about.” 
14th.—This morning, on presenting myself ac- 
cording to custom to call upon Napoleon, I was 
informed that he was asleep, and had left word 
for me to go down to Count Bertrand. Had a 
conversation with the latter, the purport of which 
was, that the emperor had been given to under- 
stand that I was in the habit of writing bulletins 
of his health, daily, or at more distant periods, 
and that it was his desire that every bulletin should 
be shewn to him, the emperor, before being sent. 
VOL, IT. T 


274 A VOICE FROM ST, HELENA. 


That any person acting as his physician must ne- 
cessarily. have a portion of his confidence; and, 


that he would not consent to be styled General. 


Bonaparte in reports made by him, as such would. 


appear in Europe to be an acquiescence on his, 


part to the use of such a title, which he would, 
sooner die than consent to; that the words /’em- 
pereur must be used, and that I had better make 
the governor acquainted with it. I observed, that 


with respect to the title of Tempereur, 1 knew iti 


it would be inadmissible. 
Saw Napoleon afterwards, who told me that he 
had always thought I might be required to make 


out reports of the state of his health, especially when. 
labouring under indisposition ; that, however, as it: 
was only a surmise, he did not take any notice,of: 


it; but that some days ago, Generals Montholon 


and Gourgaud were asked how were certain. 


symptoms (palpitations), which they were totally 
ignorant he had ever been afflicted with, as he 
(Napoleon) had only made me acquainted with 
‘them, and had professed their surprise; that.a re- 
ply was made, stating that such symptoms, were 


described in the bulletins of health sent to the- 


governor. I informed Napoleon that I bad often 


made out reports of his state of health. He asked. 
to see one. 1 immediately brought him one. of. 


the 10th. Looking over it, he observed the word 
*« general,” and said that he would never consent 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA, 275 


to be so styled by me, or by any other person 
acting as his physician; that as such I must pos- 
sess a certain share of his confidence, without 
which [ could not be acquainted with the symp- 
toms; that a physician was to the body what a 
confessor was to the soul, and was bound to keep. 
such confession equally sacred, unless permitted 
to divulge it. For the future, therefore, he insisted 
I should submit to him all reports which ] should 
make of his health, previous to sending them to 
the governor. That he did not wish to influence 
me in their compilation; on the contrary, if I 
conceived any observations made by him to be in- 
_ correct, [ was not to insert them, but that I should 
not render an account of such symptoms as deli- 
cacy or other motives might induce him to wish 
should be kept secret. That after this warn- 
ing, if | were to send any more bulletins without 
having been previously shewn to him, it would 
be acting the part of a spy and not that of a phy- 
sician, which, he added, was what the gaoler of 
St. Helena wanted, and had done every thing in 
his power to make me. That my reports were trans- 
mitted to the commissioners, and by them to their 
courts. That therefore he could not consent to 
allow a person in my situation to style him “ ge- 
neral,” in reports which might be sent to France, 
where he had been once sovereign; or to the courts 
bei oe 


276 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


of Vienna and Petersburg; as coming from me, it 
would appear to be an acquiescence on his part 
to such title, which he would rather die than 
consent to. Therefore [ must give my word of 
honour not to make any more reports without 
complying with what he thus required, and leav- 
ing the original in Bertrand’s possession ; if I did 
not consent to this arrangement, that I must not 

_write any more; if I did, he would never see me 
again as a physician. 

I replied that I never should be permitted by 
the governor to style him J’empereur, and sug- 
gested that I might use Napoleon or Napoleon B. 
That as to shewing the reports to him, [ must 
first communicate with the governor, which he 
consented to, but not to the appellation. In my 
verbal reports, he said he cared not if I called him 
generale, boja, or tiranno Bonaparte. :% 

Communicated the purport of the above to Sit 
Hudson Lowe ‘at Plantation House. As I had 
foreseen, he decidedly refused to consent to the 
use of the title required; ‘that he was willing he 
should be styled Napoleon Bonaparte. As to 
shewing the reports to Napoleon previous to their 
being sent to him, he said that he saw no objec- 
tion for the present; however, it was a matter- he 
could not decide upon directly, that it required 
some consideration, &c. He added that it was 
some deep laid scheme of the commissioners. 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 277 


Informed Napoleon in the evening of the answer 
made by the governor. He observed that he could 
not think of allowing himself to be insulted by 
his physician, That after the proposal he had 
made to the English government to assume the 
incognito, to which no answer had been given, it 
was the height of insult to insist upon naming him 
as they liked. The more that they endeavoured 
to humiliate, the more tenacious would he be of 
the title. (“ Ho perduto il trono,” said he, “ per 
un punto d’onore, e perderei la vita cento volte, §e.)” 
“I lost my throne fora point of honour, and would 
lose my life a hundred times rather than allow 
myself to be debased by consenting to be denomi- 
nated as my oppressors please.” 

_ After some time, I proposed dropping all titles 
and using the word personage, which J said 1 
thought might remove all difficulties. He ap- 
proved of my suggestion, but said that patient 
(le malade ), would answer better, and satisfy him, 
provided the bulletins were first shown to him, 
and bis consent obtained to send them. 

It was signified to Count Bertrand this day by 
Sir Hudson Lowe, that Sir George Cockburn 
used to cause the notes and papers which were 
sent by the French to town to be shewn to him 
before they were allowed to be transmitted to the 
persons to whom they were directed. 


7 


278 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


15th.—Communicated the proposal of yester- 
day to Sir Hudson Lowe, who refused his con- 
sent, saying, that he must be styled Napoleon Bo- 
naparte, or General Bonaparte, in any bulletins or 

reports made of the state of his health. 
- 16¢h.—Had a conversation with Napoleon upon 


the subject of the refusal of the governor to com- 


ply with the suggestion of calling him the patient 


in the bulletins. He observed that the governor 


evidently wanted to destroy the confidence which 
existed between him (Napoleon) and meas his phy- 
sician. ‘* When a man has not confidence in’ his 
physician,” said he, “it is useless to haye: one. 
Confidence cannot be commanded. You ought 
to consider yourself as of no nation. A physician 
and a priest ought not to belong to any particular 
nation, and be divested of all political opinions. 

Treat me as if I were an Englishman. Chance 
gave you to me; and that is the reason | had 
confidence ‘in you. If I had not taken you, you 
know that I should have had a French physician, 
who would not have made bulletins without my 
permission ; therefore I insist that you shall not. 
Would you, if you attended Lord Bathurst, write 
bulletins of the state of his complaints, to be 
printed, or sent to any other than members of -his 
own family, without having first obtained his»con- 
sent. I insist upon being treated in a similar 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 279 


‘manner; and that you drop all political consider- 
‘ations as to what 1 am, or what I was; and when 
T consult you, act as you would do to one of your 
‘own countrymen who was ill.” 

17th.— Napoleon was lying on his sofa, Leahiig 
low and melancholy, with a cup of chicken-water 
before him. Marchand told me that he had been 
very unwell in the morning, and that he was 
obliged to chafe his temples and forehead with 
‘eau de Cologne. Napoleon would not answer the 
inquiries which I made relative to his complaints. 

The Griffon sloop arrived this day, bringing the 
intelligence of the loss of the Julie sloop of war, 
on the island of Tristan d’Acunha, on the 2nd, 
with all the officers, except Captain Jones and 
two midshipmen. 
~ 18¢h.—Napoleon in his bath. Still persisted in 
refusing to consult me on his complaints. Told 
‘me, that [ had been remarked to go regularly 
every Tuesday and Saturday to Plantation House; 
and that, were it not for the confidence he had 
in me, he would, the moment it had been ‘no- 
ticed, have dispensed with my services; as it was 
evident from the regularity of the periods, that I 
‘went by order of the governor. “ The fact,” con- 
‘tinued he, “ is, that all this is only an artifice to 
‘deprive me of medical assistance e d’arrivare pit 
presto alla fine; for it was well known, that as. 


a i a ae ———— 


280 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


soon as I found it out, I would not submit to it, 
or that no. man of feeling or honour would do so. 
But this man has no morale, no feeling. He has 
been always accustomed to deserters and. galley- 
slaves; and nature never intended him for any 
higher situation than a keeper of convicts. 1 
shall not gladden his heart with a picture of my 
malady, in order that he may glut his enmity by 
calculatiug how long I may suffer before the last 
agony. You may tell him that I conceive his ob- 
ject to be to deprive me of all medical aid, and by 
that to arrive sooner at the end which he proposes. 
That I do not esteem life so much as to allow my 
physician to be made a spy. | Tell him that I said 
his views are directed. to lessen the confidence I 
had in you, and to make you a spy, or to make me 
suspect that yon are one. In fact,” continued Na- 
poleon, “had it not been for the confidence which - 
I haye in you, from the character Captain Mait- 
jJand gave of you, and from my own observation, 
the measures of this governor would long ago 
have induced me to tell you thas I had no 0 hopant 
any occasion for your services.” fobs 
| Communicated part of the pre sin thus ex- 
pressed by Napoleon to Sir Hudson Lowe, at 
Plantation House, who after some hesitation au- 
thorized me to say, that for the future no. more 
bulletins would be demanded, without first haying 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA, 281 


made him (Napoleon) acquainted that such were 
asked for. 

. Some conversation then passed about ‘the per- 
mission which had been granted by Sir George 
Cockburn to the French of sending sealed letters 
to persons, residing in the island. His excellency 
maintained, that Sir George Cockburn had never 
authorized such a practice, that he had only ¢ole- 
rated it, and had greatly exceeded his powers in 
many respects. 

19th.—Communicated this reply of the governor 
to Napoleon; after which, and after having as- 
sured him that I would not send any bulletins 
without having shewn them to him, he entered 
into a communication with me touching his malady, 
He was never free from dull pain, or an uneasy 
sensation in the right side; his appetite was dimi- 
nished ; his legs still swelled, especially towards 
night; occasional nausea; great want of sleep, 
&c.. There was some degree of anxiety evident, 
and a cast of melancholy, probably caused by 
his complaint, and increased perhaps by the in- 
formation in the last paper sent him by Sir Hud- 
son Lowe, containing. the decision of the allied 
powers, that his son should not succeed to the 
duchies of Parma, &c. 

»,22nd.—Napoleon very unwell last night with 
an attack partly of a nervous nature;—Asked me 
if there was a witness present during the conver- 


282 A VOICE FROM 8T. HELENA. 


sation which I was obliged to hold twice a week 
with the governor? | replied in the affirmative: 
“Then,” said he, “ Doctor, you will be made to 
speak as he likes. I will venture to say, that he 
has a proces verbal made out every time you go 
there, and such conversations as best suit his views 
made and signed by his witness, which will be 
produced against you hereafter. It would not 
surprise me if he had a conversation ready made 
before you arrive there. It places-you in a very 
dangerous situation. 

28¢h.—Went to Plantation House, where , Sit 
Hudson Lowe, after some inquiries touching Na- 
poleon’s health, demanded if 1 had had any re- 
markable conversations with General Bonaparte, 
_ what length of time they lasted, and on what sub- 
jects? This led to a discussion in which his ex- 
cellency was more than ordinarily violent and 
abusive. Amongst other elegant expressions, he 
said, that he conceived me to be a jackal, run- 
ning about in search of news for General Bona- 
parte. : + + 
~ In reply to this expression I said, that I would 
neither be a jackal, nor a spy, nor informer, for him 
or for any one else. “ What do you mean, sir,” 
said he, “by a spy, nor an informer?” I said, that 
if 1 complied with his directions to inform bim of 
the conversations which passed between Napoleon 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 283 


and myself, 1 should conceive myself to be both. 
In a paroxysm of rage, he said, that I was to con- 
sider myself as prohibited from holding any com- 
munication whatsoever with Napoleon Bonaparte, 
except upon medical subjects. That I was to 
have no sort of communication with him upon 
other points. 1 asked him to give me this order 
in writing, which he refused, and after some more 
abuse, told me to wait outside of the room for 
some time. In about a quarter of an hour, I was 
called in again, and informed by Sir Hudson 
Lowe, that I was to conduct myself as before, 
observing, however, that he (Sir Hudson) only 
authorized ime to hold medical communication 
with General Bonaparte; that as to other subjects, 
I was: myself responsible ;* that I was not to re- 
fuse to answer General Bonaparte upon a subject 
that he questioned me on, but that I was not to ask 
him any questions other than medical ones, &c. 
‘Afterwards he asked what I thought myself 
bound to divulge? I replied, as 1 had formerly 
done when similar questions had been put to me. 
He asked if I did not think myself bound to com- ~ 
municate to him any abusive language made use 


n s It may be necessary to remind the reader that the governor, 
in one of his proclamations, which will be found in the appendix, 
had pronounced the holding of “ any unauthorized communica- 
tions with General Bonaparte,” to be felony. 


284 A VOICE FROM SI. HELENA, 


of by General, Bonaparte,.respecting him? I an- 
swered, certainly not, unless. ordered by Napo- 
leon.. _He asked, ‘‘ Why so, sir?” L replied, that I 
did not. chuse.to act the part of an, incendiary. 
His excellency then denied that he bad ever asked 
me to tell him all the conversations, which passed 
between General Bonaparte and myself. 1 put 
him in mind of his having told me at Longwood, 
and. elsewhere, that it was, necessary he should 
know every thing that was said, as he might draw 
conclusions and inferences which 1 would. not, 
and therefore that it was essential, for him to know 
every thing. After this, I demanded permission 
to take, the Jast directions he had given to mein 
writing, from his own dictation, to prevent the 
possibility of a mistake, which he refused. He 
then told me that he would in future dispense with 
my, attendance twice a week; but that he ex- 
pected me. to confer with Mr. Baxter every week 
on the state of Napoleon Bonaparte’s health; to 
which | consented, as Napoleon had no objection 
to verbal communications being made, and I need 
not say that I was heartily glad that my pre- 
sence at Plantation House was dispensed with. 
November 2nd.—Napoleon reclining on the sofa 
with somé newspapers lying before him, and his 
snuff-box in his hand.* He looked very melan- 


* It has been asserted that Napoleon took snuff in such im- 


A VOICE FROM ‘ST. HELENA. 285 


choly and low. After the usual inquiries about his 
health, my advice was given as usual, in as forci- 
ble a manner as I could, especially as to exercise 
on horseback. He replied that he felt no confidence 
in the governor, who he was ‘convinced would find 
out some pretext to insult him, or make'some in+ 
sinuations before he went out four times. “‘ That 
letter,” continued he, ‘ which you saw at Ber- 
trand’s the other day, came from hin, and con- 
tained a paper, with the account that my son had 
been disinherited from the succession to ‘the 
duchies of Parma, &c: Now, this ‘coming from 
another person, would be nothing; but as he im 
variably culls out all the news that might’ prove 
agreeable, which he retains at Plantation House, 
and sends whatever may wound my feelings; itis 
easy to see the motives by which he is actuated.” 

* You see,” added he, with an emphasis, “that 
he lost no time in sending that news to me. I 
was always prepared to expect something of the 
kind from the wretches who compose the congress. 


moderate quantities, that he was in the habit of cramming his 
waistcoat pockets full of that article, as no snuff-box could con+ 
tain a sufficiency for bis consumption —The reader may form 
his own opivion upon the correctness of this assertion when he is 
informed, that twelve pounds of the only kind of suuff he used, 
was brought by Marchand from Paris in July, 1815, of which 
rather more than one half remained When Tleft St. Helena, in 
July, 1818, 


a 


286 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


They are afraid of a prince, who is the choice of 
the people. However, you may yet see’a great 
change; that is, provided they continue to give 
him a good education, or that they do not assassi- 
nate him. If they brutify him by a bad educa- 
tion, there is little hope. As for me, I may be 
considered as dead, as already in the sepulchre. 
I am certain that before long, this body will be no 
more. Sento che la macchina lotta, ma che non 
pwd durare: (I feel that the machine struggles, 
but cannot last.)” saad 

“1,” added he, “could listen to the intelligence 
of the death of my wife, of my son, or of all 
my family, without change of feature. Not the 
slightest sign of emotion, or alteration of counte- 
nance would be visible. Every thing would ap- 
pear indifferent and calm. But when alone in my 
chamber, then I suffer. Then the feelings of ‘the 
man burst forth.” Oe 

1] suppose,” added he, “ that that Montchenu 
is very glad to hear of my illness. By what chan- 
nel does he send his letters to France?” I re- 
plied, that he sent them through the governor and — 
Lord Bathurst. “ Then, they are all opened and 
read in London by your ministers.” I replied, 
that I was ignorant of their having recourse to 
such practices. “Because,” said Napoleon, “you 
never have been in a situation to know any thing 


ee, a ncaa 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 287. 


about it. I tell you, that. the despatches: of all 
the.ambassadors, and other diplomatists, that: pass 
through the post-office are opened. Otto told me, 
that when in London, he ascertained this to be 
a fact beyond a doubt.” I said, that 1 had heard 
that in all the states on the continent, official 
letters were opened. ‘“ Certainly they are,” an-, 
swered Napoleon, “ but they have not the impu- 
dence to deny it, like your ministers, though it is 
carried to as great an extent amongst you, as any 
where else. In France,” continued the emperor, 
‘an arrangement was made, so that all the letters, 
sent by the ambassadors, or other diplomatic cha- 
racters, all their household, and all persons con- 
nected with foreign affairs, were. sent. to a secret 
department of the post-office in Paris, no matter in 
what part of France they were putin. All letters 
or despatches, in like manner, for foreign courts 
or ministers, were sent to this office, where they 
were opened and deciphered. The writers some- 
times made use of several different ciphers, , not 
continuing the same for more than ten lines, in 
order to prevent their being understood. This, 
however, did not answer, as in order to decipher 
the most ingenious and difficult, it was only ne- 
cessary to have fifty pages of the same cipher, 
which, from the extent of the correspondence, was 
soon to be had. So clever, were the agents em- — 


— 


| oil 


288 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


ployed, and so soon did they read the ciphers, 
that latterly, only fifty louis were paid for the dis- 
covery of the means of deciphering a new one. 
By opening all the letters addressed tothe diplo- 
matic persons, the post-office police got acquaint: 
ed with their correspondents, to whom all letters 
addressed subsequently, were treated in’ a sitilar 
manner. The awbassadors suspected’ that there 
were some infidelities committed upon their cor- 
respondence, and to prevent it used generally'to— 
change their cipher every three months: But this 
only gave a little additional trouble. Theysent their 
letters sometimes to a post-office town a few miles 
distant from where they actually resided, thinking 
that they were very cunning, and would thus 
escape observation, not knowing of the arrange- — 
ment I have mentioned to you. The ambassadors — 
of the lesser powers, such as. Denmark, Sweden; 


and even Prussia, used, through avarice, to save 


the expense of couriers, to send their despatches - 
through the post-office in cipher, which “were 
opened and deciphered, and’ the most important 
part of their contents copied and communicated to ~ 
me (never to the ministers) by * ****. By these — 
means, I knew the contents of the despatches that 
Bernstorf, * * * *, and others, sent to their courts; 
before they arrived at their destination; for they — 
were always sealed up, and sent on after we had ~ 


ee a ee 


- 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 289 


done with them. Several of them, especially those 
of Bernstorf, were full of injurious reflections 
upon me, censures on my conduct, and fabricated 
conversations with me. How often have I laughed’ 
within myself, to see them licking the dust from 
under my feet at my levee, after having read in 
the morning the détises they had written of me 
to their sovereigns. We used, also, frequently to 
discover very important matters which they had 
communicated to them in confidence from the am- 
bassadors of Russia and Austria, and of your 
country, (when you had one in Paris,) who always: 
sent their despatches by couriers of their own, 
which prevented me from being acquainted with. 
the nature of them. Through the correspondence 
of the lesser powers, I became acquainted with the 
opinions of the greater. The cleverness of: those’ 
who conducted this machinery was astonishing’ 
There was no species of writing, which they. could’ 
not imitate perfectly; and in the post-office were’ 
kept seals similar to those used by the ambassadors 
of all the powers of Europe, independent of an im~ 
mense number of others, belonging to families of 
different countries. If they met with a seal for 
which they had not a ‘fac-simile, they could get 
one made in twenty-four hours. This arrange-\ . 
ment,” continued he, “was not an invention of. 
mine. It was first — by Louis’ the Four; | 
VOL. 1. aie 


290 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA.. 


teenth, and some of the grandchildren of the 
agents originally employed by him, filled in my 
time situations which had been transmitted to, - 
them from their fathers. But,” added he, “ Cas- 
tlereagh does the same in London. All letters to 
‘and from diplomatic persons, which pass through 
‘the post-office, are opened, and the contents for- 
warded to him, or some other of your ministers, 
and, they must be aware that a similar practice: is 
followed in France.” 

I asked if it was a general rule to open at 
the French hosters, letters addressed to per- 
sons not diplomatic. “ Rarely,” said, he, “and. 
never, unless when a man was strongly suspected. 
Then the first thing that was done, was to open. 
every letter directed to him, by means of which his. 
correspondents were discovered, and all letters.ad-. 
dressed to them inspected ; but this was an odious 
measure, and very seldom, resorted to with French- 
men, As to foreigners, enemies of France, it was. 

proper to adopt every means of becoming ac-. 
quainted with their secret machinations,” 

- Napoleon then told me. that ‘he had. resolved. 
for the future only to haye one regular meal daily. 
at about two or. three o'clock, For some _ 
past he has eaten very sparingly. 

. 3rd.—Napoleon much the same; Aneel to. 
his general custom, when newspapers were before. 
him, he asked me now and then the meaning of 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 291 


any word which he did not comprehend. \ He 
strongly censured the conduct which the allied 
powers had practised in persecuting his brother 
Lucien, who-was a literary character, a ‘man who 
had never commanded, and who had eadesvoured 
to withdraw himself from political affairs. “It 
is,” added he, “from a consciousness of their 
own tyranny, and the fears resulting from a know: — 
ledge that they have violated the rights of nations, 
and have acted contrary to the spirit of ‘the age, 
and the will of the people. For persecuting me, 
they might allege some reason. They might say 
that I had been asovereign and a tyrant, and that 
it was necessary for the repose of the world; but 
nothing ¢an justify such acts of oppression and 
barbarity towards him. The principle of utility 
upon which» they act once established, God knows 
to what length it may be carried. _Upon‘a‘similar 
pretext the French might justify the assassitia- 
tion of Wellington and his whole army: It is‘a 
principle which will make kings tremble agen 
their thrones.” 

. Some conversation now took wise about Lae 

Cochrane, and the attémpt which’ his’ lordship’ 
had made to capture or destroy the ships’in the 
Charante. I said that it was the opinion of avery 
_ distinguished naval officer whom ‘named, and who 

was well known to him; that if. Cetin ‘had 
jaiirey, by arate MOF ua 0) 4 


292 A VOICE FROM ST, HELENA. 


been properly supported, he would have destroyed 
the whole of the French ships. .‘* He:could not 
only have destroyed them,” replied Napoleon; 
“but he might: and would. have taken them out, 
had. your admiral supported him as he ought to’ 
have done., For, in consequence of the ‘signal 
made by L’Allemand,” (I think he said)‘ to the 
ships 'to do the best in their power. to: save them- 
selves, sauve qui peut in fact, they became panic-° 
struck and cut their cables. The terror of the 
bridots (fire-ships) was so great that they actually 
threw their powder overboard, so that they could 
haye offered very little resistance. The Frencli © 
admiral was an imbéeile, but -yours was: just ‘as 
bad. , I assure you, that if Cochrane had been” 
supported, he would have taken every one of the 
ships. They ought not to have been alarmed 
by your dbrélols, but fear deprived them of their — 
senses, and. they no serie knew how to ‘act in 
their own defence.” . . by if heusdite 
ut Wheu asking the emperor some soidieaia ques- 
tions, he recounted the following anecdote. “About — 
seven years ago, the Persian ambassador inlRiiow 
fell'sick, and ordered a physician to be‘sent for.) — 
The messenger, not properly comprehending ‘what! — 
he meant, thought that he wished to see a’ minis-) 
ter of the treasury, to, whom ‘he: went: and in-) ~ 
formed him that, the Persian ambassador desired’ 
to speak to him. The wminister surprised, said, — 


A’ VOICE .FROM ST. HELBNAs 293 


sth a'curious mode of acting, but those bar: 
barians know nothing of etiquette, and» perhaps 
he has'something important to communicate.’ On 
his arrival,.the ambassador held out his wrist; 
that he should feel his pulse, whilst another great 
fellow’ with a turban brought a chamber utensil, 
which he held up to his nose for inspection. You 
may judge how the minister was Ob spec: at 
such a reception.” : 

‘5th.—Napoleon remained in bed very tate) not 
wasiog ‘had any sleep during the night. ‘Found 
ines not risen at eleven. — 

- Saw him once more in the course of the day, ie 
had some more conversation about his brother 
Lucien: He-observed again on the cruelty and in 
justice of persecuting’a literary character who did 
not meddle in politics, and who had even quar- 
relled with him. To persecute a man from whom 
no danger was to be apprehended two years after 
he (Napoleon) had been sent to St. Helena, was 
the’ height of injustice. Such fear of an indivi- 
dual shews that they are conscious of acting con- 
trary to the will of the people. ‘Les tyrans trem= _ 
blent pour leurs seuils.” “Here he made a quotation 
about Pluto. trembling lest the earth should open 
and ‘expose to view all the horrors of the infernal 
regions. _“‘ What a degradation,” added he, “ to 
see the ambassador of one of the greatest powers’ 
in Europe persecuting an individual who has 


ya 


294 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


never been, nor ever desired to be a sovereign: 
Quando io sard. morto ¢ forse il giorno non 2 lontano 
John Bull mi vendicherd. (When I am dead, and 
perhaps the day is not far off, John Bull will re- 
venge me.)” bit Pikkd 
_ Napoleon then recounted to me some private 
anecdotes of Lucien. roll tit sith? 
- He also told me, that one Ignatio Lorri, (1 
think was the name,) a Corsican and a foster 
brother of his, had early:in life embraced the Eng- 
lish party, and entered their sea-service. “He was 
ignorant, though un bravissimo uwome, and an eXx+ 
cellent seaman. He commanded an English store- 
ship, and. landed in ——*, where he went disguised 
as a peasant to see the French consul. “When he 
came into his presence,” continued Napoleon, 
“ he threw off his cappotto, shewed the English 
uniform, and told who he was. He made many 
enquiries concerning me, without however offer, 
ing to enter my service. The consul did not be- 
lieve him, and wrote a long history to Paris of 
an impostor. who had presented himself ‘to him, 
and asserted himself to be the. emperor's foster 
brother. He was much astonished. to find» 
I admitted it to be perfectly true. It is surprising 
that during all the height of my power, siete 
' * The name of the place is illegible in the manuscript my 
journal. yr Boa 3 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 295 


never asked a favour of mé, although i in his child- 
hood he loved me, and knew, that since my ele 
vation, I had loaded his mother with favours and 
Money.” 

6th.—Napoleon in rather bette spirits, other 
wise much the same. Spoke to me about ati ar- 
ticle which he had seen in the papers, stating that 
Talma had paid a reckoning for him at a tavern 
once, when through the want of money he had 
offered his sword in pledge. ‘This he declared to 
be untrue, and that he did not believe Talma liad 
ever said so. “I did not know Talma personally,” 
continued he, “until I was first consul. T then 
favoured and distinguished him véry niuch, as a 
ian of talent and the first in’ the profession. ‘I 
sometimes sent for him in the morning, to dis- 
course with me while I was at breakfast. ‘The 
libéllers said that Talma faught me how to act the 
kirig. When TI retured from Elba, 1 said oné 
morning at my breakfast to Talma, Whol was! pre- 
sent with some other mén of science, “ Eh bieh, 
Talma, so they say that you taught me how to sit 
upon iny throne. C'est adi signe que je m'y tiens 
bien, ” 

Count Balmaine and Baron Sturmer had’ a 
lotig interview with General Montholon’ yesterday. 
They rode up to the’ inner gate, where they re- 
mained for some time looking in. Signals‘are made 


296 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


to Plantation House whenever. reat come near. 
Longwood, and a spy is generally sent, to dog: 
them from the town; but no direct attempts are 
made to prevent their intercourse with the-inhabi- 
tants of Longwood. - 

, 8th.— Napoleon ohwareed that I w thcdiladnad 
and asked if I had the gout. I replied:in the ne- 
gative, and said, that it had been caused yes~ 
terday by a tight boot; that I never had. the, 
gout, and never had been confined to my bed.a, 
day in my, life by illness. He then asked. if my; 
father had eyer had that disease, and said. that 
he would. prescribe for my, present complaint, by 
ordering me to eat nothing, drink barley-water;. 
and keep my leg up ona sofa during the day. He 
then made some observations about his son, and 
said, that, his having been disinherited from , the 
succession to Parma gave him: little or no. uneasi- 
ness. . “If he lives,” added he, “ ‘he will. be some- 
thing. As to those contemptible little. states, I 
would. rather see him a private gentleman, with 
enough to. eat, ; ;than | sovereign of any of them. 
Perhaps it may however grieve. the empress, to 
think that he will not inherit after her; but it-does 
Bs give me the smallest trouble.” ) 4). ja) 

_% The emperor. Francis,” yadded_ he, : « whose 
head is crammed with ideas of ‘high birth, was very 
ansious to, prove that, was descended from. some 


=z 


A VOICK FROM ST. HELENA, 297. 


of.the old tyrants of Treviso; and after.my mar- 
riage with Marie Louise, employed divers persons 
to.search into the old musty records.of genealogy, 
in which they thought they could find something 
to prove what they desired.. Heimagined that hée 
had: succeeded at last, and wrote to me, asking 
my consent that he should publish; the account 
with all official formalities. I :refused.. He was: 
so intent upon this favourite object, that he again’ 
applied, and said, ‘ Laissez moi faire, that I need. 
not appear to take any part in,it.. I, replied, thab 
this ‘was impossible, as if published, I :should:be 
obliged to take notice of it; that I preferred: being 
the son of an honest man, to being descended from 
any little dirty tyrant of Italy. . That Iwas ‘the 
Rodolph of my. family.” inut eestanto bolting 


_~ “There was formerly,” added. he, ‘‘one.Buona- 


ventura Bonaparte, who lived and died a) monk: 
The poor man lay quietly in his graves nothing 
was thought about him until I,.was on the throne 
of France. It. was, then, discovered) that he had 
been possessed of many virtues, which never had 
been attributed to him. before, and. the pope. pro: 
posed. to me to canonize, him... ‘ Saint Pere,’ said 
tas pow: Tamour de Dieu épargnez moi de ridicule 
de, cela; you. being in my power; all. the!world 
will say that I forced you to make,a, saipt,out of 
wy samily.’ lyr rots oy! dT > dikg tdtoompsid 


298 A VOICE PROM ST. HELENA. 


- 25th—Signal made for me to go to Plantation 
House, where I found Sir Hudson Lowe, who 
interrogated me upon various matters that had 
taken place at Longwood, and the conversations 
Thad had with Napoleon. I replied, that I had 
formed a determination not tomeddle with what did 
not concern me, and only troubled myself about 
my professional pursuits. He said that I must 
have had some conversations not medical with 
him, and demanded to be informed of the subject 
of the conversations I had with General Bona- 
parte. I replied, that in the first place, nothing 
important had taken place; that in the next, I did 
not think myself bound to repeat the subject of 
such conversations as I had with Napoleon, unless 
permitted, or unless matters. came to my knowledge 
connected with my allegiance, or of great impor- 
tance: to my own government. Sir Hudson re 
plied, * You are no judge, sir, of the iniportance 
of the’ coriversations you may have with Gené 
ral Bonaparte. I might consider several sub- 
jects of great importance, which you consider as 
trifling or of no consequence.” I observed, that iif I 
was not at liberty fo use my own discretion or judg: 
ment, I must necessarily repeat: to’ hid every 
thing I heard, which would place me ih the situa- 

tion of a man acting a most dishonourablé and 
disgraceful part. The governor replied, “that it 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 299 


ee 


was my duty to inform him of what circumstances 
came to my knowledge, and of the subject of my 
conversation with General Bonaparte; for if I did 

| not, it was easily in his power to probit me from 
| holding any communication with him, except on 
medical subjects, and then only when sent to for 
that purpose. That it was a duty I owed to the 
English government.” 1 answered, that it would 
be acting the part of a spy, an informer, anda 
| mouton. That’ I never understood the govern: 
ment had placed me about him for other than me- 

dical purposes ; that my duty did not require me 

to commit dishonourable actions; and that I would 

not do so for any person. Sir Hudson remained 

silent for a few moments, eying me furiously, and 

asked what was the meaning of the word mouton? 

I replied, “‘ Mouton means a person who insinu- 

ates himself into the confidence of another, for the 

purpose of betraying it.” Sir Hudson then broke 

out into a paroxysm of rage; said that I shad 

given him the greatest possible insult in his official 

capacity that could be offered, and concluded 

with ordering me to leave the room, saying; that 

he: would not permit a person who had made use 

of such language to sit in his presence. I told 

him that [ did not voluntarily come into nor ever 

‘would have entered his house, unless compelled 

todo so. He walked about im a frantic manner, 


300 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


sayentingy in a boisterous tone, “ Leave the room; 
sir; which he continued bawling out for some 
moments after I had actually quitted it. 
_/The following narrative may convey some idea 
of the manner in which Lieutenant General Sir 
Hudson Lowe, K. C. B. &c. &c. was duped, 
when he had the command of.an important for-— 
tress. It was communicated to me at Longwood, 
principally by the mattre d’hétel, Cipriani, whose 
name was also Franceschi, but which latter he 
never assumed at St. Helena, - reasons whic : 
will be seen hereafter. © ) ib 
‘In 1806, Sir Hudson, (then i:tinabiiaaiiaioloail 
Lowe,) was entrusted with the command of the: 
island of Capri, which is situated in the bay of # 
Naples, and with the secret: service, or in plainer: 
terms, the espionage of the continent, at least as _ 
far as regarded the Mediterranean. In the island: 
he commanded, he generally received intelligence: _ 
from thescity of Naples, from which :it is distant. 
only afew miles. It was most generally. brought: 4 
to him by means of a fishing boat, commanded by: 
a man named. Antonio, who went out at night — rf 
under pretence of fishing. Sir Hudson employed: / 
asa spy. Antonio Suzzarelli, a Corsican, anda 
man of talent, who had: been educated as a lawyer! ‘i 
along with Pozzo di Borgo, and Saliceti, the them — 
miuister of police at Naples. Suzzarelli had for-: — 


A. VOICE PROM ST. HELENA‘ 30T 


merly been an officer in the English service. © Ma- 
resca a Neapolitan, and Criscuolo, another Nea- 
politan, were also employed by him on a similar 
service; and Cassetti,* a Neapolitan lieutenant- 
colonel of dragoons,. was spy for Queen Caroline 
of Sicily: Suzzarelli remained: faithful to: Sire 
Hudson Lowe for about twenty days, viz. from’. 
the 19th or 20th of January, to the 10th: of Fe« 
bruary, when some despatches of his:were taken, 
in a boat going over to Capri. Att ‘a:tavern, ‘he? 
met Cipriani Franceschi, who was then in.the con-» 
fidential service of Saliceti, supposed to be. his’: 
natural son, and generally known by the name of. 
Franceschi. Being countrymen and intimate ac- 
quaintances, Suzzarelli confided to Franceschi: 
the nature of his employment, informing him also, 
that he. received. a certain sum monthly from the’ 
English government. Cipriani proposed to him’ — 
to apparently continue to furnish information to’ — 
the governor of Capri, and: receive his salary, but. 
at the same time. really to communicate every! | 
thing to Saliceti, and obey his directions ; adding, : 
that he then would be paid double what he:re- — 
ceived from the English; and insinuating, that?» 
should he refuse, in all’ probability he would ino ~ 


vyi shell. 4 mooi jour ou 2oineidoost 
* All those respectable persons, I believe, are now in existence, - 

and ‘one of them I’ have reason to believe enjoys a petision from 

(i S29 KS Ott dass 


his majesty’s government fer'his services. - 


‘ 
- 


aS jars 


302 A VOICE FROM ST, HELENA. 


two or three weeks be discovered and shot, Suz- 
zarelli, who was no novice, took the hint immedi- 
ately, closed with the proposal, and was brought 
before Saliceti, from whom he received instructions 
how to act. Suzzarelli also, brought. over Ma- 
resca and Criscuolo to the same mode of acting, 
partly by promises and partly by threats. | Cas- 
setti also became a spy on the queen: for Saliceti. . 
Adl. of them. were paid double what they re- 
ceived from the other parties. Matters) were or- 
dered:so, that whenever Suzzarelli received a des- 
patch from Sir Hudson Lowe, it was immediately: 
brought. to Saliceti in the: state in:which it»had 
been received ; who, after reading it, dictated'such: 
answers as he thought proper. Sometimes Saz- 
zarelli. was permitted to tell the truth.» For'ex- 
ample, while the French troops were: in’ great’ 
force in Naples, he was directed to mention their 
number. Whenever it related 1o an affair-which: 


_ Saliceti did. not like to answer directly, he:caused: 


the master of the boat and his crew to be arrested: 
and thrown. into confinement for some days; when: 


after some forms of examination had* been’ gone’ 


through, they were. released. This: also gave’ an” 


- opportunity, for! Suzzarelli to exercise: his: talents: 


in obtaining more money from Sir Hudson, by 
inventing tales of the trouble he had share Ae 
and the expenses he had.incurred in 


A VOICE FROM ST, HELENA. 303 


to save those poor devils, who otherwise would 
have been shot. In this manner the whole of the 
information furnished to the British government, 
was only such as answered. the ends. of Saliceti, 
and consequently of the emperor Napoleon, ex- 
cept what trifling intelligence Sir Hudsom could 


glean from the master of the boat, and. his,sons, 
‘who. were faithful to him, but were ignorant, of 
every thing of importance. Commissions of the 


most difficult nature were frequently, sent by Sir 


‘Hudson Lowe to Suzzarelli to| execute, which»by: 


order of Suliceti, were. done with: the, greatést 


punctuality. and despatch. Amongst others, there 


was one for some expensive, French watches for 
Queen Caroline, scarce books, and all:recent pab-. 
lications for Sir, Hudson, particalarly a copy: of 
Las Cases’ Atlas, (then called Le Sage’s,) to, ob- 
tain which he was very anxious. | This, also af- 
forded honest Suzzarelli another, opportunity, of 
gainmg money from Sir- Hudson, for, although he 
was ordered by. Saliceti, to, farnish the articles at: 
prime cost, with,a reasonable charge for expenses,) 
in order. to prevent, suspicion, he never failed to, 
lay on from fifty, to a hundred per cent. underdif-, 
ferent pretences. He. practised smuggling .also). 


tea. considerable, extent, Sir Hudson frequently 


paying for. the articles he received, in English or 
colonial goods, which Suzzarellij used: afterwards 
to sell at Naples, ata large profit. 


304 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA; 


- Sir Hudson, in his cunning, had recourse to aw’ 
extraordinary mode of sending over the wages to 
Suzzarelli, Criscuolo, and Maresca, which last in 
the fulness of his heart, he used to call his cham~ 
pion, (suo campione). They were paid in gold, 
which was generally sent in loaves of bread, that’ 
the cautious Sir Hudson had baked in his own’ 
house, and put the money in with his own hands,’ 
lest his spies should be discovered by any spies of 
the: Neapolitan police. The loaves had the appear- 
ance of bread for the use of the boatmen, while 
fishing at night. As soon as they were landed, they’ - 
were brought up by Suzzarelli’ to ‘Saliceti; ‘the! 
latter insisting that every kind of correspondence’ 
should be first submitted to him. By meats of 
Suzzarelli the French government became ‘ac’ 
quainted with the real destination of the army: 
under General M‘Kenzie Fraser, and the ‘fleet’ 
under Sir J. Duckworth. ite 4 INES. 
“Suzzarelli even offered to procure Sir Hudson’ 
some soldiers to recruit the Corsican regiment in’ 
Capri; and some I helieve were ‘actually desi 
patched over to him, to corrupt the foreigners* 
under his command. While’ the attack’ upon 
Capri was. meditating, Suzzarelli had the! art to- 
persuade Sir Hudson Lowe that it was’ meant’ 
against the little island ‘of Ponza; accordingly to 
defend which the English frigate Ambuscade, and? 
the greatest part of the gun-boats were sent’; thus” 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 305 


leaving the passage to Capri defended only by a 
small force.. To encourage this belief, an embargo 
was laid upon all vessels in Naples; but some fish- 
ing boats, manned with persons in the employ of 
Saliceti, were sent out at night, purposely to fall 
in with some of Sir Hudson’s boats, and to assure 
them that the expedition was meant for Ponza. 
In order to embroil the British government and 
Sir Hudson with Queen Caroline, letters were 
fabricated by a Neapolitan, called Dor Antonio; 
as if from her to Cassetti; whilst others, purporting 
to be written by Sir Hudson, were forged’ by an 
English schoolinaster residing at Naples ; these last 
confidentially stating, that the object of the Eng- 
lish was to get the royal family out of Sicily, and 
send them to England on a pension, that they 
might subsequently take possession of the coun- 
try; and the first, containing complaints of Sir 
Hudson by the Queen, and invectives against him 
and the English. Those wretches also, to afford 
amusement to. Saliceti, and to themselves, used 
sometimes to create a quarrel between Sir Hudson 
and the Prince of Canosa, who commanded ~in 
Ponza, by means of forged letters, abusing each 
other; which they caused to fall into their hands. 
They usually assembled at night to enjoy them- 


- selves, drinking and laughing ‘at their dupe Sir 


Hudson; whose health they toasted out of derision, 
VOL. 1. = 


306 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


whilst, in the midst of their revels, they were 
hatching new means of deceiving him... Even ‘Sa- 
liceti himself sometimes went to listen —_ — 
at their schemes. 

| Some time in 1807, or 1808, ian adeeb was to 
go to Vienna, to execute a mission for Saliceti, 
and determined to make Sir Hudson Lowe pay 
the expenses of the journey. The chief object of 
this mission was to sound the English Ambas- 
sador, and Pozzo di Borgo, then at Vienna. Suz- 
zarelli went to Sir Hudson Lowe, whom he per- 
suaded that at Vienna he could procure informa- 
tion of the greatest importance, and obtained from 
him six thousand francs for the expenses of his 
journey, &c. with strong letters of recommenda- 
tion: He then went to Vienna,) where he was 
very well received by the English ambassador, 
from whom he procured some important: intelli- 
gence. He also obtained from him an order to 
have the salaries paid which were given to other 
English agents and officers who resided on: the 
continent. With Pozzo di Borgo, he did not 
succeed, as the wary Corsican could. not: believe 
that it was possible for him to deceive Saliceti, as 
he pretended to have done. Suzzarelli im trying 
to ingratiate hiniself' into Pozzo di Borgo’s corfi- 
dence, boasted of his influence over Saliceti, say- 
ing, Io faccio intendere a Saliceti tutto cio che 


| 


A’ VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 807 


voglio* (1 make Saliceti believe whatever I like). 
A metu conti: questo? (Dost thou ‘tell this to me?) 
replied Pozzo di Borgo, bowing down to the 
ground. All the art of Suzzarelli could not ex- 
tract a single secret from bim, although the letter 
of recommendation given by Sir Hudson Lowe, 
represented him as a man in whom every’ confi- 
dence could be placed, and in the passport which 
he received afterwards from the English ambassa+ 
dor, he was styled Id Signore Barone Suzzarelli. 
On his return to Naples, he was asked by Saliceti, 
“ Ebbene cosa hai tirato da Pozzo di Borgo?” 
(Well, what hast thou extracted from Pozzo di 
Borgo?) “ Ah,” replied Suzzarelli, shrugging up 
his shoulders, “dui birbi insieme, non si guadagna 
niente,” (two rogues together, nothing is gained). 
He then told Saliceti, that Pozzo di Borgo had sent 
his‘compliments to him. Saliceti replied, “* Suz- 
zarelli, [ know that thou hast told me many lies, 
but this is the greatest that ever has escaped thy 
lips, accustomed as they are to lying. I well 
know Pozzo di Borgo: I have been the means _ of 
banishing him from his country, and of proscrib- 
ing him; so that through my means, if caught in 
France, he would be shot. Thinkest thou, then, 


* The Htalian in this narrative is given as delivered by Cipri- 
ani, who generally conversed in not the most pure or correct 
language. ~ ' 

be 


308 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


that so proud a man as Pozzo di Borgo, and a 
Corsican, would send his compliments to one who 
has done him so much injury.. None but the 
meanest and vilest of men would be capable of it, 
and 1 well know Pozzo di Borgo to be one of the 
proudest on earth.” In fact, Suzzarelli* acknow- 
ledged afterwards, that he had invented it. — 

| Suzzarelli had, at one time, persuaded Sir 
Hudson Lowe to promise to come over to Naples, 
and meet him in a little house on the beach, be- 
longing to Maresca, where he would have seen 
Saliceti in disguise, who had decided not to seize 
him, as he conceived that it would.be difficult to 
find another governor, who would allow himself to 
be gulled so egregiously, and would, besides, have 
prevented them from deriving any more services 
from Suzzarelli. “ Vorrei vedere questo colonel- 
lo tuo,” said Saliceti, “ fammelo vedere. Un uomo 
pud lasciarsi ingannare per qualche mese, ma. di 
lasciarsi coglionare a questo segno per tanti anni, 
bisogna essere ben bestia.” (I should like to, see 


"* After Saliceti’s death, Suzzarelli confessed that he had never 
‘succeeded in deceiving him but once, and even then’ not com- 
pletely ; as Saliceti, in giving him some money for the expenses of 
his journey to Vienna, told him that it was not given on , account 
of the services he had then rendered the public, as he, i in the bot- 
tom of his heart, believed that most of what he had told him Was 
false, -but because he knew that he must. get perth gene 
means, for the existence of his family and himself. 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 309 


this colonel of thine. Let me see him. A man 
may allow himself to be deceived for some months, 
but he who suffers himself to be humbugged so 
grossly for so many years, must be a beast in- 
deed.) “Oh,” replied Suzzarelli, with an air of 
gravity, “non 2 tanto bestia, 2 talento mio.” (Not 
quite so great a blockhead, it is my cleverness.) 
Something, however, induced Lowe to change his 
intentions. 

Murat being desirous of seizing all the English 
merchandize, of which there was a great quantity 
in Naples, under the name of American, and, at 
the same time, not wishing to quarrel with the 
Americans, employed Suzzarelli to find out the 
means of ascertaining what was really American, 
and what was not. Suzzarelli went to Sir Hud- 
son Lowe, whom he persuaded that he should be 
able to render essential service to the British go- 
vernment, if he were possessed of the means of 
distinguishing the English passports from the real 
American ones. Sir Hudson gave him two, one 
real and American, and the other counterfeit and 
English, shewing him how to distinguish between 
them, the only difference being in the stamp. In 
the English, the initial was exactly in the centre 
of the stamp ; in the American, though the letter 
was the same, it was placed a little underneath. 
Furnished with these, Suzzarelli departed, and in 


310 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


the beginning of 1810, a general ‘seizure of the 
ships was made by Morat, and all those found 
with passports in the’ manner described above, 
were confiscated. While Saliceti lived, but few 
were seized, as he wished to keep Suzzarelli on 
terms with Lowe. — 

It was by means of the money sth tii 
seizure and confiscation of the above-mentioned 
vessels, that King Joachim in a great measure 
equipped ‘and paid the expedition undertaken 
against Sicily in the year 1811. Saliceti ‘became 
acquainted with almost every thing that. passed at 
the court of Palermo, by means of the Duchess of 
C***, with whom heintrigued. She was daughter 
to the Princess C ***, wife to the Sicilian ambas: 
sador in* **, and prima dama to Caroline, ‘and her 
confidant. Her husband wrote her’an account of 
every circumstance that took place ‘at ‘the court 
of ****, She hated the French, and Saliceti 
pretended that he was! a'republican;\and detested 
the Fretich party. She established a correspond- 
ence with her mother, who communicated every 
thing to her, forthe disclosure of which she 're- 
ceived one thousand sewdi per'month from Saliceti. 

In 1808 or 9, a Neapolitan named Mosca, and 
in Yank a captain, ‘wassent over from Capri by 
Queen Caroline ‘to assassinate Napoleon’s' bro- 
ther, Joseph, at that*time’ King’ of ‘Naples: In 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA, sil 


order to stimulate him to the deed, she gave him 
a lock of her hair, and a letter in her own hand- 
writing, engaging to make him a colonel as soon 
as what he promised was effected.) Independent 
of this; he received a letter from the Princess V ** 
T***, confidant to Queen Caroline, specifically 
pointing out what he was to do; viz. to rid his 
country of the usurper, and giving him every as- 
surance, that the “ good queen, his mistress, would 
Sulfil all her promises to him.’* He accordingly 
left Capri, in a felucca, provided with, all, the ne- 
cessary passports; in one of which, signed by an 
English officer, there were instructions requiring 
that all British officers should afford every assis- 
tance to the bearer, who was proceeding on a 
secret mission, for the good of the service of King 
Ferdinand. He landed at Molino, near to a 
country-house of Joseph’s, and his intention was 
to have assassinated him while walking in. the 
garden. While lurking about in expectation of his 
victim, he met with a girl, whose appearance struck 
him, and to whom he offered some pieces»of gold 
to consent to his wishes, Not succeeding ‘in this, 
he told her that he had come over from the queen 
to execute.a grand object, and that if she would 
consent to his desires, he would make her. ‘a great 


‘d Those two letters, as well as the passports, yy in Ai oct 
ginal since my return from St. Helena. 


312. A VOICE FROM ‘ST; HELENA. 


woman. The girl became alarmed, and would 
not consent, notwithstanding the sight: of: his 
gold, and the promises he made. Information 

was given to the police, who proceeded imme- 
diately to the spot. Two of Mosca’s associates: 
were killed, and he himself seized, after a desperate 
resistance. . The letters, the lock of hair, the arms 
which were found upon him, and the girl, were 
produced against him before a military commis- 
sion. ‘He said, in his defence, that he merely. had. 
come over to throw himself at Joseph’s feet, and 
ask pardon and permission to return to; Naples: 
After condemnation, however, he confessed his. 
real intentions. He died with great courage, and — 
refused to disclose the names of his accomplices. 

Some time after this, Queen Caroline sent. over 

a Neapolitan apothecary, named Gherardi, (or | 
Visconti,) and his two sons, to assassinate:Sali- » 
ceti.. For this purpose he went to Ponza, from - 
whence he proceeded to Capri, and. from Capri to. 
Naples, where he landed at night, taking with 
hima sort of catamaran, in shape and size simi- 
lar to.a ship’s buoy. He managed matters so well, ~ 
as to get admittance into Saliceti’s house, and even 
to hire a room under the stairs as an apothecary’s 
store, in which he placed his machine. Saliceti, 
who had been at a party at the house of the Prin- 
cess ***, did not return. until about, twelve, or 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 313 


one. o'clock, alighted from his carriage, and ac- 
cording to his usual custom, bounded up stairs 
with great quickness: this saved his life: for the 
incendiary’s machine did not explode until he had 
passed through four rooms of his suite of apart- 
ments. Cipriani was with him at the moment of 
the explosion. Upwards of thirty of the rooms 
were either blown to pieces or materially injured, 
and the palace nearly reduced to ruins, under 
which was buried one of Saliceti’s daughters (now 
the Duchess of * * *),f where she remained for 
some hours, but at last was. discovered by Ci- 
priani hearing the moans of some person. While 
proceeding on in the direction of the voice, he 
tumbled through the floor down to the room be- 
low, fortunately without sustaining any injury, 
which brought him nearer to the sufferer. An 
alarm was given, and after considerable difficulty 
the young lady was extricated, half dead, from 
under the mass of ruins. Some of the rafters had 
formed a cross over her which was the means of 
saving her life. Gherardi and his sons were ar- 


_ -rested and tried, the sons shot, but the father, in 


consequence of his advanced age, escaped with 
perpetual imprisonment. | 
Immediately after this event, Sir Hudson Lowe 


» + This lady is now alive, and resides in Naples. In 1819, 
-I saw-and conversed with her sister at Rome. 


' 814 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


wrote a letter to Saliceti, professing his entire igno- 
rance of it, and his detestation of similar attempts, 

’ Saliceti, suspecting the drum-major of the regi- 
ment of Vajro, then in Naples, to be an agent.of 
Queen Caroline, employed Suzzarelli to discover 
it; Accordingly Suzzarelli, with whom the.drum- 
major was intimately acquainted, embraced an op- 
portunity, of addressing him one day while he was 
walking about, looking’ very: discontentedly, and 
commenced by inveighing against the tyranny to 
which they were subjected, and how happy he 
should be to get away from a place: where no 
one’s life was safe for a moment; professing his.in- 
tention of effecting his escape as'soon ashe could 
do it without running the risk of being seized and 
shot by the police, of which he said he was dn 
greatdread. The poor drum-major heartily jomed 
him, professed his own disgust for the: govern- 
ment they were under, and his attachment to that 
of Caroline, adding, that he would also get away 
as soon as possible. Upon this Suzzarelli.pro- 
‘posed to him to induce twenty or thirty of his: re- 
giment to enter into either Caroline’s or the Eng- 
‘lish service, telling him to makethem signa paper 
purporting their readiness to enter, and ‘giving 
him two hundred dollars. to forward his plans, 
with a promise, that.as soon as they were. ready, 
he would procure them a passage over to Capri. 


A&A NOICE FROM ST, HELENA, 815 


The drum-major went amongst his friends in the 
regiment, and-used all his endeavours,to!inveigle 
some to enter into his projects... He could not, 
however, succeed’ with more than ten.or twelve, 
who were so illiterate that they could. neither 
réad hor write, and he was obliged to write their 
names himself, along with those of his two sons. 
He then met Suzzarelli according to appointment, 
acquainted him with how far he had succeeded, 
and’ shewed him the list of names. Suzzarelli com- 
municated this to Saliceti, recommending him at 
the same time to wait until he had procured more 
victims. | Saliceti rejected this, replying, that it was 
the business of the police by every means to. dis- 
cover traitors, but, not’ to encourage or make 
them ; on-the contrary, that his duty was to nip 
every thing of the kind in the bud,and,not know- 
ingly to: allow such practices to be’ carried on. 
The, drum-major and his associates were imme- 
diately arrested, the paper with the names found 
upon him, and, ashort time afterwards, himself, his 
sons, and some of the others were hanged. Suz 
zarelli lay concealed for several days, and then 
went’to see the widow of the unfortunate drum- 
major, told her that her husband had nearly 
been his ruin; that he had come-to him to,;re- 
quest ‘assistance in getting away from Naples, 
which hein his friendship-had promised, to, afford, 


316 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


but that all had been discovered; that he had 
been taken up, thrown into prison, and would 
have been hanged, if. luckily for him a country- 
man of his had not been in Saliceti’s office, who 
had interested himself to save his life. This he 
told so plausibly, that the poor woman implicitly 
believed what he said, looked upon him as a be- 
nefactor, and ever afterwards, when in trouble, 
used to have recourse to Suzzarelli for advice, 
who occasionally. gave her a dollar or two. Two 
or three days after this abominable treachery, Ci- 
priani said to Suzzarelli, “ What a scelerato (mis- 
creant) thou art, Suzzarelli.. How canst thou 
reconcile to thyself being the cause of the death 
of those poor fellows who were hanged through 
porcit Napolitanacci,” "(they are Neapolitan hogs). 
In 1809, Saliceti, wishing to discover when the 
packet from England was expected to arrive in 
Sicily, set Suzzarelli to work upon Colonel Lowe. 
Suzzarelli accordingly wrote to the colonel, stat 
ing that as the news they had received from | 
land by the last English papers. had been very 
distressing, and had produced bad effects, by dis- 
couraging those partizans of the English who_ “be- 
lieved it; that even those who did not. credit 
it-to the fall extent, thought that something | un- 
favourable had occurred ; he therefore requt 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 317 


the colonel to communicate immediately to him 
any news that he might have received, that he 
might be able to keep up the spirits of the party. 

Sir Hudson Lowe replied, that he was very right 
to use every exertion not to allow the loyal senti- 
ments of the faithful subjects of King Ferdinand 
to be lowered ; but at that moment he had no au- 
thentic intelligence to communicate; that, how- 
ever, he expected to a certainty that the packet 
from England would arrive in a few days, when 
he would take care to forward to him forthwith 
eyery, intelligence that was favourable. As soon 
as Suzzarelli made this known to Saliceti, a pri- 
vateer, called l’ Ardito, was despatched to cruise 
between Sardinia and ——, and in a few days 
actually fell in with the English packet, (which, I 
believe, was called the Success) which she took. 
The mail was thrown overboard, but in the hurry, 
it hung by one of the cords which attached it, 
and the privateer’s men kept up such a fire of 
musketry, that the crew of the packet durst not 
approach to cut it away, and it was taken. In it 
were despatches giving some directions concerning 
an attack which was meditated upon Corfu; 
with some letters from the admiralty to the ad- 
miral relative to the blockade of that island, Ci. 
priani described the packet as having been com- 
manded by a young man about twenty, and 
manned with fourteen men. 


318 A VOICE FROM. ST. HELENA. 


Suzzarelli extorted large sums of money: from 
Colonel Lowe under various pretexts; such as in- 
demnifying his agents for their imprisonment, and 
as bribes stated by him. to have been given to the 
police to prevent his own arrestation. ‘He was'a 
most debauched character, but a man of talent, 
of prepossessing appearance and manner. He 
tried at times to deceive Saliceti with wonderfal 
stories, and invented schemes to obtain’ money — 
from him. Saliceti on these occasions has beet 
known to say, “ Vai a far eredere questo al colo- 
nello tuo, che 2 un coglione, a me non puoi, che ti 
conosco.* Canst thou not say at once’ that’ tel 
hast need of money?” ye 

With a view to embroil the English everett 
with the Sicilian, a letter was fabricated by Suz- 
zarelli, in imitation of Colonel Lowe's hand-writ- 
ing. ‘In the course of conversation with Cassetti, 
Suzzarelli observed, that Queen Caroline was 
playing the devil in Sicily, and endeavouring to 
destroy all the English. This excited Cassetti’s 
curiosity, and caused him to make many inquiries 
from Suzzarelli, who, after many seeming diffi- 
culties, replied, that he had a letter from’ the 
colonel to that effect, which Cassetti, with great 
9 asked to see. Suzzarelli after’ ‘much 

bit | 


~ *-Goand make thy blockhead of a colonel believe this, It will 
not go down with me, who know thee. » bohwae 


A VOICE FROM 8ST. HELENA. 319 


persuasion allowed him to look at it. It stigma- 
tized the Neapolitans as a set of wretches without 
faith; counselled Suzzarelli to beware of them, 
asserted that Queen Caroline had formed ‘a plot 
to assassinate all the English in Sicily ; that the 
barons had every thing ready to take up arms, 
and to massacre or drive them off the island; 
concluding with declaring, that in consequence of 
this discovery, the English government had te- 
solved to seize upon the queen, and take the island 
under. their own protection. Cassetti. begged 
hard to be allowed to retain the letter, which 
Suzzarelli refused, but gave him a copy, promis- 
ing that he would consider of the propriety of 
giving him the original. He then went to Sali- 
ceti, to whom he related that Cassetti had taken 
the bait, adding, that he had promised to consider 
of the propriety of letting him have the original. 
Not to neglect taking every precaution, Saliceti 
desired Suzzarelli to send for the English school- 
master in their employment, who counterfeited 
hand-writing to perfection, to ascertain if the 
colonel’s hand-writing had been well imitated by 
Suzzarelli. On looking at it, he declared that 
the cheat would be discovered. He then was 
ordered to copy the letter, and imitated Sir Hud- 
son Lowe’s hand-writing so perfectly, that the lat- 
ter was subsequently deceived by it himself. The 
next morning Suzzarelli gave it to Cassetti, in- 


320 A VOICE FROM 8ST. HELENA, 


structing him at the same time not to shew-or lose 
‘it, as he said his life depended upon it. ‘Cassetti 
immediately hurried off to Palermo, and shewed 
the letter to the queen, who in a rage sent for 
Sir John Stuart, who was then at Palermo, and 
presented him the counterfeit letter, insisting that 
a most summary punishment might be inflicted 
upon Colonel Lowe for having dared. to make use 
of her name in such a manner. | Sir John Stuart 
immediately sent to Colonel Lowe to demand an 
explanation. On being shewn the letter, his‘hand+ 
writing was so well counterfeited, that he acknow* 
ledged it to be his, but declared that he was not 
‘conscious. of ever having written such a letter} 
neither could he find a copy of it in his private’ 
despatch-book. At the time that Suzzarelli forged 
the letter, the police purposely sent out some boats: 
and seized the colonel’s boat coming over from: 
Capri. The next day, Suzzarelli wrote to the co= 
lonel to inform him that the boat had been seized; ~ 
and that he did not know what intelligence he liad? 
forwarded to him, as all had fallen into the hands 
- of the police, who had ere nme 
boat. ii gate 
Maresca was davai the person: employed°to 
go: over to the colonel: in Antonio’s boat. 
Hadson styled both Suzzarelli and him su cam* 
pioni (his champions). Maresca had two: sons} 
whom, as well as Antonio, the boatman, and*his 


A VOICE FROM. ST, HELENA. 32h 


- sons; were faithfal to Sir Hudson Lowe... About 


the middle of 1809, Sir Hudson Lowe began to 
suspect Suzzarelli, who in consequence went over 
te Capri, where he employed his eloquence so 
effectually as to convince Sir Hudson that he 
was the most trusty of mankind, and wholly de- 
voted to his service. On his return Suzzarelli 
went to Saliceti, to whom he related the whole 
conversation that had taken place between them, 
accompanying it with divers strokes of wit at the 
expense of the poor colonel. Saliceti, when he 
wished to :unbend from state affairs, and divert 
himself, used sometimes to send ‘for Suzzarelli to 
make him Jaugh, by recounting the gross manner 
in which he had humbugged the colonel. 

Several plans were laid to induce the Prince of 
Canosa to land on the coast of Naples, but fortu- 
nately for himself, he did not agree to any of them, 
as:‘he would have been seized and shot within 
twenty-four hours. While Suzzarelli was thus 
catrying on his game, a letter arrived from, thé 
police at Paris, stating, that information had been 
received that one Suzzarelli, a Corsican emigrant, 
in the pay of England, was at that moment ini 
Naples, employed as a spy for the English, and 
desiring that Saliceti might cause him: to :be ar- 
rested, tried by a military commission, and. the 
sentence executed — Saliceti sent for Suz- 

VOL. II. 


a a le ee er 


322 A VOICE PROM Si, HELENA: 


aarelli, in whose: hands he put the letter to read 
He then wrote to the police in Paris, explaiming 
the nature of Suzzarelli’s: connexion with Sir 
‘Hudson Lowe, and that he was a treasure to 
them: This incident Suzzarelli turned to his. own 
advantage, as it. gave him an opportunity of .ex- 
tracting some money from. Sir Hudsow : Lowe; 
under pretence of having been obliged to’ bribe 
largely some of the police; adding, that if it had 
not been for his friend and countryman, Fran- 
ceschi,* who was in. the service of Saliceti, and 
had great influence, he should infallibly were 
arrested and shot. ueredoemes bose 
Information was sent to Saliceti: thats Sleesets 
intended to poniard him. Although he did ‘not 
eredit it, he nevertheless determined to take pre- 
cautions. Accordingly, one night) whem Cas- 
setti made his appearance, he was seized and: mis 
nutely searched. Nothing, however, was found 
upon him to justify such a suspicion. » Aftershay- 


‘ing gone through this ordeal, he was permitted-to 


enter, and loudly complained of the ignoble-treat- 
ment he had received. Saliceti pretended ‘utter 
ignorance of it, and affected the greatest asto- 
iishment, sent for the officer of gendarmerie, and 
with an angry’air asked how he. dared toput 
© This was the reason that Ci oe never Pe we as 
af Franceschi, at St. Helena. 0) 2 gadis 
10 


A VOICE FROM 8ST. HELENA. 323 


such a. measure in execation towards a man of 
honour like Cassetti.* The officer; whowas pre- 
pared, pretended that it was a mistake, and by 
order of Saliceti made many apologies to the man 
of honour. “1 saw,” said Cassetti, who’ was 
himself deceived, great rogue as he was, “fire 
flashing from Saliceti’s eyes with indignation at 
the unworthy treatment to which 1 had been ex- 
cy ly 
 Suzzarelli, while over in Sicily, had a conversa- 
tion with one of the Roncos, a captain of brigands 
under the command of one Piccioli, a native of 
Cheti, and in the employ of Queen Caroline, who 
were in the habit of landing and committing de- 
predations in the Calabrias. Piccioli was tired of 
her service, and was desirous of doing something 
to procure his pardon and admittance into that of 
Murat. He’ therefore proposed, through Ronco, 
“to' ¢ause the gang to land at night in such part 
of'Calabria as might be agreed upon, for the pur- 
pose of betraying them into the hands of the Nea- 
potitan police, Suzzarelli mentioned this to Sa- 
liceti, and proposed to send a vessel to bring them 
to Calabria, under pretence of landing in some 
place where they would meet with a rich booty; 
whieh | plan he hoped to effect through, Reneo. 
* Cossetti had the rank’ of lieutenant-colonel ‘in King Joa-. 
chint’s ariny, as well as in that of Queen Caroline. é 
y 2 


324 A VOIG® FROM ST. HELENA. 


Saliceti, however, who doubted Suzzarelli’s cou- 
rage, told him that he was clever at making pro- 
posals and projects, but not in executing such a 
one.as he had suggested, and sent him away... At 
this proposal was present one Spadaccini, a Nea- 
politan, a lawyer by profession, and the secret spy 
of the interior for Saliceti. Ostensibly he was a 
partizan of Queen Caroline's, and in order the 
better to deceive the partizans of the exiled fa- 
mily, he procured himself. to be, arrested aud 
thrown into prison by orders of Saliceti, where 
he was detained as a suspected person for four 
months, and apparently. treated, with great rigour ; 
although in reality he was allowed to do what he 
liked, and every night went out of the prison in 
disguise, to make merry with his brother villains, 
He was a man of determined courage, and capable 
of any desperate enterprize. At night he returned 
to Saliceti, to whom he said that the project; pro- 
posed by Suzzarelli, was one of straw, and. that 
he alone was the person who could. succeed, as 
he was intimate with Piccioli, they, haying, been 
brought up together at college, and their houses 
next to each other. Saliceti promised him six, thou; 
sand scudi in. case of success, but if he. failed, he 
declared that he would not only not give himany- 
thing, but would take his present pension | from 
him; adding, that he mould give him no money in 


A VOICE PROM ST. HELENA. 325 


advatice, but would allow six companies of Corsi- 
can gendarmerie to be placed under his orders. 
This offer was immediately accepted by Spadac- 
cini, who proceeded to Pescara, froin whence he 
sent a messenger to Piccioli, who was then at 
Rocoli. On Piccioli’s arrival they had a long 
conference together, during which they arranged 
their diabolical plans. A few days afterwards, 
Piccioli landed in the gulph of Tarento with his 
gang, consisting of between seventy and eighty 


-ruffians, all gente di riputazione, who. had signa- 


lized themselves by robberies and murders: along 
the coasts, and were the terror of the kingdom of 
Naples. These wretches marched forward to the 
mountains, and in their way took an escort with 
the contribution of the district for three months, 
which was on its road to the treasury. In the 
Abbruzzi, they were led by Piccioli at night into 
a defile, where, under pretence of ascertaining the 
way, their Judas proceeded in advance. The Cor- 
sican gendarmerie were disposed amongst the 
trees, and as soon as Piccioli got to a certain dis- 
tance, he stepped in amongst them, when. they 
commenced a fire upon the deluded villains, and 
massacred every individual of them, who certainly 
had merited death, but not through. the treachery 
of their leader. After this exploit, Spadaccini 
and ae returned to Naples, where the for- 


326 A VOICE FROM sT. HELENA. 


mer received the reward of his enterprize, and the 
latter his pardon. Saliceti, however, considered 
his treachery to be of so black and atrocious a 
nature, that he never would either see him, anak 
low him to be employed. 

At'the end of October, 1808, King Jéechilany 
finding that the possession of Capri by the Eng- 
lish was a source of continual annoyance to the 
trade of Naples, and also being alarmed ‘by the: 
attempts at assassination made by persons coming 
from that island, and in the pay of Queen Caro-. 
line; and considering it as a reproach to him to 
suffer the English to hold an island so near to his 
capital, determined to make himself master of it. 
Accordingly, great preparations were made for the: 
attack, which Suzzarelli and his confederates per- 
suaded Sir Hudson Lowe was destined for ‘the 
island of Ponza. Every thing having been pre- 
pared, a council of ministers was held a short: 
time previous to the attack. Some wished that 
Suzzarelli should continue to deceive Sir Hudson 
Lowe to the last; one* however gave his opinion’ 
that the success of the attack was uncertain, and 
should it fail, Colonel Lowe would perceive that — 


he had been deceived by Suzzarelli, cea a 
_ a him again. He thought therefo 


y “This fact was related to me in 1819, by the minister’ 
whose haine, for obvious reasons, I shall not mention, a a “3 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA, 327. 


to -prevent this, it would be right to. permit Saz- 
zarelli to send information of the real destination 
ef the expedition to Sir Hudson Lowe afew 
hours before it sailed. Until that moment Suzza- 
relli should continue to persuade him that it was 
intended for Ponza; thus whatever might be the 
event, Suzzarelli would not be compromised. .A. 
number of scaling ladders were requisite for the 
attack of Capri, and it appeared difficult to cause 
them to be constructed without its coming to the 
knowledge of Sir Hudson Lowe, which would not 
only expose Suzzarelli, but point out at once 
the real object of the expedition. This appeared 
at first to be an insurmountable difficulty. .The 
genius of the same person, however, who, had pro- 
posed the above measure, suggested an expedient 
which, perfectly answered. The day before the. 
attack, an order was given by the police, that all 
the lamplighters in the city of Naples should as- 
semble with their ladders at a certain hour on the 
following day. The same night, Suzzarelli sent. 
over intimation, to Lowe, that the island was to. 
be attacked next morning, and even inclosed him 
a copy of the proclamation which was to be is- 
sued to the troops who were to make the attempt, 
It was considered that this short notice would 


only tend to increase the confusion of the garrison, 


The expedition, consisting of sixteen or eighteen 


328 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


hundred men, under the command of General 
Lamarque, sailed from the bay of Naples on the 
4th or the 5th of October, and arrived under the 
rocks of Capri, without any molestation from the 
English squadron, consisting of the Ambuscade 
frigate and three or four sloops, or the flotilla: of 
gun-boats ; which in the supposition of Ponza being 
the intended point of attack, had been sent to:de-. 
fend it. Capri had a garrison composed of the royal 
regiment of Corsicans, the royal regiment of Malta, 
and some Englishartillery. There is not perhaps 
in the world an island which presents. more ‘ob- 
stacles by nature to an attacking army than Capri, 
Nine-tenths of the circumference. of the island 
consists of steep and perpendicular rocks, several: 
hundred feet above the level of the sea. Every 
known landing place was fortified, and there were 
about forty pieces of cannon mounted in the forts. 
Tn spite of all these natural and artificial .ob- 


Stacles, the French landed, being obliged in some 


places to climb the precipices by means’of lad- 


_ ders, resting on the moving basis of the boats-be- 


low. The regiment of Malta, whether through 
cowardice, or from having been corrupted bythe 
champion, Suzzarelli, threw down their arms, and 
refused to fight, and were made prisoners, in spite 
of all the exertions of their officers, ‘several-of | 
whom, ‘including ‘the commanding officer, »-were : 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 329 


killed in the attempt. In this manner’ the fort St. 
Barbe and Ana-Capri, the summit of the island, 
were taken. “The only: way of communicating 
with Capri itself, the citadel, and the forts, where 
‘Sir Hudson and the rest- of the garrison were, 
'was' by means of a stair, or ladder of four or five 
hundred steps, down which only one person at 
‘a time in front could descend, and was com- 
manded by several pieces of cannon. Notwith- 
standing this, the French troops made the at- 
‘tempt, succeeded, and invested the town. Five 
hundred men were harnessed to some twenty-four- 
pounder guns, which they dragged up in one night 
to Mouit Solaro, the most elevated point of Ana- 
Capri, and commanding the citadel. During the 
whole period of his government, Sir Hudson Lowe 
had neglected to fortify this part, in the suppo- 
sition that it was impracticable to drag heavy can- 
non up the steep sides of the mountain. Breach- 
ing*batteries were constructed facing the citadel, 
and others furnished with farnaces for red hot shot 
erected along the beach, in order to keep off the 
English squadron and flotilla which were séer 
beating up ‘fron: Ponza. Some- reinforcements 
also pushed off from Naples and landed near Tibe- 
rius’s Bath, and’in a few days, Sir Hudson Lowe 
_eapitulated, surrendering to the French the island, 
forts, artillery, ammunition, and’stores.’ «©. 


830 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


“Capri was commonly called the Gibraltar, of 
Naples, and the obstacles to its capture, or even 
to landing, appeared so insurmountable, as. to 
draw forth from Saliceti the following remarks, 
on visiting it after it was taken, “ J’y ai trouvéles 
Francais, mais je ne petection croire. isla 9 cio 

entrés.” 

‘When the entalition satian Lieutenant General 
Sir John Stuart and Admiral Freemantle, consist- 
_ ing of about eighteen or nineteen thousand men, 
left Sicily in 1809, the advice and intention of the 
admiral were, that the expedition should. land 
between Portici and Castelamare, and. attack 
the ‘city of Naples. Sir Hudson Lowe was with 
the army. Reference was made to Suzzarelli, for 
advice, who recommended that the English should 
at first secure some point of support and retreat, 
by taking the islands of Ischia and, Procida, 
and then to land at Baja, the garrison of which. 
he said was.commanded bya. Corsican colonel 
a relation of his, who would for a certain, sum. 
of money, and an equal rank in the English.ser- 
yice, betray the place, after making a shew of re. 
sistance. That.by this time the. English party. 
and that.of Ferdinand would have time. to arrange” 
their plans to assist them, and. collect their ad-— 
herents.. This advice was unfortunately followed, 
There were. at, this,time,only four thousand men 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 331 


in that city, as most of the French troops were 
upon their march towards Germany, it being a 
little before the battle of Wagram.. Orders bad 
been given to those troops who were in the city 
to abandon it if the English landed, and retire to 
Fort St. Elmo, there to remain until they were 
succoured. They had even been ordered not/to. 
fire upon. the town of Naples, if the English oc- 
cupied it. All the treasure, ‘all the king iand 
queen's baggage and jewels were packed up;.as 
well as those of the principal ‘persons, and ready | 
to: depart the moment the English landed. Little 
or nv resistance could have been made. ‘There. 
were several frigates and a seventy-four on ithe 
stocks, immense stores, between two and ‘three. 
hundred sail of merchantmen, and a very large . 
flotilla, which must have been all. taken, as Murat - 
did not like to injure the city, by attempting a_ 
useless defence. When the English first appeared, 
Saliceti was in Rome. Murat became imbecile, 
and thought of nothing but saving his treasures, 
The queen, however, who had much more firmness . 
and talent in the cabimet than her husband, sent. 
_ Cipriani with a note to Saliceti, intreating him to . 
return without loss of time to Naples ; that ‘the - 
king had lost his senses, and was incapable of com. 
manding ; and that every thing depended apon 
him. This letter Cipriani concealed in ‘the sole 


3382 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


of his boot ; and after some difficulty, andia 
narrow escape from robbers near Terracina,: suc- 
ceeded in arriving at Rome. If he succeeded in 
bringing back Saliceti, he was ordered by the. 
queen to return with all possible celerity; and at 
a place agreed upon near the entrance of the 
town, to take out his handkerchief, and appear to 
wipe the sweat off his brows; if not, he was to 
continue his course. He saw Saliceti at about 
two in the morning, to whom he communicated 
every thing. After reading the letter, Saliceti 
demanded what Suzzarelli and Maresca were 
doing. Cipriani replied, that they were in Naples, 
and endeavouring to persuade the English gene- . 
rals not to land between Portici and Castelamare, - 
but to attack Ischia. ‘ Bravo, Suzzarelli,” ex- 

claimed Saliceti, “son perduti; but if they land 

between Portici and Castelamare, we are lost.” 

Saliceti sent Cipriani on, who returned with a. . 
rapidity never before heard of, and made the sig- 

nal agreed upon. He was soon followed by Sali: 
ceti, who on ‘his arrival found Maurat’s gone 
saddled, and the king himself in the street, and 

on the point of abandoning the city to its fate. 
Saliceti iin rather a harsh manner ‘told Murat_that 

he was unworthy of a kingdom if he did not defend 

his;people; and concluded by assuring him that 
he would himself take the direction of every thing. 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 333 


in the name of the Emperor Napoleon, if he did 
not adopt the necessary measures for defence, 
Murat confounded, returned to his palace. Or- 
ders were instantly despatched to recal the troops 
in the interior, and those on their march ‘to: Ger- 
many ; the fourth regiment of dragoons:was brought 
from the Abbruzzi, and every necessary’ measure 
instantly adopted. Cannon were placed «in: the 
streets, with trusty troops and matches: lighted ; 
and orders publicly given to fire upon any)assem- 
blage of the people. | Saliceti sent for those whom 
he suspected, and told them that he could not 
trust to their bare words that they would remain 
quiet, and not meddle with what was going on; 
and concluded by asking, in a stern: tone of; voice, 
what guarantee they: could give him for their con- 
duct? Astonished at his manner, after) a. little 
hesitation, they asked to be confined in one:of the 
forts until the business was over, which was,,ac- 
cordingly done. While he acted publicly, in,this 
manner, and ordered that every means of defence 
should be put in practice to encourage those who 
were faithful, and dismay the disaffected, he had 
at the same time secretly continued the directions, 
that if the English disembarked, the troops were 
to evacuate the town, and retire to the forts, until 
a sufficient force had returned from the interior to 
afford some chance of success. In; three days a re- 
spectableforce was collected, and allfears at anend. 


334 A VOICE FROM ST, HBLENA, 


| Saliceti. was a republican \in principle; and 
would, have supported the establishment of that 
sort of government in Italy, had there appeared’a 
probability of success. He died a few hours after 
having dined with an enemy, to whom he had been 
reconciled, which gave rise to a supposition 'that he 
was poisoned. Upon this, however, there was a 
difference of opinion ; the Prench) physiciansyas- 
serting, and the Italians denying the fact: No 
traces of poison were discovered on opening his 
body. When Napoleon was informed of his death, 
he exclaimed, * son nom seul' me: ce od anette 
de cent mille hommes.” : warts 

: ‘Independent of the codiitebetion of the inp 


‘sation given to me by one of the then ministers 
‘of King Murat, and the fact of Sir Hudson Lowe's 


letters to Suzzarelli being now im existence, Na- 
poleon, to whom I mentioned some of the circum- 
stances, replied, that he was aware of the maniier 
iu whieh we had been betrayed by our spies ‘at 
Naples; and added, that Cipriani, who'had been 
a principal agent, could farnish me with all: the 
particulars. He remarked, ‘that in. general our 
spies betrayed us. That the French’ hada 
advantage in the Roman Catholic religion, as th 
spies were induced to believe that it. ‘was not only 
not necessary, but even Lai not to 
faith with heretics. . ys » 990 ail> Sis hadils 
December 4th:—-Miss Viens, a pretty girl, and 


¢ 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 335 


Semme de chambre to Lady Lowe came to Long+ 
wood this day from Plantation House, mounted 
on one of the governor's horses, and: furnished 
with a letter from Major Gorrequer, stating that 
Sir Hudson Lowe had forgotten to leave.a pass 
for her before he went to town, and directing 
Captain Blakeney to admit her. | She went to 
Longwood House, where she remained ‘for near 
two hours, during which time she passed through 
almost every room in the building; the French 
domestics were so much enchanted with the appa- 
rition of a young and pretty girl, that their gal 
lantry could scarcely refuse her any thing.» She 
was very desirous of obtaining admission to Napo- 
leon, and at one tune had partly opened the door 
of theroom where he was, for the purpose of goimg 
in to him, but was prevented by St. Denis. . She 
persuaded them, however, to allow her to peep’ at 
him for some time through the key-hole.* -. 
. 7th—Communicated to Mr. Baxter, that) Na 
poleon had mt SURE pissnaiveye medicine 
gin od 
® A short time afterwards this young person left St. aan 
onset (if report be true)bysone of the inmates of Plaritation 
House. She was accompanied on. board. ship. by, Sir Thomas 
Reade, and every possible attention paid to her by the SOveepas, 
arious were the surmises at Longwood, as to the cause. of this 
Youtig woinan’s visit under Such circumstances, some of whiich the 
intelligent reader will. not fail to guess: wOEITWD bu uly 


336 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


which I administered to him myself, and» by. 
which he had been temporarily: benefited. Mr. 
Baxter agreed with, me in opinion \of the pro- 
priety of affording him some other winter abode; 
than the dreary and exposed situation of Long- 
wood ; where, in consequence of the bleak ‘and 
eternal, south-east wind, he. very: generally. con+ 
tracted a catarrhal affection whenever he went out. 
Mr. Baxter himself mentioned Rosemary Hall or 
Colonel Smith’s, as being: the most:suitable. 
.» $th.— Signal made for me to proceed to Planta- 
tion House. Soon after my. arrival, Sir Hudson 
Lowe said, with a serious air, that he had sent 
for me on business not medical, that he»had great 
occasion to censure my conduct, and then ,pro+ 
ceeded to ask, if I had not kept ap'a correspond» 
ence, or was not the medium of communication 
for the French at Longwood, with persons onthe 
island? I felt surprised at the question, aud:re- 
plied, that I was ignorant of his: meaning. --He‘re- 
peated his interrogations more than once, adding, 
that he did not mean communications to favour 
General Bonaparte’s escape from the island, but 
of another nature. I replied, that if going into 
shops and buying articles for Countesses Ber- 

trand and Montholon, or others at Longw 0d, id, 
could be construed into carrying on, communica, 


tions or correspondence for them, J must certainly 


“= 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 337 


plead guilty. He then asked, if I had not written 
to town to a person to send up some articles for 


‘Madame’ Bertrand? [ replied, certainly, that I 
had written to Mr. Darling to send up some 


basons, chamber utensils, and other articles of 
household use: The governor said, that it was a 
breach of orders, as he liad prohibited me from 
being the bearer of any message or communication 
not medical.‘ What business had J to do'so? If 
Madame Bertrand wants any thing of the kind, 

let her apply to the orderly oficer; and why had 
she not done so?”” |. ° 


“TL replied, that, in the first place, cleanliness was 


necessary to prevent sickness, and consequently, 
every thing relating to it was medical. That, in 
thé riext place, the orderly officer was absent from 
Longwood when the request was made to me; that, 
even if he had been present, delicacy would pitevelle 
a lady from making demands: to him for certain ne- 
cessary articles, which she could with propriety 
mention to her surgeon; and that I. did not conceive 
it to be a crime to desire a tradesman to purchase 
chamber utensils, (naming them,) or similar articles, 
either for Madaine Bertrand or myself. His ex- 


‘cellency, as usual, flew into a violent passion, and 


said, that he would not allow me to insult him i in 

his capacity of governor, and was otherwise | very 

violent ; asked mé, “how dare I order’ aiticles to 
VOL, Il. Z 


338 A VOICE FROM 8T. HELENA, 


be sent out of the king’s stores without consulting 
‘him? or to have them charged to those stores?” 
I replied, that I had said nothing about charging 
‘them to the king’s stores? A reference was then 
made to my letter to Mr. Darling, which the go- 
vernor had in his possessiqn, and which confirmed 
my statement. Notwithstanding this, he conti- 
nued his abuse, and made some common-place 
remarks upon the delicacy of French ladies... 
I asked for written orders, in order to prevent 
the possibility of a mistake, which he refused to 
give. I then asked, if the ladies required me to 
purchase some articles for them in the shops, what 
reply was I to make? After some hesitation, he 
said, that “if they wished me to purchase any thing 
‘for them myself, I need not refuse, but that if they 
asked me to apply to another to purchase any 
thing for them, I was not to comply with it!!” 
He was very violent for a great part of the tite, 
and I had much difficulty in repressing a smite at 
‘the serious manner in which he treated this im- 
portant subject. wy 
No alteration of importance has taken place in 
the state of Napoleon’s ‘complaint. Had some 
discourse with him upon the libels which had 
been published at his expense. “ Of all the libels 
and pamphlets against me,” said he, ‘ with which 
your ministers have inundated Europe, not one 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA: 339 


will live to posterity. During the reign of Louis 
the Fourteenth, and even under Henry the Fourth, 
the press teemed with libels, not one of which is 


‘now to be found. The labours of those wretches 


employed by your ministers,* to dance over the 
ruins of their own country, will die ina similar 
manner. When I was asked to write, or cause to 
be written, answers to them; I replied, wne vic- 
totre, un monument de plus est la véritable réponse. 
Besides, it would have been said that I paid for the 


* The acrimony still entertained towards the deceased Emperor 
Napoleon, is exemplified by a reply which I have been told es- 
caped from the lips of an under-secretary of state, who, when in- 
formed that, a short time before his dissolution, Napoleon ordered 
that his body should be opened, bis heart taken out, preserved in 
spirits of wine, and sent to the Empress Marie Louise ; replied, 


ct ought to have been thrown into quick-lime.” When Napoleon 


was sent to St. Helena, it was expressly stated, in the regulations 
for his safe custody, that should he die in that island, his body 
should be interred wherever he thought proper to order it in his 
will. - This promise, however, has not been kept. In the codicil 
to his will, which was made known to the ministers, the — 
words are to be found :— 
“ April le 16, 1821, Patna? 
., “ Ceci est un codicille de mon testament, 1°. Je désire que mes 
cendres reposent sur les bords de la Seine, au milieu de ce peuple 
Frangais que j’ai tant aime.” ee 
 (Signé) Narotton.”” 
lis remains were refused, at the end of last year, to the prayers 
of his aged mother. » 
Z22 


340 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


writing of them, which would have been discredit- 
able. Posterity will, judge by facts: calumny 
has exhausted all her poisons on my person... 1 
shall gain every day. La premiere fureur passée, 
je ne conserverai pour ennemis que des sots ow des 
méchans.. When there is not a trace of those libels 
to be found, the great works and monuments that 
I executed, and the code of laws that 1 formed, 
-will go down to the most distant ages, and future 
historians will revenge the wrongs done to me by 
my contemporaries.” 

I asked, if, in his own mind, he believed that 
*** was privy to the death of **? “ There is not a 
doubt,” replied be, “ that the attempt was made 
with his consent. The empress,” added he, ‘‘never 
could bear the sight of any of the murderers after- 
wards, and never would receive them; but one is 
now aide-de-camp to * **, 

“ After the execution of the Duc d’Enghien, 
*#**” said he, “ ordered a service to be celebrated 
fami death. 1 did not like this, and caused his 
conduct relative to the death of his own father, to 
be served up to him in prose and verse.” * 

* Lord **,” continued he, “ was also” privy to 
it. He was the most intimate friend of P**, the 
principal contriver and actor. This was well 
known at Petersburgh.” : 


* An idiomatic expression. 


—_— 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 341 


' He mentioned that Talleyrand ‘certainly had 
first suggested the attempt upon Spain, partly 
through hatred of the Bourbon family, and partly 
in the hope of filling his pockets. 

Conversing on the policy adopted by our minis- 
ters, “ It would have been better for England,” 
he observed, “ to have left me on the throne, as 
Russia, Austria, and Prussia, would, through jea- 
lousy of me, have given commercial advantages to 
England. There is nothing now to prevent their 
taking steps to promote their own commercial in- 
terests, by injuring those of England. Moreover, 
having great influence with the French ‘nation, 
and being loved by them, I could have given you 
a favourable commercial treaty, which the Bour- 
bons, who are hated, dare not propose. — But, in 
truth, there was nothing really to be feared from 
France, under any sovereign. Until she has’ an 
army of five hundred thousand men, France is not 
to be dreaded. Besides, it was always for the 
allies to grant peace. France was tired of war, 
and was frightened at the idea of new conquests, 
I succeeded in beating the allies, because I at- 
tacked them in detail, and destroyed one power 


’ before the army of the other could arrive to sup- 


port it. Hundreds of years will probably elapse, 
before circumstances will arise similar to those 
which concentrated such a mass of power in me. 


342 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


I repeat, that there was nothing to be feared from 
me, for if I had attempted new conquests, the opi- 
nion, which brought me back from Elba, inlanie 
have thrown me to the ground agaitt.” 

Massena, he observed, on a former occasion, 
had lost himself in the campaign of Portugal, 
which, however, he attributed to the bad state of 
his health, that did not permit him to sit on honse+ 
back, or inspect, himself, what was going on. 
“ A general, who sees with the eyes of others,” 
added he, “ will, never be able to command am 
army as it should be.. Massena was then so ill) _ 
that he was obliged to trust to the reports of 
others, and consequently failed.in some of his un- 
dertakings. At Busaco, for example, he attempt- 
ed to.carry a position almost impregnable: in, the 
manner he attacked it; whereas, if he had com- 
menced by turning it, he would have succeeded: 
This: was owing to his not being: able to) recone 
noitre personally.” He added, “ that) if Massena 
had; been what he was formerly, he would have. 
followed Wellington.so closely as to: be:able to at- 
tack:him,* while entering the lines before Lisbon, bes 

hy ific 

* Speaking of the Duke, of, Wellington on,a former oceasion,, 
he observed, that all generals were liable to err, and that 
ever committed the least number of faults, should be 


be the greatest, and that he (Wellington) * Had committed! them 
as seldom as most otliers, 


A VOICR FROM 8ST. HELENA. 343 


fore he could have taken up his position properly.” 

14th.—Sir Hudson Lowe at Longwood. Asked 
me several questious about Napoleon’s health. 
Observed, that it was very extraordinary he did 
not take exercise; that if he expected, by confining 
himself, to obtain any further relaxation in the 
system adopted, he was mistaken. He then in- 
quired if the want of sleep was caused by mental, 
or by bodily disease. I said, that I thought it was 
chiefly caused by the want of exercise, that no 
man, leading such a life as Napoleon did, could 
possibly remain long in a state of health. The 
governor said, with a sneer, that he believed 
laziness was the cause of his not taking exercise. 
1 replied, that when he first came to the island, he 
had taken a great deal. He then said, that he 
wanted to have information of his state of health 
more frequently, and desired me to mention any 
thing extraordinary to Captain Blakeney. I said, 
that it would be very easy to arrange matters, by 
sending him bulletins describing Napoleon as 
“‘ the patient,” giving copies to Count Bertrand at 
the same time. This he refused to allow, saying, 
that as long as verbal reports could be got, he did 
not think written ones of consequence. He also 
made some insinuations about his not having seen 
Mr. Baxter. 

In the course of conversation this day, Napoleon 


344 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA, 


expressed his disapprobation of our custom of shut- 
ting up shops, and prohibiting people from working 
on Sundays. In reply to what I said, he remarked; 
“‘ For those who are at their ease, it may be very 
right and proper to discontinue working on the 
seventh day, but to oblige a poor man who has a- 
large family, without a meal to give them, to leave 
off labouring to procure them victuals, is the height 
of barbarity. If such a law be enforced, provi- © 
sion ought to be made by your government to feed 
those who, on that day, have not wherewithal to 
purchase food, and who could obtain it, if per- 
mitted to labour. Or let your gorbellied priests; 
(panciuti,) give a portion of their dinners on that 
day to the starving poor, whom they will not 
allow to work. They would have an apoplexy, 
or an indigestion the less. | Besides, it does not 
serve the cause of morality. Idleness is the mo- 
ther of mischief, and I will wager, that there is 
more drunkenness to be seen, that there is more 
vice, and that more crimes are committed in’ Eng- 
land ona Pantes) than on any other ~ of i 
week.” 

Speaking upon the possibility of ocwsbiligt uni- 
ting the negroes with the whites, Napoleon ob- 
served, that it had occurred to him, that the only 
mode of effectually reconciling the two colours, 
would be to allow polygamy in the colonies. 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 345 


That every black or white man ‘should be per- 
mitted to have a wife of each colour. By such 
means, he thought, that in the next generation, 
nearly all would be alike, and consequently all 
jealousy and hatred done away. He added, that 
it. would have been easy to have obtained a dis- 
pensation from the Pope to that effect. He also 
said that he considered the ——— to be a race 
inferior to the whites. 

_ Saw Napoleon again in the evening, who sired 
some observations upon the governor, who, he ob- 
served, had passed by his windows. “I never see 
that governor,” said he, “ without thinking I view 
the man heating the poker (échauffant le bar de 
Ser) for your Edward the Second in Berkley Cas- 
tle. Lanature m’a prévénu contre, and gave me a 
friendly warning the first day I saw him. Comme 
Cain, la nature Ta bien cacheté. Jf 1 were in Lon- 
don, and Sir H. Lowe were presented to me en 
bourgeois, and I were asked, whom do you conceive 
that man to be? I should reply, c’est le bourreau 
de la municipalité. You cannot say,” added he, 
“that it arises from prejudice against your nation, 
as I never have been so with Cockburn. Never 
did I for a moment, as you well know, suspect or 
distrust him in the slightest manner. From him 
1 would readily have received a surgeon or any 
thing else. I had every confidence in him, even 
after we had differed. But I think that I see this 


346 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


** ****** or heating the poker. He wanted 
to encircle the house with grilles de fer, in order 
to make the second cage de fer de Bajazet, for 
which purpose he put his government to the use- 
less expense of eptere: out a ship-load of iron bars 
to make his cage.” 

1 recommended him to see Mr. Baxter, sind 
that it would be a satisfaction to me to have the 
assistance of the advice and opinion of another mez 
dical person, He replied, * JJ governatore sen 2 
mischiato; ¢ vero che la sua fisonomia ¢ buona, mae 
troppo attaccato a quel boja. Le gouverneur est 
+*eeee*, Tl rend odieuw tout ce qui se passe 
entre ses mains, therefore I think that he must have 
suffered by contact with him. Besides, he has 
been recommended by him, and that is sufficient 
to prevent me from eyer seeing him.” 

“TI, malheureusement,” added he, “had stale 
a physiognomy, the world would then believe the 
~ libellers, Look, they would say, oh, look at the 
countenance of the scelerat. See the murders 
of Wright, of Pichegru, and of a a others 
stamped on the visage of the monster.” ig 

18th. — Summoned to attend at Plantation 
House by letter from Major Gorrequer. As the 
reader must be already disgusted with the details 
of-the manner in which the governor took ad- 
vantage of his situation to insult and oppress an 
officer inferior in rank, because the latter refused to 


A VOICE, FROM ST. HELENA, 347 


be his spy; I shall not fatigue him with any further 
account of the conduct practised towards me on 
this day, than that my replies and refusals to dis-, 
close Napoleon’s conversations, caused me to be 
treated in a more outrageous manner than on the 
18th of last month. The governor followed me 
out of the room, vociferating after me in a frantic 
manner, and carried his gestures so far as to me- 
nace me with personal violence. 

After this orders again given me to attend inter 
rogations at Plantation House twice a week. 

27th.—A letter sent by Major Gorrequer, in- 
forming me that I had been expected yesterday at 
Plantation House, and ordering me there this. 
day. On my arrival, I saw Mr. Baxter, to whom, 
after some conversation about Napoleon’s com- 
plaint, I communicated my positive determination, 
never to come again to the governor at Plantation 
House, or attend him elsewhere, if a repetition of 
the scandalous treatment I had met with on the 
18th again occurred; that this I was determined 
upon, whatever might be the consequences. i 

January 1st, 1818—Napoleon nearly in. the 
same state as yesterday. 

Some conversation took place upon Mr, Hob: 
bennels book, which, as has been already stated, 
had been sent by the author, and detained by Sir 


Hudson Lowe. I said that it had been seen by 


348 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


accident in Sir Hudson’s library, by the’ person’ 
who had acquainted him (Napoleon) with the cir= 
cumstance. “It was a bétise in the governor,” 
said he, “after he had illegally detained it, to’ 
leave it where any person might see it. In Cardi- 
nal Richelieu’s time, a nobleman who waited 
upon him about some affairs, and to ask some 
favour, was ushered into his private’ cabinet. 
While they were conversing together,’ a great 
personage was announced, and entered the room: 
After. some conversation with Richelieu, the great 
man took his leave, and the cardinal, in compli- 
ment to him, attended him to his carriage, for- 
getting that he had left the other alone in the ca- 
binet. On his return to his cabinet, he rung-a@ 
bell, one of his confidential secretaries entered, to: 
whom he whispered something. He then’ con 
versed with the other very freely, appeared ‘to 
take an interest in his affairs, kept him in conver- 
sation for a short time, accompanied him ‘to 
the door, shook hands, and took leave in the most 
friendly way, telling him that he might make his 
mind easy, as he had determined to provide for 
him. The poor man departed highly satisfied, 
- and full of thanks and gratitude. As he was 
going out of the door he was arrested, not allowed 
to speak to any person, and conveyed ina coach 
to the Bastille, where he was kept au secret for ten 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 349 


years; at the expiration of which, time the cardi- 
nal.sent for him, and expressed his great regret at 
having been obliged to adopt the step he had. 
-taken,: that he had no cause of complaint against 
-him; on the contrary, that he believed him to be a 
good subject to his majesty; but the fact was, 
he had left a paper on the table when he quitted 
the room, containing state secrets of vast inport- 
ance, which he was afraid he might have perused 
in his absence; that the safety of the kingdom de- 
manded that they should not be divulged, and 
obliged him to adopt measures to prevent the pos- 
sibility of the contents being kuown., That as 
soon as the safety of the country had permitted, he 
had released him, was sorry, and begged his 
pardon for the uneasiness he had caused him, and 
would be happy to make him some amends.” ... . 
Some sentiments relative to the French reyolu- 
tion were also delivered by Napoleon, and argu- 
ments in favour of the validity of the imperial 
title. ‘The republic sent to and received from 
all the powers of Europe ambassadors. It was 
sanctioned by the will of the people, by victory, 
by religion, and by, all the nations of Europe. 
Louis, driven from one state to another, was. at 
last obliged to seek for refuge in England, but 
was received there as a private person, and, on the 
express stipulation that he should only assume the 


350 A VOICE FROM 8ST. HELENA. 


title of the Count de Lisle. None of the powers 
ever acknowledged Louis theSeventeenth, or Louis 
‘the Eighteenth. Every legitimate government 
cancels the rights and the legitimacy of the go- 
vernments which preceded it. The French revolu- 
tion was a general movement of the mass of the 
nation against the privileged classes, The nobles 
retained the higher and the inferior justice, and 
other feudal rights, under various forms; enjoyed 
the privilege of being exempt from the burthens 
of the community, and exclusively possessed all 
honourable employments. The chief object of the 
revolution was to destroy those privileges and 
abuses, to abolish the manorial courts, suppress 
the remains of the ancient slavery of the people, 
and subject all citizens equally to bear the ex- 
penses of the state. It established equality of 
rights. Any citizen might succeed to any em- 
ployment according to his talents. Before it, 
France was composed of provinces differently di- 
vided and unequal in extent and in population. 
They had a great number of legal customs and 
peculiar laws for the administration of civil as 
well as criminal justice. She was an assem- 
blage of several states without amalgamation. 
The revolution destroyed all those little nations, 
and formed a new one. There was one France 
with an homogeneous division of territory, the 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 351 


same civil and criminal laws, and the same regu- 
lations for taxes. There no longer remained any 
trace of the ancient privileges of the provinces, 
their ancient sovereigns, or ancient parliaments. 
One half of the territory had changed proprietors. 
France presented the spectacle of thirty millions 
of inhabitants circumscribed in natural limits, 
composed of one class of citizens, and governed 
by one law, one regulation, one order. Subse- 
quently the French nation established the impe- 
rial throne, and placed me upon it. No person 
ever ascended a throne with more legitimate rights. 
The throne of France was granted before to 
Hugues Capet bya few bishops and nobles. The 
imperial throne was given to me by the desire of 
the people, whose wishes were three times verified 
in a solemn manner. The Pope crossed the Alps 
to crown and anoiat me. Kings hastened to ac- 
knowledge me. England acknowledged the re- 
public, and sent ambassadors to the first consul. 
Before she violated the peace of Amiens, the Eng- 
lish ministers offered, through Malhouet, to ac- 
knowledge me as king of France if I would agree 
to the cession of Malta; and in 1806, Lord 
Lauderdale came to Paris to treat for a peace be- 
tween the king of Great Britain and the Emperor 
Napoleon, exchanged his powers, and negociated 
with the plenipotentiary of the emperor. If Fox 


352 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


had lived, peace would have been made. More- 
over, the imperial title was acknowledged by Lord 
Castlereagh, when he signed the ultimatum at 
Chaumont, acknowledging the existence of the 
bist and me as emperor.” 

- 2nd.—Went to Plantation House sedes ‘ot 
the governor, whom | saw in the library. He asked 
a great many questions concerning my appoint- 
ment as surgeou to Napoleon, and concluded by 
asserting that I was not his surgeon, but only to- 
lerated to visit him. 1 observed that the bills 
which 1 drew for my pay on the Navy Board, the 
form: of which had been ordered by Sir George 
Cockburn, were worded “ as surgeon to Napoleon 
‘Bonaparte and suite.” I also took the liberty of 
asking him for what object 1 was at St. Helena? 

He asked me “ if I conceived myself to be in- 
dependent of him as governor, and of the govern- 
ment under whose orders I acted?” I replied, 
that no British officer could be independent of 
the government of his country. He then asked 
“whether I conceived myself independent of 
him, and if it were not in his power as governor, 
and having charge of Napoleon, Bonaparte, if he 
thought that my conduct was not correct, to send 
me away if he pleased?” I told him that he could 
reply to that himself, as he best knew what the 
extent of his authority was. This answer did not 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 853 


please him, and after walking about the room 
for a little time exclaiming against my conduct, 
hé stopped, crossed his arms, and after look- 
ing at me with an expression of countenance 
which I shall never forget, said, “ This is my: 
office, sir, and there is the door leading to it. 
When [ send for you on duty, you will come in 
at that door; but do not put your foot in any 
| other part of my house, or come in at any other 
entrance.” 
I calmly replied, that it was not for my own 
pleasure, or by my own desire that I ever set foot 
in any-part of his house; and after ‘suffering this 
paltry abuse of authority, departed. 

Saw Napoleon afterwards, who was nearly in 
the same state as yesterday. Had some conver- 
sation relative to the capture of Rome by the 
French. “ After the treaty which [ had con- 
cluded at Tolentino with that imbecile and frau- 
dulent court of old women at Rome,” said Napo- 
leon, “ they endeavoured by all means to assist 
the Austrians, and even placed an Austrian gene- 
ral at the head of their troops. Every where the. 
populace were excited by all the means generally 
put in practice by superstition and bigotry, to mas- 
sacre the French. General Duphot, who was re- 
siding at Rome as a private person, was murdered 
at the door of my brother Joseph, who was ambas- 

VOL. II. 2A 


354 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


sador there. However, under all the circumstances, 
and concluding that a rupture with Rome would 
infallibly lead to one with Naples, I was of opi- 
nion that we ought only to correct, and not de- 
stroy her. That we ought to demand that an 
example should be made of the guilty; that Pro- 
vera, the Austrian general, should be obliged to 
depart, and an ambassador sent to Paris to beg 
pardon. The directory, however, decided. that 
we should march against the Pope; and said, that 
the time was come to overturn thatidol. Berthier 
was sent with an army to revolutionize Rome, 
and establish a republic, which was done... The 
people at first were transported with joy at the 
thonght of the re-establishment of the Roman. re- 
public, and fétes were given, and a te deum cele- 
brated with great pomp; at which last a number 
of the cardinals attended, although the act of re-es- 
tablishment was the annihilation of the Pope's tem- 
poral power. Their joy, however, was of short 
continuance, as the troops, who were little re- 
strained by their generals, and excited by agents 
of yours and of the Austrians, commenced a scene 
of robbery, and plundered the Vatican and the 
palaces of the nobles of their pictures,and pieces 
of art of all kinds, and finished by’ matinying 
against the imbéciles, who saw. the error too late, 
and endeavoured in vain to put a step to. their 
abuses.” 


. 
——~—— eo — ws" -- 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 355 


- When’ the Venetians,” continued Napoleon, 
** deceived by false reports that Joubert’s army 
had been defeated and cut to pieces; and duped 


‘by the traitorous and machiavelian policy of the 


court of Vienna, armed a number of Sclavonians 
and peasants, the priests preached destruction 


-to the French, and another Sicilian vespers, All 


the French in Verona were massacred, and their 
bodies thrown into the Adige. Four hundred of 
the sick and wounded in the hospitals were bar- 
barously murdered. In other towns in the Vene- 


-tian territories similar cruelties were practised. 


As soon as they discovered that the army of Jou- 
bert was entire; that Augereau was marching 
against them, and finding that the Austrians, de- 
feated every where, had sent to ine to supplicate 
for peace, their fright knew no bounds, A de- 
putation waited upon me, making the most sub- 
missive proposals; pledging themselves to agree 
to every thing I should require, and offering me 
millions if I would grant their prayers. Finding 
this useless, orders were despatched to their minis- 
terat Paris to corrupt the directory, in which they 
succeeded, as orders were sent of a nature favour- 
able to their wishes. The despatches of theit am- 
bassador, however, were seized and brought to 
me, and the whole intrigue discovered, together 
with the amount of the bribes they had given. I 
2a2 


856 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


commanded the French minister to quit their terri- 
tories within twenty-four hours, and declared war 
against Venice, which Baraguez d’ Hilliers entered 
with his division, upset the oligarchy, and the 
‘whole of the states were soon republicanized.” : 
Received the letters which are inserted in ye" 
preface. 
 6th.—Interrogated by Sir Hudson iow’ wrt. 
ther Napoleon Bonaparte had directed or com- 
manded me to make a communication which I 
had done to him, viz. that he, Napoleon, had told 
Lord Amherst, “ neither of your houses’ of par- 
liament can oblige me to see mon bourreau, &c.” 
or whether I had repeated it without having ‘had 
authority to do so from Bonaparte? 1 answered, 
‘that Napoleon had said, “If I were asked any 
‘questions about the conversation with him, I was 
permitted to mention it.” This did not satisfy 
Sir Hudson Lowe, who wished me to answer it 
‘as best suited whatever purposes he had in view; 
‘and on my persisting in the above reply, he be- 
came very violent and abusive, and ordered Major 
Gorrequer to write down, “ Mr. O'Meara refuses 
to reply to the question of, ‘Did Bonaparte or 
did he not desire you to communicate the above- 
mentioned expressions: to the governor?” » I said 
that some persons would cousider it-as a desire, 
and others only as a permission, and therefore it 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 357 


was best to put down Napoleon's words; which, 
however, his excellency would not allow. | 

7th.—Sir Hudson Lowe sent for me at six 
o'clock in the evening, when after having made 
some inquiries about Napoleon's state of health, 
which I told him was not so good as the last time 
I had reported ; he said, that if General Bonaparte 
thought he should gain any further relaxation in 
the restrictions by confining himself to the house 
in the manner he did, he was mistaken, as he, 
(Sir Hudson,) without an order from government, 
would not make any more alterations in the re- 
gulations, even if he were worse iu health. I asked 
if he wished this to be communicated to Napo- 
leon? He said, that he did not desire it; but that it 
ought to be known. 

9th.—Another series of interrogations at Plan- 
tation House, partly about Lord Amherst, during 
which the governor said, that ‘‘General Bonaparte 
would not have dared to make use of the insult- 
ing expressions he did before any other persons, 
than Lord Amherst and myself; that General. 
Bonaparte had so expressed himself, because he 
(Napoleon) knew that his lordship had received 
the governor's permission to listen to any com- 
plaints which he might make ; that a listener was 
as. bad as a repeater; and that Count Bertrand had 
told him (Sir Hudson) in October Jast, that Ge- 


358 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA, 


neral Bonaparte was influenced by the persons 
about him, amongst whom I formed one.” I could 
scarcely help smiling at the supposition that J 
could have influenced such a personas Napoleon, 
and contented myself with replying, that as faras . 
I knew him, he was not a man to let himself be 
guided by the opinion of others. Sir Hudson, 
however, insisted that Count Bertrand had con- 
fessed it, and said that J should be responsible for 
a great deal of what might happen, &c. &e. > ~ 

13th.—Moreinterrogations at Plantation House. — 
Sir Hudson Lowe took out of his pocket a Morn- 
ing Chronicle of the 17th of September, 1817, 
(I think,) containing a detail of a conversation 
stated to have taken place between Napoleon and 
some English gentlemen, and. was desirous, he 
said, “ to know from me whether such a conversa- 
tion had ever taken place between General Bona- 
parte and myself, or if I had ever communicated 
it to other persons. That he inferred from the 
commencement of the article, viz. after the usual 
salutations, that the conversation had taken place 
between General Bonaparte and some person who 
was frequently in the habit of seeing him; that 
Admiral Malcolm, and myself, were the only per- 
sons who had ééte @ téte conversations with him ; 
therefore that it must have been communicated by 
one of us,” 1 replied, that I had neither written 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA, 359 


nor communicated it, and reminded him, that 
others besides the admiral and myself had com- 
munications with Napoleon. His excellency ap- 
peared to be very anxious that [ should assist 
him to saddle it upon the admiral; in which, how- 
ever, he did not succeed. Indeed, on the first 
glance I had of it, I saw that it must have come 
from Mr. Ellis; it however contained some mis- 
representations. 

15th.—Saw the governor at Plantation House, 
to whom I reported that Napoleon's indisposition 
had rather increased, and that I had been that 
morning under the necessity of giving him physic. 
Communicated the same to Mr. Baxter. 

16th.—Saw Napoleon, who felt somewhat re- 
lieved by the effect of the physic administered 
yesterday. Had a conversation with him upon 
some of the early periods of his life, and the man- 
ner in which he had obtained the command of the 
troops of the convention against the sections. 
“When Menou,” said he, “ was repulsed in his at- 
tempt to disperse the sections, through the imbeci- 
lity of the representatives who were with him, and 
his own incapacity, the convention was in the 
greatest alarm, as the comité of the section had 
declared itself sovereign in the exercise of its func- 
tions, and permanent, refusing to obey the orders of 
the convention, and had even sent deputations to 


360 A VOICE FROM ST, HELENA, 


the other sections to assist them. Their numbers 
amounted to above forty thousand. I was ina box 
at the theatre Feydeau when informed of this, and 
proceeded to the assembly. The convention were in 
the greatest dismay ; Menou was accused of trea- 
chery—the danger was imminent. Each member 
of the assembly proposed the general in whom he 
had confidence. The members of the committee 
of public safety, and some who had known me at 
Toulon, proposed me as the person best caleu- 
lated, by the energy of my character, to save them, 
in the present crisis. A deputation was sent to 
offer the command to me. I balanced however. 
for some time before I would accept of it. It was 
a service that I did not like; but when I con- 
sidered that if the convention was overturned, 
‘Tétranger would triumph; that the destruction 
of that body would seal the slavery of the coun- 
try, and bring back an incapable and insolent 
race, those reflexions and destiny decided that J 
should accept of it. 1 went to the comité, pointed. 
out to them the inconvenience of having three re- 
presentatives with the troops, who only served to 
impede all the operations of the general. The 
comité perceiving that there was no time to be 
lost, proposed Barras to the convention, as general- 
in-chief, and. gaye the command of the troops that 
were to protect the assembly, to me. The mea- 


— eo 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 361 


sures that I adopted, as I explained to you before, 
saved the convention, with a very trifling loss of 
men* on both sides.” 

' 20th.—Went to. Plantation House, according to 
orders, While speaking to Mr. Baxter in: the 
library, the governor came in, looking very angry, 
and asked in a rough and abrupt manner, what, 
communications I had to make respecting Ge- 


* I was informed by the Duke of Rovigo, and by many other 
officers who had served with him, that the humanity displayed 
by the emperor to his soldiers was exemplary on all occasions. 
That in particular he was frequently in the habit of riding over 


the field of battle after an action, accompanied by numbers of bis 


staff, aud by persons carrying restoratives of different kinds for 
the .purpose of resuscitating any of the wounded, in whom signs 
of life appeared. ‘hat Napoleon has often spent hours in 


this pious employment. Amongst other strong instances, the’ 


Duke of Rovigo mentioned, that after the battle of Wagram,’ 
Napoleon, accompanied by him and several others, rode over the’ 
field, and pointed out for assistance many of the wounded from 
whom life had not yet departed. _ While employed in this man- 
ner, the body of a colonel named Pepin, who had fallen under his 
displeasure for some misconduct several years before, and had not 
been actively employed until a short time before the battle of 


Wagram, attracted his attention, though he had not seen him for, 
a number of years. He was.on his back, a ball had perforated 


his head, and life was not extinct, though he was insensible. 

« Ab, Pepin! poor fellow,” said Napoleon, in a feeling manner, 
«Tam sorry to see him here, and still more so that, before he! 
met his fate, I had not an opportunity of letting him know that I. 
had forgiven him, and forgotten his conduct.” 


362 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


neral Bonaparte’s health? I replied, that no perma-' 
nent relief for the better had taken place. “ Has he 
been out of the house?” “ He has not.” “ Has he 
been in the billiard room?’ “ He spends a consi- 
derable portion of his time there every day.” 
“« How does he employ his time there?” “I cannot 
tell, sir.” “ Yes, you can, sir,” replied the gover- 
nor, regarding me in his customary manner, “ you 
well know what he does there; you do not do 
your duty to government.” 

His excellency then walked about the room, 
stopping occasionally, and regarding me with his 
arms crossed over his breast in a manner which 
it is difficult to describe, and bursting out into 
furious exclamations. I contented myself with 
taking out my watch to ascertain the length of 
time he contemplated me in this manner. I 
thought more than once that he meditated some. 
act of violence. This composure and silence ap- 
peared not to be what he wished, and he began 
another series of interrogations in his usual man- 
ner, Telative to the name of the person who had 
given me information about twelve months ago, 
that Lord Liverpool had interfered and prevented 
my removal from St. Helena. J answered that I. 
_ had, at the time I had first mentioned it to him in 
July last, offered to shew, to a third person, that: 
part of the letter which stated that application had 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA: 363 


been made to Lord Liverpool, that his lordship 
should prevent my being removed. The governor 
renewed in a violent tone his demand that I should 
forthwith give him the name of the person who 
had communicated the information to me, and 
that the offer I had then made of shewing it to a 
third person, was an insult to him; and advanced 
towards me in a menacing manner, evidently with 
an intention to intimidate me to a compliance. I 
answered as before, which drew forth another de- 
mand of the name with an increase of violence. I 
said then, that as my replies only brought upom 
me abuse, bad language, and bad treatment, I 
must decline giving him any more answers on the 
subject. “ Put down, Major Gorrequer, that Mr. 
O‘Meara refuses to answer,” was the governor's 
reply. After listening to a long and abusive ha- 
rangue about my improper conduct since he had 
catechised me about a newspaper, (id est, since I 
had refused to be an instrument to calumniate 
Admiral Malcolm,) I was permitted to depart. 
28th.—Saw Napoleon, who was rather better 
than on the preceding day. Had some conversa- 
tion about Chateaubriand. “Chateaubriand,” said 
he, “ is an old emigrant, who was appointed 
secretary to Cardinal Fesch, when the latter was 
ambassador to the court of Rome, where he con- 
trived to render himself disliked by the Pope and 


364 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


the cardinals, notwithstanding the galimathias 
which he had published upon Christianity. While 
he was there, he endeavoured to persuade the old 
king of Sardinia, who had abdicated and turned 
religieux, to renew his claims to the throne of 
Sardinia. The king, suspecting him to be a mou- 
ton, le mit 2 la porte, and made a complaint to 
me of his conduct, which caused his disgrace. 
While I was in power, he was one of the most 
abject of my flatterers. C'est un fanfaron sans 
caractére, qui a Vdme rampante, et qui a la SoH. 
de faire des livres.” 

I asked him some questions about Bernadotte's 
conduct. ‘ Bernadotte,” said he, “ was ungrate- 
ful to me, as I was the author of his greatness; 
but I cannot say that he betrayed me; he ina 
manner became a Swede, and never promised that 
which he did not intend to perform. I can ac- 
cuse him of ingratitude, but not of treachery. 
Neither Murat nor he would have declared 
against me, had they thought that it would have 
lost me my throne. The wish was to diminish 
my power, but not to destroy me altogether. 
Murat’s bravery was so great, that the Cossacs 
used to express their admiration of him with © 
cries. They could not restrain their feelings, at 
seeing a noble figure, advancing like a knight of 
old, and performing such prodigies of valour.” 


—EE 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 365 


“ Labedoyére,” said he, “ was a young man 
animated by the noblest sentiments, and the most 
sovereign contempt for a race that had surrounded 
themselves with all that was most foreign to the 
manners and rights of the French; and with a set 
of misérables, who to avoid starvation, had vege- 
tated for twenty-five years in inferior and disgrace- 
ful situations. His attachment to me was enthu- 
siastic, and he declared himself at the moment of 
the greatest danger.” 

Drouot he described to be one of the most 
virtuous and unassuming characters in France, 


though possessed of talent rarely to be met with. 


Drouot was a man who would live as contentedly, 
as far as regarded himself personally, upon forty 
sous a day, as if he had the revenues of a sove- 
reign. He was charitable and religious; and a man 
whose morals, probity, and simplicity, would have 
been honoured in an age of stern republicanism, 
30¢h.—Went to Plantation House. After some 


questions relative to Napoleon's state of health, 


Sir Hudson Lowe said, that he had heard, in an 
indirect manner, which it was not necessary: for 
him to explain to me, that General Bonaparte 
was in a much worse state of health than I had 
reported him to be; that he desired, therefore, 
whenever [ went to town, that I would mention 
to Mr. Baxter or Sir Thomas Reade the state of his 


366 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA, 


health, which might prevent the necessity of my 
coming to Plantation House to report on the day 
I made them. That I might now mention to 
Major Gorrequer what I had to say about his 
health. Accordingly, I told the major that, sinee 
the 26th, Napoleon had not suffered so mneh from 
head-ach, especially in the right side of the head, 
as I had extracted the tooth from that jaw; that 
the swelling in his cheeks was considerably less; 
that his bowels were very costive; that he had 
some symptoms of dyspepsia, such as nausea 
and flatulence; that the pain in his side was not 
increased, nor were his legs diminished in size; 
that on the whole, though the local complaint in 
his cheek was better, there was no amelioration in 
his general state of health, I also applied for a 
small still, or alembic, in order to make some 
orange-flower water, as there was none to be had 
on the island; which to Napoleon would have 
been very grateful, and indeed necessary.* 

February 3d—The Cambridge store-ship ar 
rived, bringing the melancholy news of the death 
of the Princess Charlotte.t+ 

Communicated this intelligence to Napolests, 
who expressed his affliction at the unfortunate 
' * This request was never complied with, although frequently 


repeated. 
t Ehave suppressed some of Napoleon’s remarks on this event. 


A VOICE FROM ST, HELENA. 367 


event; as, independent of the feelings which natu- 
rally arose at the fate of a princess, cut off in the 
prime of youth and beauty, and with such pros- 
pects before her; he said, that he had not been 
without hopes that she would have caused more 
liberal policy to be adopted towards himself. He 
inveighed against the accoucheurs, and expressed 
his surprise that the populace had not stoned them 
to death. He observed, that the business. had a. 
strange appearance, and that precautions appeared 
to have been taken to deprive the princess of every 
thing necessary to support and to console her in 
a first accouchement. He urged, that some old 
married women, who had frequently borne chil- 
dren, ought to have been at her bed-side to com- 
fort her. Had they been present, they would have 
perceived that matters were going on wrong, and 
would have insisted upon further assistance being 
rendered. It was unpardonable in the old queen 
not to have been on the spot. ‘ What signified 
Leopold,” said he, “he is a gargon, and knew not 
what to do. Had it not been for me,” added he, 
Marie Louise would have died in a similar man- 
ner. During the time of her labour, I was in an 
apartment close by, from whence I went to her 
room every now and then. After she had been 
some hours in labour, Dubois, the accoucheur, 
came to me while I was reclining ow the sofa, with 


368 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


great alarm painted on his countenance, and said, 
“ that the empress was iu a state of great danger, 


- that there was a wrong presentation.’ I asked him 


if he had ever seen any thing of the kind before. 
‘Dubois replied, ‘ that he had but very rarely, per- 
haps not one in a thousand, and that it was very 
afflicting to him that so extraordinary a case should 
happen with the empress.’ Forget,” said I, “that 


_ she'is empress, and treat her as you would the wife 


of a little shopkeeper in the Rue St. Denis. This is 
the only favour I ask of you. Dubois then asked, 
“if it were necessary that one should be sacrificed, 
which should he save, the mother or the child?’ 
The mother certainly,” I replied, “ it is her right.” 
1 then accompanied Dubois to the bed-side, en- 
couraged and tranquillized the empress as much 
as possible, and held her while the forceps were 
applied. The child was apparently dead when 
born, but by frictions and other means he was 
restored to life. His birth produced a delirium 
of joy in the nation. On the discharge of the: first 
gun, that announced the interesting event, all the 
population of Paris, in the greatest suspense, ran 
into the streets, the public walks, and the parks, 
counting the number of guns.. Twenty-one guns 
were to have been fired for the birth of a prin- 
cess, and one hundred and one'for a prince. 
At the discharge of the twenty-second gun, the 


= = 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 369 


Parisians rent the skies with acclamations and ex- 
pressions of universal delight. Almost alh the 


powers of Europe sent ambassadors extraordinary 


to compliment me on the happy event. The Em- 
peror of Austria was represented as his god-father 
by his brother, the Duke of Wartsburgh, and the 
Emperor Alexander sent his minister for the home- 
department to Paris to express his satisfaction on 


the occasion.” * 


* Soon after the birth of young Napoleon, his father contem- 
plated building a superb palace, nearly opposite to the Pont d’Jena, 
which was to have been called Le Palais du Roi de Rome. ‘The 
government consequently endeavoured to purchase all the houses. 
situated upon the ground where it was intended to be built. Upon 
the spot of ground, which, according to the plan)that had been 
traced out, was to form the extreme right of the front of the 
palace, there was a small house belonging to a poor cooper 
named Bonvivant, which, including the ground upon which it 
stood was not, at the highest estimation, worth more than a 
thousand francs... The owner demanded ten thousand franes. It 
was referred to the emperor, who ordered that it should be pur- 
chased at that price. When the proper persons waited upon the 
cooper to conclude the agreement, he said, that upon reflection, he 
should not sell it for less than thirty thousand francs, It was re~ 
ferred again to Napoleon, who directed that it should be given 
to him. When they came to conclude the business, the cooper, 
increased his demand to forty thousand. The architect was 
greatly embarrassed, and did not know how to act, or in what 
manner he could again venture to annoy the emperor on the, 
subject; at the same time he knew that it was impossible, to 
conceal any thing from him. He therefore addressed him again 

VOL. II. 2.8 


“B70 - A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


“ Had the poor Princess Charlotte,” added he, 
“had some person about her, who would have 
“acted with energy as [ did, she would have been 
‘saved. Now, through the neglect of her relations, 
and the imbecility, or something worse, of those 
‘mistrables of accoucheurs, it is impossible to say 
what calamities may befal the British empire.” 
- © No sooner was it known,” continued Napo- 
leon, “ that the interests of France had induced 
me to dissolve the ties of my marriage, than the 
greatest sovereigns of Europe intrigued for an 
alliance with me. As .soon as the Emperor of 
Austria heard that a new marriage was in agita- 
tion, he sent for Narbonne, andexpressed his sur- 
prise that his family had not been thought of, At 
this time an union with a princess of Russia or 
of Saxony was contemplated, The cabinet. of 
Vienna sent instructions on the subject to: Prince 
Schwartzenburg, who was ambassador at Paris. 


on the subject.“ Ce drdle Id abuse,” said he, “ pourtant il n’y a 
pas d’autre moyen; allons il faut payer” The architect returned 
to the cooper, who increased his price to fifty thousand francs. 
Napoleon indignant, when informed of it, said; Cet homme ld 
est un misérable, et bien je n’achetterai point la maison, et elle restera 
comme un monument de mon respect pour les loix.” The Bourbons 
returned, razed the foundation of the intended palace, and threw 
down what had been erected ; the cooper’s’ hovel fell to ruins, and 
its master, M: Bonvivant, now lives at: Passy, Rue Basse, No. a 
where he earns a miserable existence by his trade. — ald 


A VOICE PROM ST. HELENA. 371 


Despatches were also received from the ambas- 
sador in Russia, stating the willingness of the 
Emperor Alexander to offer his sister, the Grand. 
Duchess Anne. Some difficulties however pre 
sented themselves relative to the demand that a 
chapel for the Greek ritual should be established 
in the Thuilleries:; A privy council was held 
upon the subject, and the votes of the majority 
were for an Austrian princess. I consequently 
authorized Prince Eagene to make the overture 
to Prince Schwartzenburg, and articles of mar’ 
riage, similar to those between Louis the Sixteenth 
and Marie’ Antoinette, were signed. The Em 
peror Alexander was not pleased that his over- 
tures were slighted, and thought that he had been 
deceived, and that two negociations had been car- 
ried on at the’ same hig in which he Was ae 
taken.” 

“ Tt has’ been said, ” added fdponeii, “that the 
marriage of Marie Louise was’ one of the secret 
articles of thé treaty of Vienna, which had taken 
place some months before; this is entirely false. 
There was no thought whatever of an alliance 
with Austria, previous to the despatch from Nar- 
bonne, relating the hints which had been made to 
him by the Emperor Francis and by Metternich, 
In fact, the marriage with the Empress Marie 
Louise was proposed in council, discussed, de- 

2B2 


372 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


cided, and signed within twenty-four hours, which 
can be proved by many members of the council 
who are now in existence. Several were of opi- 
nion that I ought to have espoused a French wo- 
man; and the arguments in favour of this were so 
strong, as to incline me to balance for a moment. 
It was hinted, however, by the Court of Austria, 
that, declining to chuse a princess out of one of 
the reigning Houses of Europe, would be a tacit 
declaration of intentions to overturn them, when- 
ever opportunities should present themselves.” ” 

10¢h.—No improvement has taken place in Na- 
poleon’s health. Had some conversation with him, 
relative to the marriage of the Princess Elizabeth 
with the Prince of Hesse Homburgh. ‘ The 
English royal family,” said he, “ va * incana-. 
gliarsi with little petty princes, to whom I would. 
not have given a brevet of sous lieutenant. When 
I marched upon Ulm in 1805, I passed through 
Stutgardt with my army, where ] saw your princess, 
royal the Queen of Wirtemberg,f with whom I. 


* A word probably invented by Napoleon, and intended to 
convey a meaning of degradation in a very strong manner, 

+ I have been informed, from a source entitled ‘to the highest. . 
credit, that the Queen of Wirtemberg wrote an account of this 
interview to ber mother Queen Charlotte, in which she expressed 
very favourable opinions of Napoleon, and, in describing his 
person, concluded in the following manner, “ and mapas be- 
witching a smile.” y 


A VOICE FROM 8T. HELENA. 373 


had several conversations, and was much pleased 
with her. She soon lost whatever prejudices she 
might have originally entertained against me, I 
had the pleasure of interfering to her advantage, 
when her husband, who was a brute, though a 
man of talent, had ill treated her, for which she 
was very grateful to me. She afterwards contri- 
buted materially towards effecting the marriage 
between my brother Jerome and the Princess Ca- 
therine, daughter of the king by a former mar- 
riage.” 

-16th.—While in James Town, I was asked by 
Mr. Barber of the Cambridge, who had opened a 
shop in the town, “how did Bonaparte like the 


portraits?” Being ignorant of his meaning, I asked 
for explanations. He said, that I surely mast 


know what he alluded to, and after some more 
conversation informed me that he had brought 
vut two engravings of young Napoleon, for sale, 
thinking that it would please the French, and in- 
duce them to give him some custom. That, on 
his arrival, he had mentioned the circumstance, 
and that both of the portraits had been taken by 
the governor and Sir Thomas Reade, Sir Hudson 
Lowe declaring that he was glad to have an op- 
portunity of sending such articles to Bonaparte. 
Mr. Barber appeared much surprised and disap- 


374 A VOICE FROM ST, HELENA, 


pointed, when he learned from me that, they ber 
not reached Longwood.* 

17th.—Went to Plantation House. The. go- 
vernor, after having made some inquiries about 
the state of Napoleon’s health, and that of General 
Gourgaud, and whether ] had complied with the 
desire he had expressed on the 2/st, that I should 
shew to Captain Blakeney the letter in which 
Lord Liyerpool’s name was mentioned? I replied, 
that as he had left it to my option, whether to 
shew it or not, I had preferred the latter, seeing 
that the business had occurred a long time ago; 
that at the ¢ime I had offered to shew it, which he 
had refused to accept, and also, because he had 
said he considered the offer to shew it as an in- 
sult. That it was necessary for me to be very 
cautious, and as I did not know why I was now 
required to shew the letter, I had declined doing 
so. His excellency was not pleased with this 
reply, and hegan to abuse me in his customary 
manner, saying, that “1 constantly insulted him 
as governor.” 1 replied, that it never had) been 
my intention to insult him either in word or deed; 
that I was yery sorry if constructions, so foreign 
to my intentions, should haye been put upon 
them. Sir Hudson Lowe then got up, and,look- 

* On my departure from St. Helena, in August, 1818, neither 
of the engravings had been sent to the father. 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 375 


ing at me, in a menacing manner, said, “ Upon 
your word of honour, sir, | ask you if you have 
had any other conversations with Napoleon Bo- 
naparte, than upon medical subjects, for a month 
past?” I replied, “ perhaps there may have been 
on other subjects, not interesting!” “ 1 do not 
allow you, sir, to be a judge of whether they were 
uninteresting or otherwise. Youhave noauthority — 
for holding any communications with Napoleon 
Bonaparte, unless upon medical subjects, and then, 
only when sent to for that purpose. Have you 
had any communication with any other person of 
his family?” “ Certainly, sir, | have had.” With- 
out waiting to know whether those communica- 
tions were medical or otiler wise, he burst out 
with, “ You have no authority, sir, to hold any 
communication whatsoever with any of his family, 
who are subject to the same restrictions as him- 
self, unless upon medical subjects, and then only 
when sent for; and when finished, you are to 
leave them. You have no business to go amongst 
them, unless for medical purposes. Have you, 
sir, had any communication with any of them un- 
less upon those subjects?” I replied, by referring 
his excellency to his own orders, that I should 
not hold any other communication than medical 
with them. “ This reply, sir, as usual, is not a 
direct one. You make it a practice to go to town 


376 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


when ships arrive, which [ do not approve of. 
You go to collect news for General Bonaparte.” 
I answered, “ that I was an English officer; and, 
as such, would not give up my rights; moreover, 
that I, as well as others, was desirous of purchas- 
ing the necessaries of life as soon as they were 
landed, and before any monopoly took place to 
increase the price. That, if he intended to prohi- 
bit me from going to town, I had to request orders 
to that effect in writing.” .This Sir Hudson re- 
fused, saying, with a sneer, “ the request is wor- 
thy of the place you come from, and the people 
with whom you associate. I do not think a per- 
son, under a pledge to Napoleon Bonaparte, ought 
to be received into company, and I do not‘ap- 
prove of your going to town when ships’ arrive: 
You are suspected by me, sir.’”’. I replied; “ that 
I was under no other pledge to Napoleon, than 
one which was tacitly understood in every society 
of gentlemen,” The governor said, “ that it was 
presumption and insolence for me, to dare to 
judge of the line of conduct his majesty’s govern- 
ment had thought proper tu pursue with respect 
to Napoleon Bonaparte.” I replied, “ that I:did 
not attempt to judge of that, that I merely men- 
tioned what was the custom of society.” “ You are 
a suspected man, sir, you are suspected by me.” 
‘¢ 4. cannot help that, sir. It is a consolation: to: 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 377 


me, however, under such circumstances, to have 
the mens conscia recti.” This the governor said, 
was a fresh insult, which he followed up by a 
volley of abuse. 
“ You took an opportunity, sir, of staying in 
town the other day, when a ship arrived, instead 
of coming here to report, as you ought to have 
done,” said his excellency, after he had a little re- 
covered his breath. “It was in compliance with 


-your own instructions, sir, on the 30th of January. 


You then told me, in the presence of Major Gor- 
requer, that when I saw. Mr. Baxter or Sir Tho- 
mas Reade in town, it might supersede the neces- 
sity of my coming to Plantation House on that 
day. Having, therefore, seen and explained to 
Mr. Baxter on that day, what I had to say, I did 
not think it necessary to come up here.” He en- 
deavoured to shuffle this off. I appealed to Major 
Gorrequer, if I had not repeated his excellency’s 
own words? The governor said, in not the most 
moderate manner, that this appeal was an insult 
to him, and burst forth into a fresh paroxysm, of 
invective, which lasted for a considerable time. 

18th.—Napoleon more ee! than he has been 
for a few days. 

« Had some further conversation rth him upon 
the subject of the death of the Princess Charlotte, 
during which he observed, that had she been the 
wife of a poor mechanic, she would have been 


378 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


saved, and that one of les dames de la halle de 
Paris would have met with more care and at- 
tention from her relations and friends, than the 
heiress to the greatest throne in Europe had ex- 
perienced from hers. ‘ 

He afterwards spoke of the plans which he had 
upon England. 

* Had [ succeeded in effecting a landing,” said 
he, ‘I have very little doubt that I should have 
accomplished my views, Three thousand. boats, 
each to carry twenty men and one horse, with a 
proportion of artillery, were ready. Your fleet 
having been decoyed away, as I before explained 
to you, would have left me master of the Channel. 
Without this, I would not have made the attempt. 
Four days would have brought me to London. 
Iv a country like England, abounding in plains, 
defence is very difficult. I haveno doubt that your 
troops would have done their duty, but one battle 
lost, the capital would have been in my power. 
‘You could not have collected a force sufficiently 
‘strong to beat me in a pitched battle. Your ideas 
of burning and destroying the towns, and the ca- 
pital itself, are very plausible in argument, but im- 
practicable in their accomplishment. . You would. 
have fought a battle and lost it. ‘Well then,’ you 
would say, ‘we have been beaten, but we have 
not lost our honour. We shall now endeavour de 
tirer la meilleure partie from our misfortune. 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 379 


We must make terms.’ I would have offered 
you a constitution of your own choice, and have 
said, ‘Assemble in London deputies from the 
people to fix upon a constitution.’ I would have 
called upon Burdett and other popular leaders to 
organize one according to the wishes of the people, 
I would have declared the * * fallen from the * * *, 
abolished the nobility, proclaimed liberty, free- 
dom, and equality. Think you, that in order to 
keep the house of *** on the *** your rich 
citizens, merchants, and others of London, would 
have consented to sacrifice their riches, their houses, 
their families, and all their dearest interests, espe- 
cially when I had made them comprehend that I 
only came to * * **** away, and to give them 
liberty? No, it is contrary to history and to hu- 
man nature. You are too rich. Your principal 
people have too much to lose by resistance, and 
your canaille too much to gain by a change. If, 
indeed, they supposed that 1 wanted to render 
England a province of France, then indeed Tesprit 
national would do wonders. But I would haye 
formed a republic according to your own wishes, 
required a moderate contribution, barely sufficient 
to have paid the troops, and\ perhaps not even 
that. Your canaille* would have been for me, 


" * Napoleon frequently used the word canaille, not in a degrad- 
ing sense, but as the people, distinct from the nobles. 


ail 


380: A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


knowing que je suis Thomme du peuple, que je sors 
dela canaille moi-méme, (that I am the man of the’ 
people, that I spring from the populace myself) 
and that whenever a man had merit or talent,’ 
I elevated him without asking how many de~’ 


grees of nobility he had; knowing, that by joining” 


me, they would be relieved from the yoke of the 
aristocracy under which they labour. There is’ 
not:a canaille in the world, not even the Prussian, 
worse treated. Excepting the obligation of serv- 
ing as soldiers, the German canaille are better off 


than yours. You have no more regard for yours” 


than if they were so many Helots, and you treat 
them precisely as if they were such. To my 


lords and my ladies, to the aristocracy and the: 


gentlemen, (in English) oh, indeed, you pay every 
kind of attention and regard, nothing can be too’ 
good for them; no treatment kind enough; but for 
your canaille, bah! they are so many chiens; as 
your contractors said when furnishing provisions 


to the French prisoners, ‘it is too good for those 


French dogs.’ You yourself have got a great 
deal of la morgue aristocratique in your head, 


and appear to look down upon your canaille as if 


they were a race of inferior beings: You*talk of 
your freedom. Can any thing be more horrible 
than your pressing of seamen? ‘You send your 


boats on shore to seize upon every male that can 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 381 


be found, who, if they have the misfortune to be- 
long to the canaille, if they cannot prove them- 
selves gentlemen, are hurried on board of your 
ships, to serve as seamen in all quarters of the 
globe. And yet you have the impudence to talk 
of the conscription in France, it wounds your 
pride, because it fell upon all ranks. Oh; how 
shocking, that a gentleman's son (in English) 
should be obliged to defend his country, just as if 
he were one of the canaille! And that he should 
be compelled to expose his body, or put himself 
ona level with a vile plebeian!! Yet God made 
all men alike. Who forms the nation? Not your 
lords, nor your fat prelates (panciati) and church 
men, nor your gentlemen, nor your oligarchy. 

Oh! one day the people will revenge themselves, 
and terrible scenes will take place.” 

“ That conscription,” coutinued Napoleons 
“which offended your morgue aristocratique so. 
much, was conducted scrupulously according to 
the principles of equal rights.. Every native of a, 
country is bound to defend it. The conscriptiom 
did not écraser a particular class like your press- 
gang, nor the canaille, because they were poor. It, 
was the most just, because the most equal mode of 
raising troops. It rendered the French army the. 
best composed in the world. The conscription, 
would have become a national institution, instead- 


382 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


of being regarded as a punishment or 4 servitude. 
It would have been a point of honour to have 
served the country, and the time would have come; 
that a girl would not have married a youth that 
had not paid the debt he owed to it. The loveof 
glory is the inheritance of a Frenchman.” ’ 
‘Were you a nation,” continued he, “ of half 
savages, of poor wild mountaineers, or of ferocious 
shepherds, like the Scythians; then indeed you 
might destroy your capital, and desolate your 
country, in order to stop the progress of an in- 
vader. Even if you were as poor, as wild, and 
as ignorant as the Spaniards, perhaps you might 
destroy some of your towns and habitations. But 
you are too rich and too selfish. Where is there 
one of you would say, ‘I will destroy my house, 
abandon my property to be pillaged, my wife and 
daughters to be violated, my sons to be mas- 
sacred!! And for what? To keep *** * ** on 
the **, and Lord Bathurst and the Archbishop 
of Canterbury in their employments of twenty 
thousand a year. All this I will do against a 
man who offers terms, who proposes to give us a’ 
constitution according to the wish of the nation.” 
No, no. It is more than could be expected from 
man. Pitt himself was’ well aware of it, and one’ 
of the means which he took to form the coalition 
against me; was, by asserting, that a descent was 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 383 


possible; that if it were effected England would be 
conquered before twelve months; that then all the 
continent would be at my mercy and my disposal ; 
that England once fallen, all was lost. This the 
king of Prussia told me afterwards.” 

Napoleon now repeated what he had said once 
before relative to the inhabitants of Moscow not 
having assisted in setting fire to the city; but on 
the contrary, having done their utmost to extin- 
guish it; and proceeded thus: “ The English, 
after a battle, finding that we did not come to 
plunder and destroy them, that we did not injure 
or molest the inhabitants, that their wives. and 
daughters remained unviolated ; for 1 would not 
have allowed the smallest outrage to be committed: 
Instant death would have been inflicted on who- 
ever attempted it. They would have seen that 
we did not come to rob, or to destroy them, but 
merely to ******, If, indeed, war were waged, 
as in ancient times, when the male prisoners were 
massacred or made slaves of, and the women be- 
came the concubines of the victors, then the con¥ 
quest of the nation would have been impossible. 
But no: you would have seen us advancing, and! 
molesting the population as little as your owt 
soldiers. Every thing would have been done te 
conciliate and to harmonize.” 

I now made some observations to Nariedoiier 


384 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


about his own government in France. _‘‘ The sys- 
tem of government,” said he, “ must be adapted 
to l'esprit de la nation, and to circumstances, ,,,In 
the first place, France required a strong govern- 
ment. While I was at the head of it, I may.say 
that France was in the same state as Rome, when 
a dictator was declared necessary for the salvation 
of the republic. Successions of coalitions against 
her existence were formed by your gold amongst 
all the powerful nations of Europe. To resist 
successfully, it was necessary that all the energies 
of the country should be at the disposal. of the 
chief. I never conquered unless in my own. de- 
fence. Europe never ceased to make war upon 
France and her principles. J/ nous fallut abattre 
sous peine détre abatius. Between the parties that . 
agitated France for a long time, L was like a rider, 
seated on an unruly horse, who always wanted to 
swerve either to the right or to the left; and to make 
him keep a straight course, I was obliged to let 
him feel the bridle occasionally. The government, 
of a country just emerged from a revolution, me- 
naced by foreign enemies, and agitated by. the, 
intrigues of domestic traitors, must necessarily;be_ 
dur. In quieter times my dictature would have, 
finished, and I should have commenced my cou, 
stitutional reign. Even as it was, with a coalition. 
always existing agaiust me, either secret or public, 


r 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. ‘385 


openly avowed, or denied, there was more equa- 


lity in France than in any other country in Eu- 
rope. 


» One of my grand objects was to render educa- 


tion accessible to every body. I caused every in- 


»stitution to be formed upon a plan which offered 
‘instruction to the public, either gratis, or at a rate 


so moderate, as not to be beyond the means of the 


-peasant. The museums were thrown open to the 
-eanaille. My canaille would have become the best 


educated in the world. All my exertions were 
directed to illuminate the mass of the nation, in- 
stead of brutifying them leg a ignorance and super- 
‘stition.” 

* Those English,” added he, “ who are lovers 
of liberty, will one day lament with tears having 
gained the battle of Waterloo. | It wasas fatal to 


the liberties of Europe in its effects as that of 


Philippi was to those of Rome; and like it, ‘has 
precipitated Europe into the hands of triumvirs, 
associated together for the oppression of mankind, 
the pi. 1 pron of knowledge, and the restoration 
of superstition:” 

 Recounted to the emperor the’ treatment I had 
experienced yesterday at Plantation House. “T 
do not believe,” said he, “that in all the armies 
of Europe a man of so ignoble a ‘character could 
be found. | It is the height of baseness for a supe- 

VOL. II. 2c 


SST ee 


rr 


386 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


rior to insult officially an inferior. This man’s 
disposition makes him like.a person afflicted with 
an inveterate itch; he has need of continually 
rubbing against something. But independent of 
his natural uneasiness, his intentions are, by bad 
language and bad treatment, to irritate you into'a 
breach of respect to him as governor, which he will 
convert into an act of violence, and proceed against 
you for an attentat upon him in his official:eapa- 
city. You are in a very dangerous situation: He 
has a witness, who is his creature, and who will 
sign every thing that he dictates, and ‘have no 
other conscience or will than his. You have only 
your own word to plead ; and this man’s conduet 
in endeavouring to make a spy of you, by ill treat- 
ment and abuse, is so extraordinary, that people 
unacquainted with him will with difficulty believe 
it. I see no other mode for you to act than to 
maintain an absolute silence. Hear what he has 
to say, and reply not, unless in answer to médical 
questions. ‘To those he has a right to expeet an 


. answer; but to any thing else say, ‘ I do not 


know,’ or, ‘ it is no business of mine’””) 5) 
20th—Underwent a few more interrogations 
from Sir Hudson Lowe, in which I had the good 
fortune to leave his house, without. having been 
assailed with any outrageous languages 9) 6 
23rd.—Cipriani complained this day of inflam- 


IOV 


A) VOICE. FROM ST. HELENA. 387 


mation of the bowels; which from the moment he 
made:it known to me, presented. most formidable 
appearances. He was very largely bled, put into 
a warp bath, and recourse had to all the vigorous 
remedies:usually administered in)such cases, Only 
temporary relief, however, was obtained ; and the 
‘unfavourable symptoms returned) with increased 
aggravation. It was soon evident that his life was 
in the most imminent danger; and the advice and 
assistance of other: professional: men were called 
in: » All, however, was useless, and the complaint 
was rapidly hurrying him on to dissolution. » Ci- 
priani' himself, though: conscious. of his danger, 
preserved the greatest calmness and composure. 
Napoleon, who had an affection for him as his'coun- 
tryman, and aman wholly devoted: to his service, 
was extremely anxious for his recovery, and fre- 
quént iihis inquiries.: On the 25th, Cipriani'was 
jm a/state:in' which persons labouring under the 
same: complamtiare sometimes seen: He had-ex- 
perienced; some relief ‘from suffering ; but it was 
doubtful whether it arose from . the diminution:of 
the violence of the complaint,’ or was that cessa- 
tion: of) pain: preceding dissolution, produced by 
mortification: The last was my own opinion; 
but there was nothing certain. He was in a state 
of extreme weakness, .N ourishment was . admi- 
nistered to him at short intervals, which was re- 
2c2 


i le 


388 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


tained on his stomach. While in this. state of 
doubt, Napoleon, with whom I had been repeat- 
edly during the day, to report the state of the 
patient, sent for me at twelve o'clock at night. I 
mentioned that Cipriani was lying ina kind of 
stupor. ‘I think,” said he, “that my appearance 
before poor Cipriani would act as a stimulus to 
slumbering nature, (la natura che dorme,) and will 
rouse her to make new efforts which may finally 
overcome the disease, and save the patient.” He 
endeavoured to illustrate this by describing the 
electric effects which had been produced in many 
instances, by his appearance on the field of battle 
at most critical moments and times., I replied, 
that Cipriani was still sensible; and that I knew 
the love and veneration he had for his master to 
be so great, that on his appearance before him, he 
would make an effort to rise in his bed, which 
exertion, in the weak state in which he was, would 
probably produce syncope, during which his soul, 
already tra sie no, to quit or to remain. in its 
earthly tenement, would most probably take its. 
departure.* After this and other explanations on 
the subject, Napoleon acquiesced in my opinion, 
that he should not try the experiment; observing, 
* It is well known to medical people, that in cases of great 


debility the mere raising of a patient’s head from the pillow, bes , 
sometimes produced dissolution. 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 389 


that in such cases, les hommes de Cort were the 
best judges. 

At ten o’clock the following morning, symp- 
toms decidedly mortal made their appearance, 
and about four, poor Cipriani was numbered with 
the dead. 

Cipriani was a man possessed of strong, but un- 
cultivated talents. Though artful, he had the 
appearance of openness and candour. He had, 
however, many good qualities. He was generous 
and charitable. Like most of his countrymen, he 
was an ardent friend, and a bitter enemy, and had 
strong national spirit. He was a republican in 
principle, and manifested more attachment to Na- 
poleon in his misfortunes, than he had ever shewn 
for him in his grandeur. He was regarded by his 
master in a very confidential light. Had he en- 
joyed the benefit of an early education, he would 
probably have made a figure in the revolution. 
He had been unwell for several days before he 
complained, during which, in all probability, la- 
tent inflammation had been going ov. His corpse 
was followed to the grave* by Counts Bertrand 
and Montholon, by myself, and byall the household 
who could attend. So much was he esteemed at 
St. Helena, that several of the most respectable of 
the inhabitants, and some of the officers of the 


* See Count Bertrand’s letter, Appendix, No. XIII. 


390 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


66th regiment, voluntarily joined the funeral pro- 
cession. Had he been buried within the liunits, 
Napoleon himself ‘would have attended. 

Immediately after his death, 1 reported the-cir- 
cumstance to Napoleon, who'remarked, * Where 
is his soul? Gone to Rome, perhaps, to see) his 
wife ae “apy before it undertakes the a a 
journey.” 

Some days before his demise, Cipriani told -me, 
that not long after the governor had put into execu- 
tion his rigorous measures towards the inmates of 
Longwood, Santini, who was of a merry dispo- 
sition, had been’ observed to. be much altered, and 
apparently thoughtful and melancholy.’ One-day 
he came into Cipriani’s room, and avowed his in- 
tention of shooting the governor the first time that 
the latter came to Longwood. ‘Cipriani asked 
him if he was mad, and endeavoured to dissuade 
him from the attempt, by using‘all the arguments 
in his power. Although Cipriani had much influ- 
ence over him, Santini was unmoved; and accom- 
panied his declaration with many ‘oaths pecu- 
liar to the inferior order of Italians. »He had his 
double-barrelled gun loaded with ball, with which 
he intended to despatch the governor, and then to 
finish himself. Cipriani, finding his arguments 
fruitless, went to Napoleon, to whom he commu- 
nicated the affair. The emperor immediately sent 


A VOICE FROM ST, HELENA. 391 * 


for, and questioned Santini, who avowed his in- 
tentions. Napoleon then commanded him, as his 
emperor, to drop all thoughts of injuring Sir Hud- 
son Lowe, and succeeded, though not without 
some reluctance on the part of Santini, in making 
him abandon his project. Santini was a most de- 
termined character, and brave as a lion. Besides 
being master of the small sword, he had asure and 
deadly aim with fire-arms; and there is little doubt, 
that had it not been for this prohibition, he would - 
have effected his intentions. > 

_ March 6th.—The progress of the disease in the 
emperor continues to advance a little, though 
slowly. Found him reading a volume of Corneille, 
upon whom he pronounced some warm eulogiums, 
observed, that to the sentiments which he inspired, 
France was indebted for some of her glorious 
deeds, and added, that if Corneille had lived in 
his time, he would have made him a prince. 

He then conversed about himself, said, that he 
believed nature had calculated him for great re- 
verses—that he had a soul of marble. After 
which he made some comparisons of his own con- 
duct with that adopted by his enemies towards 
_ “ If | had been actuated by the spirit which 
prevailed with the Bourbons,”’ said she, ‘“ or even 
according to the laws of reciprocity, I should haye 


* 392 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


caused the Duc D’Angouléme to be tried,'in te- 
taliation for the attempts he had made upon ‘me, 
the proscription against my person by the Bour- 
bons, and the declaration of the allied powers,” 
placing me out of the pale of the law, and in- 
viting my assassination. By the laws of the na- 
tional assembly, existing against any of the mem- 
bers of his family who should re-enter France, 
I could have bad. him shot within twenty-four 
hours. Instead of doing so, I ordered that every 
respect should be paid to him, and care taken of 
his person, and that he should be pencataneist to 
Cette for embarkation.” 

** Maitland,” said Napoleon, ‘“‘ was not an ac~ 
complice in the snare that was laid for me by your 
ministers, when they gave him orders to receive 
me on board of his ship.t | He is un brave homme, 
and incapable of participating in the infamous 
transaction that took place. He was deceived, as 
well as myself, and probably in bringing me to 
England, thought that I should have been allowed 
to live there, subject to such restrictions as had 
been imposed upon my brother Lucien.” He then 
observed, that he had formed too good an opinion — 
of the English, and had believed the influence of 
the voice of the people upon the ministers, to have 
been much more powerful than it was in reality. 


* See Appendix, No. XIV. + See Appendix, No. XV.” 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 393 


“ Previous to going on board of the Bellerophon,” 
added he, ‘‘ some debates were held upon the pro- 
priety of the measure. Some naval officers, to 
whom it was mentioned, strongly urged that I 
should not venture on such a step. They said, 
the English are the most interested people on 
earth. Interest is their god, and they will caleu- 
late what may result from ill or well treating you. 
If they think that they shall gain any thing by it, © 
they will hurry you away, and bury you in one of 
their colonies, where you will be exposed to every 
species of bad treatment, that hatred can suggest. 
“« They were right,” added he, “some of them had 
been in the pontons, and knew what you were 
better than I did. I did not conceive it possible 
that a great nation could countenance the perse- 
cution of one man, who had fallen into their hands, 
after having been twenty-five years their enemy.” 
He then delivered, as follows, some explana- 
tion of the causes which had produced his fall: 
“Had it not been for that fatal suspension of 
arms, in 1813, to which I was induced to consent 
by Austria, | should have succeeded. The vie- 
tories of Lutzen and Wurtzen had restored confi- 
dence in the French forces. The King of Saxony — 
was triumphantly brought back to his capital; one 
of the corps of the French army was at the gates of 
Berlin, and the enemy had been driven from Ham- 


394 A VOICE FROM ST, HELENA, 


burgh. The Russian and Prussian armies were 
preparing to pass the Vistula, when the cabinet of 
Austria, acting with its characteristic perfidy, ad- 
vised the suspension of hostilities, at a time when 
it) had already entered into engagements with 
Russia and Prussia; the armistice was only a 
delusion to gain the time necessary to make pre- 
parations, it being intended to declare against 
France in May. |The. unexpected. successes 
obliged it to act with more circumspection, It 
was necessary to gain more time, and negocia- 
tions went on at the congress of Prague. Met- 
ternich insisted that Austria should have the half 
of Italy, and made other exorbitant conditions, 
which were only demanded, in order. to be re- 
fused. As soon.as she had got her army ready, 
Austria declared against France. After the vic- 
tory of Dresden, I was superior, and had formed 
the project to deceive the enemy, by marching to- 
wards Magdeburgh, then to cross the Elbe, at 
Wittenberg, and march upon Berlin, Several di- 
visions of the army were occupied in these ma- 
neuvres, when a letter was brought to me from 
the King of Wirtemberg, announcing that the Ba- 
varian army had joined the Austrians, and to the 
amount of eighty thousand men, were marching 
towards the Rhine, under the command of Wrede; 
that he, being compelled by the presence of that 


A VOICE FROM ST, HELENA. 395 


army, was obliged to join his contingent to it,,and. 
that Mentz would soon be invested, by a hundred 
thousand men. ' 

* This unexpected defection entirely changed 
the plan of the, campaign, and all the preparations 
made to fix the:war between the Elbe and. ithe 
Oder, became useless. At Leipsic, afierwards,I 
was victorious on the 16th, and should have ;suc- 
ceeded on the 18th, had not the whole Saxon 
army, which occupied one of the most important 
positions in the line, deserted to the enemy, witha 
train of sixty pieces of cannon, which were imme- 
diately turned against the French. Notwithstand- 
ing this, the field of battle remained in possession. 
of the French, and the allies made a retrograde 
movement on the:same day. During the night J 
ordered the army. to retire upon our supplies be- 
hind the Ister. The defection of some other Ger- 
man corps afterwards, and the premature blow- 
ing up of the bridge at Leipsic, caused the most 
disastrous effects. When the army bad passed — 
the Saale, it. should have rested to recover from 
its fatigues, and receive ammunition and ,other 
supplies from Erfurth. Intelligence, however, 
arrived, that the Austro-Bavarian army under 
Wrede, had arrived on the Mein by forced marches, 
and it was necessary to march against it, Wrede 
was driven from his position at Hanaw, com- 


396 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


pletely beaten, and himself wounded. : Confer- 
ences afterwards took place at Francfort, and 
proposals for peace were offered on condition 
that I should renounce the protectorate of the 
confederation of the Rhine, Poland, and the de- 
partments of the Elbe; but that France should 
be. preserved in her limits of the Alps and the 
Rhine. Those conditions were accepted as bases. 
This congress, however, like the others, turned 
out to be a delusion, as at the moment that those 
pacific proposals were made, the allies violated 
the neutrality of Switzerland, which they entered 
in large force. At Chatillon, afterwards, they pre- 
sented their ultimatum, in which they demanded 
that France should be reduced to the limits she 
had previous to 1792, which I rejected. Had it 
not been for the subsequent treachery of Talley- 
rand, Marmont, and Augereau, the allies would 
not have succeeded in forcing upon the throne a 
detested family, against whom, for twenty-five 
years, the nation has combated ; and France would 
not have been degraded by the spectacle of a 
king upon the throne, who had the baseness pub- 
licly to declare that he owed it to the baits 
Regent of England.” re 
28th.—Twenty-seven volumes of books were 
sent to Longwood by Sir Hudson Lowe on the 
12th, and seven on this day, with some numbers 


A» VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 397 


of the Lettres Normandes et Champenoises. . These 
formed the entire of the supply of books and 
pamphlets sent by his majesty’s: ministers,* (or 
through them,) since the arrival of the Phaeton in 
1816. Napoleon observed, “C'est une bassesse 
dont je ne croyais pas méme que Lord Bathurst 
Sit capable.” nv 
‘It has beena rule} for some time, that all’ cap- 
tains of merchant ships which arrive, ‘are obliged 
to submit a list of their books, newspapers, &c:-to 
Sir Hudson Lowe, and those of a political natare 
are specifically required to be sent to him, under 
a pretence of desiring to forward: them to Long- 
wood, where, however, none of the books, have 
arrived ;- and but very few newspapers. |. The 
Edinburgh ‘Review is specially sought. after: by 
his excellency and staff. — v9, tadt: besser 


* Mr. Goulbourn promised Count Las Cases on the return of 
the latter to Europe, that every interesting book ‘and new publi- 
cation should be sent to Longwood, with’a copious and regular 
supply of newspapers, French and English, of different descrip- 
tions,, Whether the worthy secretary performed his promise or 
not, I am not able to say. None, however, except some uncon- 
nected numbers of the Times and Courier, Observer, Bee. with “a 
few straggling French papers of a very old date, reached Long- 
wood during my residence there. In’ one instance, in March, 
1817, I think, the governor permitted me totake the Morning 
Chronicle for some weeks, as a great favour, which was not again 
repeated. : ! [ } 1 VisYouPe ’ 

+ See Appendix, No: XVI1. 


ea 


398 A’ VOICE. FROM ‘ST. HELENA. 


April: 4th Some days ago a circumstance 6e- 
curred which threw some light upon the motives 
whith had induced the governor to oblige. me to 
visit Plantation House twice a week. One of the 
foreign ‘persons. ‘residing’ in the: island’ informed — 
Count<Montliolon, that the commissioners | had 
seen an account of the state of Napoleon's health 
‘in the: bulletin of that day. | Count Montholon 
knowing that no bulletins were issued | by; me, 
asked forexplanations, which were given ; and by 
which it appeared that surreptitious bulletins were 
made by a person who never saw Napoleon, and 
who ‘consequently could not: bea judge of: his 
complaint: Those fictitious reports were sent from 
‘Plantation House to the commissioners, and trans- 
mitted ‘by them to their respective courts. Iap- 
prehend that every conscientious reader will+be 
of opinion that those bulletins ought to have been 
shewn to me, I being the. only medical man who 
‘saw: the patient, and consequently the only person 

capable of judging of their correctness*) 
* 10th.—Sir Hudson Lowe having failed in the 
application that he made in Trondon to est 


if * Sir Hudson Sawes when he was thee eltmiann or 
giving)some account of this transaction, endeavoured to slur it 
over, by, stating to. Count Bertrand that. the. fictitious, bulletins 
were merely repetitions of my conversations with Mr. Teahie i 
this were true, why conceal them from me? 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 399 


- my removal from St. Helena had recourse ‘to:an 


expedient which insured him success. He caused 
a letter. to. be written to» me. this: day ‘by Sir 


- Thomas Reade, in which he informedme that Ibwas 


not to pass out of Longwood, without assigning any 
reasons fora measure by which it appeared thatthe 
governor had imposed upon me-restrictions even 
more arbitrary and vexatious thamthose which he 
had inflicted:‘upon the French; for by confining me 
to Longwood, within the precinets of\which he al- 
Jowed no persons. to..enter without»a pass, /hede- 
prived me of English society ;) while ‘at the:same 
time he prohibited me from holding any otherinter 
course, even with the French, than-that relating to 
my profession.* As soon asI received this letter, I 
went to the Briars, with the intention of laying the 
affair before Admiral Plampin,, who. sent,.word 
by his, secretary that. he would, not see. me, ,. 
then wrote a letter.to Sir, Hudson Lowe,, tender- 
‘ing my resignation, and’ another ‘to Count Ber- 
trand, in which 1 explained the step that I had 
been compelled to take, and. the ‘motives. which 
urged. me.toadopt. its. od liv yuiove> woy WH Boh 
14th.— Napoleon sent forme to give me an au 
dience prior to my departure. “During which’ he 
declined receiving any 1 more medical advice from 


» * Ivis almost unnecessary for me toexplain tothe seamed I 
was neither able nor inclined to ob « \this arbitrary taidate: 


400 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


me in the situation in which I was placed by Sir 
Hudson Lowe, and addressed me in the following 
words: “ Eh bien, Docteur, vous allez nous quitter: 
Le monde concevra-t-il qu'on a eu la lécheté datten- 
ter a mon médecin? Puisque vous étes un simple 
lieutenant, soumis a tout V'arbitraire et dla discipline 
militaire, vous n'avez plus U'indépendance nécessatre 
pour que vos secours puissent m’étre utiles ; je vous 
remercie de vos soins. Quittez le plut6t possible .ce 
séjour de ténéebres et de crimes; je mourrai sur ce 
grabat, rongé de maladie et sans secours; mais votre 
nation en sera deshonorée a jamais.’”* He then sigs 
meadiets) (1): uiblo:! moist: Hikiete od aalt 
May 9th.—Sir Hudson Lowe finding that he 
could not succeed in his plan of establishing 


* “Well, Doctor, you are going to quit oe. Will the world 
conceive that they have been base enough to make attempts upon 
my physician? Since you are no more than a simple lieute- 
nant, subjected to arbitrary power and to military discipline, 
you haye no longer the independence necessary to render your 
services useful to me. I thank you for your care. Quit as 
as you can this abode of darkness and of crimes. ‘I shall expit 
upon that pallet, consumed by disease, and without } any assist- 
ance. But your country will be eternally dishonoured by my 
death.” It may be proper ‘to inform: the reader, that though 
Napoleon generally conversed in Italian with me, as I spoke the 
language with considerable fluency, from es resided several 
years in that classical country, whenever he became animated, 
he always broke out into French, and also whenever he was at a 
loss for a word. vlog, se 


os -_-- es 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 401 


‘another surgeon with Napoleon; and that the lat- 
ter was determined not to receive him, and having 
been made to comprehend by the commissioners,* 
that if Napoleon died while he kept me in confine- 
meut (without bringing me to a trial, or even pre- 
ferring any charge against me) or under the hands 
of any surgeon forced upon him, strange surmises 
would arise in England and in Europe respécting 
his death, of which they themselves should be 
unable to render a satisfactory explanation, de- 
cided upon removing the restrictions he had im- 
posed upon me. Accordingly he released me, after 
having kept me in confinement twenty-seven days; 
during which time I was successively assailed; 

in correspondence, by all his staff; and in order to 
" ensnare me, frequently required to return by a 
dragoon who waited, answers to letters composed 
after several days’ reflection, by the united wisdom 
of ‘Sir Hudson Lowe and his staff. As this cor- 


= an been informed, that some very animated discussions 
took place at Plantation House on this subject, in one of which 
the governor, while debating with Baron Sturmer, burst forth 
into one of the paroxysms of anger he so frequently manifested 
towards me. The baron very coolly made his excellency stop op- 
posite to a large looking-glass, in which he begged of him to con- 
template his own features, adding, that be should not desire to 
afford his court a better representation of what was occurring 
at St. Helena, than the figure in the mirror before him. 


VOL. II. 2pD 


402 A VOICE FROM sT. HELENA. 


respondence has been already before the public, 1 
shall not now trouble the reader with it. 

_ In the letter containing the order for my release, 
his excellency felt himself obliged to acknowledge 
me as Napoleon's private surgeon, a point which 
he had contested before. 

A despatch sent by Sir Hudson Lowe to Long: 
wood, containing some extracts from a corres- 
pondence of Lord Bathurst, stating, amongst other 
matters, that permission would be given, that a list 
of persons, not exceeding fifty in number resident 
on the island, should be drawn up by Count Ber- 
trand and submitted to the governor for approval, 
and that such persons should be admitted. to 
Longwood at seasonable hours, with uo other pass. 
than the invitation of General Bonaparte; it being. 
understood, that they were on such occasions to 
deliver in their invitations with their names, as 
vouchers, at the barrier; it being clearly under- 
stood, that the governor was to reserve a dis- 
cretionary power, to erase from the list any indivi, © 
duals to whom he might consider it inexpedient ’ 
to continue such facility of access. aidbe 

_10th.—Previous to allowing me to resume my 
medical functions at Longwood, Napoleon, in 
order to put a stop to the fabrication of ‘any 
more bulletins, required that I should, make ¢ outa 
report of the state of his health once a week, or 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 4083 


oftener if necessary. A copy of which should be 
given to the governor if he required it. This I 
immediately communicated to Sir Hudson ‘Lowe, 
who not only did not require it, but absolutely 
prohibited me from making him (Sir ee 
any written report. | 

‘Napoleou’s state of health had become worse 
since last month. The pain was more sm ones 
and severe, Kc. 

Considerable indignation was excited in the 
island at the conduct which had been pursued to- 
wards Napoleon. 

16th.—A ° proclamation issued by Sir Hudsot 
Lowe, and placarded in the most conspicuous 
places, interdicting all officers, inhabitants, and 
other persons whatsoever, from holding any cor- 
respondence or communication with the —_ 
persons under detention on it.* 

18th.—Captain Blakeney ordered by Sit Hud- 
son Lowe to assemble all the English servants at 


* Longwood, and read to them the proclamation of 


the 16th. This was done without notice being 
given to their masters. Napoleon, when informed 
of this, ordered ‘that the English servants em- 
ployed at Longwood House, in place of Santini 
and the others sent away by Sir Hudson Lowe, 
should be discharged. 
* *'Seé Appendix, No. XVII. 
2nd2 


404 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


' 20th.—Had some conversation with the emperor 
upon the work published by Mr. Ellis on the-em- 
bassy to China, and the conversation at Longwood 
which that gentleman had published. Napoleon 
observed, that having learned that Mr. Ellis had 
been secretary to a mission to Persia, a short time 
after General Gardanne had quitted Ispahan, he 
had questioned bim as to the progress that Russia 
had made on the Persian side. * 1 told. hit,” 
added Napoleon, ‘“ that if Russia succeeded in at 
taching the brave Polish nation to her, she would 
no longer have a rival, because she would restrain 
England, by menacing the latter’s possessions in 
India, and Austria, by the great moral superiority 
of her troops, and by the followers of the Greek 
church, who are so nuinerous in Hungary and Gal. 
licia; and that appearances rendered: it probable 
that a Greek patriarch would one day officiate in 
Sancta Sophia. I also mentioned to him, ‘that if 
England adopted the system of founding her power 
upon her land forces, and on maintaining armies — 
‘on the continent, those armies would mask her real _ 
forces, and she would commit the same fault that 
Francis the First watguilty of at the battle of Pavia, 
by placing himself with the élite of his cavalry before 
a formidable battery, which would have assured 
him the victory, had he not prevented it#®m firiug — 
by masking it. 1 told him that your riots in Eng: 


A’ VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 405. - 


land signified nothing, and that your constables 
were sufficient to re-establish order, if at the same’ 
time your ministers directed all their attention and 
care towards the amelioration of the administra~- 
tion, to the prosperity of your manufactures and, 
your commerce. That above all, you must not. 
be ashamed of being merchants ; from that source. 
your power springs; but that if the misery. was: 
real, as asserted by Lord Wellesley, and. was 
caused by the too great efforts made by England 
during twenty years, in that case too violent mea- 
sures employed upon the mass of the people 
would be topical applications likely to produce. 
madness in them. . I said that you have amongst 
you men too wise, not to open, at the same time 
that they applied these violent remedies, channels 


which would discharge the acrimonious humours, 


restore health and ease to the people, and cause 


Inisery to disappear. 


** During all the conversations I had with Mr. 


Ellis,” continued he, “ which lasted about half 


an hour, not one word was said about St. Helena. 
Count Montholon had no. conversation on the 
subject with Mr. Ellis, or any other of the lega- 
tion. Mr. Ellis made no enquiries on the spot, 
never visited the interior of the establishment, 
knew nothing, saw vothing, and heard nothing 
about it, at least from the French. And yet in 


406 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA: 


his work he has the impudence to play the part 
of a judge, who had heard the complaining parties 
on the spot. But that passage’ has not: been. 
written by his hand. It is the invention:of some 
commis to Lord Bathurst, who has imposed the 
insertion of it upon him. Such a prostitution:of 
his name reflects but little credit — that diplo- 
matic character."* Opts 

» He made some observations upon thie contrast 
between the governor’s proclamation and conduct, 
and the despatches sent by Lord Bathurst: said 
that the despatch was merely got up to have the 
appearance of doing something to benefit et sie 
tuation, while in reality nothing was done. 
' In the course of the conversation, | oeidons 
observed, that but little reliance was to: be placed 
on the writings of a man, in forming a. jadgment of 
his private character or conduct, which: he illus- 
trated by informing me that Bernardin St. Pierre, 
whose writings were so sentimentally beautiful, 
and breathing principles of humanity and social 
happiness in‘ every page, was onevof the worst 
_— characters in’ France: | on W. cio 

‘June 7th The Mangles store sbipidiniadn ve 

1 1th.— With the exception of the painful inflam- 
matory affection of the cheeks, the so frequent 
"* Mr. Ellis’ has since been appointed to a lucrative situation 
at the Cape of Good Hope, which, I believe, is in the gift of Lord 
Bathurst. 


fall Ss * a 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 407 


recurrence of which has been prevented by the 
extraction of two more teeth, Napoleon’s state of 
health has become much worse. He accordingly 
consented on this day to adopt the practice recom- 
mended to him, which was consequently com- 
menced on this day. He has been confined almost 
entirely to his apartments for nearly six weeks. 
20th.—The officers of the 53d regiment had 
done me the honour to elect me an honorary mem- 
ber of their mess; and on the departure of that 
regiment from’ the island, the officers of the: 66th 
had conferred a similar honour upon me. Sir Hud- 
son Lowe employed Sir Thomas Reade to fill the 
mind of Lieutenant Colonel Lascelles (the com- 
manding officer) with the most insidious calumnies 
against me, in-consequence of which Lieutenant 
Colonel Lascelles called upon Lieutenant Rear- 
don of the regiment (a friend of mine), to whom he 
related, that it had been insinuated to him by Sir 
Thomas Reade, that I had become displeasing to 
the sight of the governor, that the officers of the 
regiment ought to expel me from their mess, as a 
person who had submitted to insults from the go: 
vernor, who had turned me out of his house, and 
consequently that I was unfit for their society ; 
insinuating also that my expulsion would be very 
agreeable to Sir Hudson Lowe, who, he observed, 
had said that he should consider any person ‘who 


408 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


was seen to associate with me as his personal 
enemy. Lieutenant Colonel Lascelles concluded» 
with begging of Lieutenant Reardon to persuade 
me to withdraw privately from the mess, as my. 
presence there was obnoxious to the governor; 
protesting however, that personally he had a great 
esteem for me, and that he would be one of the 
first to invite me to dine there as a guest. 
Reflecting, that if I slunk away secretly, oppor- 
tunity would be furnished to my enemies to paint 
me in the blackest colours, and to represent that. 
my conduct had been such as to compel the officers 
of the 66th to turn me out of the mess,,and, being 
conscious of upright intentions, [ immediately 
wrote to Lieutenant Colonel Lascelles, the letter in _ 
the appendix marked No. X VILL. In the evening I 
met him coming to seeme. Hemademany profes- — 
sions of friendship and esteem for me, but said, that 
as the governor was displeased with me, he begged _ 
I would withdraw privately from the mess, that 
Sir Hudson Lowe desired it, and that he was 
afraid of his resentment being exercised upon him- } 
self, and upon the officers of the regiment, if I did 
not comply with his wishes. He concluded by | 
stating, that Sir Thomas Reade had shewn him 
_ part of my correspondence with the governor, — 
and some secret documents which had» never 
been communicated to me, and professing his” 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 409. 


esteem, in which sentiment, he said, he knew he 
was joined by every officer in the:regiment. » I 
replied, that clandestine misrepresentations, from _ 
their being unknown to me, might remain unre- 
futed, that no person was secure from the breath 
of calumny ; that, however, 1 was ready to sub- 
mit the whole of the correspondence between the 
governor and myself to the judgment of the officers 
of the regiment, or to submit to any other scrutiny 
that he or they might desire, and to abide by their 
decision; but that I never, would renounce the 
honour which the officers of the 66th had conferred 
upon me in granting me a seat at their table, unless 
(according to the custom of the army) by a vote of 
the mess, or by an order from the governor.» .) 
. This reply was communicated to Sir Hudson 
Lowe, who, probably having his own reasons 
for not allowing the correspondence to be sub- 
mitted to the judgment of a corps of officers, sent 
an order by Brigadier General Sir George Bing- 
ham (as [ have been informed) to, Lieutenant Co- 
lonel Lascelles, to exclude me from the mess, 
which was communicated to. me by the following 
letter, without assigning any reason for such act.. 


Dear Sir,—As commanding officer of the 66th 
regiment, 1 beg leave to inform you, that I feel it 


410 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


expedient on my part to say, that I cannotany 
longer allow you to be an hororary member of the 
66th’s mess, ? 
I am, dear Sir, is 

Your obedient Servant, — 


C. Saaeaiaen 
_ Barry O'Meara, Esq, ” hia 


Being desirous of obtaining every authentic in- 
formation to establish the fact, that this: new out- 
rage had been effected by the orders of Sir Hud- — 
son Lowe, I waited upon Sir George Bingham, by 
whom I was very politely received, and informed, 
that he had been commanded to carry: inte execu- 
tion the above order. Fi 

25th.—Sent the following letter to he Dead- 
wood camp :— 


To the Officers of the 66th Regiment. 


Gentlemen,—In consequence of the extraor- 
divary mission which I accepted, having been de- 
tached from that branch of the service to which I 
belong, the officers of the 53rd regiment, taking 
into consideration the isolated situation in which I 
was placed, were pleased to do me the honour 
of electing me an honorary member of their mess, 
in. which I continued as long as the regiment re- 
mained in the island. You, gentlemen, shortly 


A VOICE’ FROM ST. HELENA. 4i1t 


after your arrival, condescended to confer upon 
me ‘a similar honor, by which I have benefited 
for nearly a year. By a fatality, which at this 
moment persecutes me, orders emanating from a 
superior power prohibit me from any longer enjoy- 
ing, in your society, the great, the only consolation 
it was possible for me to experience in this dreary 
abode. I cannot however return to my solitude, 
without returning my most sincere thanks to you 
for the many marks of friendship and kindness - 
with which you have honoured me, and to assure 
you, that the esteem, respect, abd'gratitade, which 
I bear to you, individually and collectively, are 
indelibly engraven upon the heart of one, who, 
at his last moments, will exult in saying that he 
was deemed worthy a seat at your table. 
I have the honour to be, 
Gentlemen, 
With the greatest respect, 
Your most obliged Friend, 
(Signed) . Barry E. O'Meara, 


Surgeon, Royal Navy. 
Longwood, 25th June, 1818. 


”? 
- 26th.—The officers of the 66th regiment were 
pleased to return the following reply :—_ 


Deadwood, 26th June, 1818. ° 
‘Dear Sir,—As president last night, I had the 


412 A, VOICE, PROM ST, HELENA: — 


hovour of communicating to the mess the con- 
tents of your letter of the 25th instant, and am di- _ 
rected by the commanding officer and officers com- 
posing it, to say, it is with much regret they hear 
of your departure as an honorary member of the 
mess, and to assure you, they always conceived 
your conduct while with them, to be perfectly 
consistent in every pevnehes with om ofa — 
man, » 

Iam also directed to say, the.n mess feel ‘tiock , 
indebted for the very flattering expressions of es- 
teem contained in your letter. et} 

And have the honour to be, ._ 
ad Dear Sir, ; vasephoad 
Your very humble Servant, « 
(Signed) Cus M‘Carruys) 
’ Lieut, 66th Regiment. 
To Barry O'Meara, Esq., 
Surgeon, R. N. Longwood. 


271k.—Napoleon much affected by a severe 
catarrhal affection, caused by the extreme humi- 
dity of his rooms. Discontinued some of »the 
remedies he was taking, and reported the state of 
his health to the governor. wren 

July 15th.—Several cases of wine sent by the 
Princess Borghese through Lady Holland, arrived 
last month. A few were sent to Lougwood,. and 


A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 413 


the remainder deposited in the government stores 
by order of Sir Hudson Lowe. Napoleon ex- 
pressed on this, as well as ou many other oc¢a- 
sions, sentiments of great affection towards ‘the 
Princess’ Pauline, and declared’ his conviction 
that no sacrifice would be too great for her to 
make for his benefit; adding, that he had no 
doubt she would endeavour to obtain permission 
to come out to St. Helena.* He also spoke of 
the Princess Hortense in very high terms, whom 
he pronounced to be a lady possessed of very su- 
perior talents. Likewise of the Princess Eliza. 
He expressed in a very handsome manner his 
sense of the attention and kindness manifested for 
bim in his misfortunes by Lady Holland, at a 
time when he was abandoned by many, from whose 
gratitude he had reason to expect some little no- 
tice. He observed that the members of the family 
of the great Fox abounded in liberal and generous 
sentiments. 

20th.—Went to town, and tried to procure a 
copy of the observations on Lord Bathurst's 
speech, some of which I was informed had arrived 
on the island. Captain Bunn, ‘of the Mangles, to 
whom I applied for one, professed his surprise 


* The princess subsequently demanded permission to proceed 
to the place of her brother’s oxi, as wis be seen in wan mpPen- 
a No. XIX.. 


414 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


that such an application should be made:from ia 
person belonging to Longwood, for immédiately 
after his arrival, Sir Hudson Lowe and: Sir Tho- 
mas Reade had taken five copies of the pamphlet: 
from him, assigning as a reason for taking somany, 
that they wanted to send two or three to Long- 
wood. He added, that those two. persons had 
been very particular in requiring {him to render an 
account of the books that he had brought out, 
and had possessed themselves of all the modern 
publications on political subjects, making a de-— 
mand for all the copies of the Edinburgh ee 
he might have brought with him. | «0% %) » 

. 25th.—After having paid a profession} vinit: to 
Napoleon, whose malady was by no means altered 
for the better, and while entering my room at 
about half past four o'clock, Captain women 
delivered to me the following letter :* 


Plantation Hed July 25h, 1s18. 4 


Sir,—I am directed by Lieutenant Genchit Sit” 
Hudson Lowe to inform you, that by an. instruc. 
tion received from Earl Bathurst, dated the 16th 
of May, 1818, he has been directed to withdraw 
you from your attendance upon General Bona-— 

| * A letter of a similar import was sent to Count Month aby ; 


Sir Hddson Lowe, containing. instructions from Lord J athurst, 
that Mr. Baxter should be directed to attend in my place. a 


A VOICE FROM 8ST. HELENA. _ 416 


parte, and to interdict you all further interviews 
with the inhabitants at Longwood. © | 
. Rear-admiral Plampin has received instructions 
from the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty 


as to your destination when you quit this island. 


. You are in consequence to leave Longwood 
immediately after receiving this letter, without 
holding any further communication whatsoever 
with the persons residing there. 
I have the honour, &c. | 
Epwarp Wynyarp, 

Lieut.-Col. Military Secretary. 

Barry O'Meara, Esq. Longwood. 


Humanity, the duties of my profession, and the 
actual state of Napoleon's health, alike forbade a 
compliance with this unfeeling command, espe- 
cially as my situation was of a.civil nature,-similar 
to other naval officers in the employ of the excise 
or customs. My resolation was adopted in a 
moment. I determined to disobey it, whatever 
might be the consequences; Napoleon’s. health 
required that I should prescribe for hima regimen, 
and prepare the medicines which it would be ne- 
cessary for him to take in the absence of a sur- 
geon, an absence likely to be of long duration, as 
I was perfectly sure he would accept of none. re- 
commended by Sir Hudson Lowe. [accordingly 


416 A’ VOICE .FROM ST. HELENA. 


went instantly to Napoleon's apartment. Hay- 
ing obtained admission, I communicated. to him 
the order which I had received. ‘ Le crime se 
consomme;'a plus vite,’ said Napoleon, 1 have 
lived too long for them. | Votre ministere est bien 
hardi,” added he; ‘“‘ when the Pope was in Frauce, 
sooner would [ have cut off my right arm than 
have signed an order for the rns of his sur- 
geon.” vlb abaya 

After some more conversation had pt place, 
and I had given him sach medical instructions as 
I could upon the sudden, Napoleon said, ““ When 
you arrive in Europe, you will either go yourself, 
or send to my brother Joseph. You will inform 
him; that I desire he shall give to you the parcel 
containing the private and confidential* letters of 
°* On-my return’ to Europe, I used every exertion to obtain 
the important letters in question. Unfortunately, however, for 


* posterity, my efforts have not been atrended with success, Be- 


fore the Count de Surveillers had left Rochefort for America, ap-, 
prehensive that he might be seized by the allied power A 

“judged it prudent to deposit his precious charge in the hands of 
4 person upon whose integrity he thought he could rely; but who 
it has appeared since, basely betrayed the count, as some months 
ago a person brought the original letters to London for sale, for 
which be demanded 30,000/. This was immediately communi-~ 
cated to some of his majesty’s ministers, and to the foreign am- 
bassadors, and I have been credibly informed, that the Russian 
ambassador paid 10,000/. to redeem those belonging to his mas- 
ter. Amongst other curious passages, which have been repeated 


A. VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 417 


the Emperors Alexander and Francis, the King of 
Prussia, and the other sovereigns of Europe with 
me, which I delivered to his care at Rochefort. 
You will publish them, to couvrir de honte those 
sovereigns, and manifest to the world the abject 
homage which those vassals paid to me, when ask- 
ing favours or supplicating for their thrones. When 
I was strong, and in power, ils briguérent ma pro- 
tection et Vhonneur de mon alliance, and licked the 
dust from under my feet. Now, in my old age, 
they basely oppress, and take my wife and child 
from me. I require of you to do this, and if you 
see any calumnies published of me during the 
time that you have been with me, and that you 
can-say, ‘I have seen with my own eyes, that this 
is not true; contradict them.” 
He soon after dictated to Count Bertrand the let- 
ter, an extract of which is given in another part of 
this work, which he signed, adding a postscript in 
his,own hand-writing, and assuring me, that those 
few words would say more to the empress for me, 
than if he had written pages in quarto ; he then pre- 
sented me with a superb snuff-box, and a statue of 


to me by those who have been favoured with their perusal, the 
following occurs in reference to Hanover. His Majesty of Prus- 
sia stated, that “he always entertained a paternal regard for that 
country ;” and it appeared that the sovereigns, in general, made 
earnest supplications for territory. 

VOL. II. 2E 


418 A VOICE FROM ST. HELENA. 


himself; desired me, on my arrival in Europe, to 
make inquiries about his family, and communicate 
to the members of it, that he did not wish that any 
of them should come to St. Helena, to witness the 
miseries and humiliations under which he laboured. 
“You will express the sentiments which I preserve 
for them,” added he. “ You will bear my affections 
to my good Louise, to my excellent mother, and 
to Pauline. If you see my son, embrace him for 
me; may he never forget that he was born a French 
prince! Testify to Lady Holland the sense T en- 
tertain of her kindness, and the esteem which I 
bear to her. Finally, endeavour to send me au- 
thentic intelligence of the manner in which my son 
is educated.” The emperor then shook me by the 
hand, and embraced me, saying, ‘Adieu, O’ Meara, 
nous ne nous reverrons jamais encore. Soyez 
heureux.” 


_ For the authenticity of the foregoing conversations and de- 
tails, I pledge myself. I think it right also to mention, that 
I am in possession of other conversations, and documents of 
great importance, delivered by Napoleon himself, which it 
might be imprudent to make known at present. Their pub- 
lication will be a matter for future consideration. 


4 - , ‘ Tr | 
: c : ie 
~ 4 

* ~ - —_ ll 
e . 
- 4 >. 
ra “bh bute ee sR. 
’ > 


ae er 2G nu ter srviewt da Pascge; te 
— ne et foes cn! eee 
; r ibe etal<% x hae * Seat: tage ci et muy 
ee ab ~~ eo Reed the 
: ASPs nt Bs! ys -<ete  s 
= PE és: Cs om pet Saige ewer ye ‘ 
we ie « ated a ™ Vien he Be aan 
Rg yee: Lorie 40 me ot 00 a aan oe : 
3 t Fy gis tf Pyare wy a, ote hep hive. > 
iF 1 RE atin Re vor Aihger Sind ae We te rl 
> sbhnogatiiege ram rods : 
i > Vip gaeeiiresen ta yihd aS 
YO. Meyer bey deities eres 
\ . Cadets Herat ihe mlacyaVi" ya 
- es “ol + west at) ba Wenge 
: on AERA res? 


= : an eC" 


ey ited ty 
> 


taal ctor huey) @ pang 27 marae 
SMDIA AS ALDI Jo Quauneuor p tape prsrles uaqodayy writ y oy yon venry ur 


APPENDIX. 


Tue island of St. Helena is situated in latitude 
15° 55’ S., and longitude 5° 46’ W., in the south- 
east trade wind. It is about ten miles and a half 
in length, six and three quarters in breadth, and 
twenty-eight in circumference. The highest part 
of it is Diana’s Peak. It is distant from the 
nearest land (Ascension), about.six hundred miles, 
and twelve hundred from the nearest continent, 
the Cape of Good Hope. Its appearance is the 
most desolate and unpromising that can be ima- 
gined. Its exterior presents an immense mass of 
brown rock, formed of different sorts of the 
rising from the ocean in irregular, rugged, 
perpendicular precipices, of a burnt and yl 
appearance, totally void of vegetation, from 

to fifteen hundred feet high, diversified vi ie 
ous, deep, and narrow ravines, descending to the 
sea, and in some places forming landing-places. 
The island is composed of lava, cooled in different 


> 


422. APPENDIX. 


states of fusion, which, with the total absence of 
any primitive substance, its conical hills, the puz- 
zolana, and other volcanic productions found in it, 
clearly shew that it has undergone the action of 
fire. James Town, the only one in the island, is 
situated in the bottom of a deep wedge-like ravine, 
flanked on each side by barren and tremendous 
overhanging precipices, on whose sides and sum- 
mits, huge loose rocks continually menace the in- 
habitants with destruction. ‘The one on the’ left 
from the sea, is called Rupert’s Hill, and that on the 
right, Ladder ‘Hill. There is a steep and narrow 
road, called the side path, cut along the fornier, 
and a good zig-zag road leads along ‘the latter to 
‘the country-seat of the governor. ‘The first view 
of the town is pleasing, especially to those who 
have been long at sea, and resembles that of a 
scene at the theatre. Opposite to the town is 
James’s Bay, the principal anchorage, where the 
largest ships lie perfectly secure, as the wind 
never varies more than two or three points, and is 
always off the land, and favourable for sailing: 
The town ‘consists of a small street along the 
beach, called the Marino, and the main street, 
commencing from this, and extending in a right 
line ‘to a distance of about three hundred yards, 
where it branches off into two lesser ones. ‘There 
are about one hundred and sixty ‘houses, chiefly 


e- 


APPENDIX. 423 


built of stone, cemented with mud, lime being 
scarce on the island. The principal houses, how- 
ever, are plastered with this article, generally 
white-washed, and roofed with shingles. The 
others are covered with boards and earth. There 
is a church, a botanical garden, an hospital, a 
tavern, and barracks. On the left from the beach 
is. situated the Castle, the town residence of the 
governor. There are some breweries, in which 
beer is brewed of a quality equal to our best table 
beer. , 

The houses are in general neat on the exterior, 
though deficient in many of the conveniences and 
comforts of England. They chiefly consist of 
shops, and boarding or lodging houses. East 
India and English goods are to be had, but ‘the 
latter at an enormous price. Tea is the only com- 
modity to be purchased cheap. We found on our 
arrival that provisions were very scarce; indeed 
the necessaries of life were to be procured with 
great difficulty, and at an exorbitant rate. Such 
was the scarcity of cattle, that killing a bullock 
was an affair of state, and a regulation existed 
prohibiting the inhabitants from slaughtering even 
their own cattle, without first having obtained of- 
ficial permission from the governor and council.* 

* The difficulty of obtaining permission to slaughter cattle in- 
duced some of the inhabitants to have recourse to the expedient 


424 APPENDIX. 


The sheep are very small, weighing from twenty 
to thirty pounds each. Mutton, when to:be had, 
sells from about one shilling and sixpence per 
pound, to two shillings. Fowls are very dear, from 
six to ten shillings each. Ducks, ten shillings; 
geese, fifteen ; and a turkey, from one pound five, 
to two pounds sterling. Veal very difficult to be 
had, and about two shillings per pound; Pork, 
one shilling and three pence. Cabbages, from,ten 
pence to half a crown each. Carrots, a shilling 
per dozen. Potatoes, six to eight shillings: per 
bushel. Eggs per dozen, five to six shillings. 
Peas sometimes to be had, but exorbitantly. dear. 

The principal supply of fish is mackarel, which 
is caught in abundance. There are albicore, 
boneta, bulls’ eyes, cavally, and many other kinds, 
and at times, but very rarely, turtle. There is also 
a sort of cray-fish called long legs, and some nr 
cies of crabs. . 

There area few wild peacocks, some partridge, 
and pheasants, which constitute the only game on — 
the island. These last are royal. game, and are 
solely reserved for the governor, there being a 
heavy penalty liable to be levied upon any person 
_killing one, who does not immediately send. it to 


of precipitating a bullock down the steep sides of the ravines, in 
order to break some of his bones, and thus have a were to kill 
hiro. Py , 


APPENDIX. 425 


the governor. No hares are to be found, and but 
few rabbits. Lodging is excessively dear; five 
shillings a night being the price for residents, and 


‘ten for passengers. Board and lodging is thirty 
‘shillings a day for a grown person, fifteen for a 


child, and ten for a servant; for which there is a 
middling table, and a modicum of wine. Eng- 
lish porter, and all wines, except Cape, are dear. 
The sale of every description of spirits is prohi- 
bited. The goats, which were once. sonumerous, ° 
and so destructive to the young trees, are nearly 
extirpated. The houses are: overrun with, rats 
and mice, which abound in numbers scarcely cre- 


‘dible to those who have not been at St. Helena; 


and the ravages they commit are incalculable. 
There are also swarms of musquitoes of ‘two 
kinds, one called the day, and the other the night 
musquito, whose bites are tormenting; numbers 
of cock-roaches, some scorpions and centipedes, 
and a sort of fly, extremely annoying to the cattle, 
and horses. . Caterpillars and grubs are astonish- 
ingly numerous; and the ravages they commit 


‘upon the young green plants are almost incredible, 
whole plantations of vegetables are said to. have 
‘been sometimes destroyed by the, former ma 
night. . Fuel is extremely scarce and dear ;, coals 
‘are: obliged to. be: sent from England. » The re- 


sources of the island are very few, and 1. may 


426 APPENDIX. 


with truth venture to assert, that on board.of the 
Northumberland alone, there was a greater num- 
ber of artificers and mechanics, than it contains. 
Labour is excessively dear, the common wages of 
a working man being a dollar a day, and those of 
a mechanic from seven to ten shillings. 

James Town is defended by a line of works 
along the beach, to’ the left of which (from ‘the 
sea) is the landing place; and by strong sea-works 
on Ladder-Hill, Rupert’s-Hill, by Munden’s and 
Banks’s batteries. Across the sea-line there is\a 
draw-bridge, and a gate leading into the main 
street, which is closed at night. The approach to 
the town is round a conical hill called Sagar 
Loaf Point, where ships are obliged to send a 
boat to declare their names, country, &c. before 
they are permitted to anchor. | There are besides 
this landing place, five or six others, not however 
easily practicable, excepting to a sailor. 9) 

A stream of water runs through and supplies 
the town and shipping in the bay, which, with 
water-cresses, a few vegetables, and. beer, are the 
principal refreshments to be had by those pas- 
sengers, or others, whose pockets are not well 
supplied. ya eevee 

“The population of the island, (exclusive of the 
niilitary,) is reckoned at about two thousand nine 
hundred souls, of whom about seven hundred 


APPENDIX. 427. 


and eighty are whites, thirteen hundred blacks, 
and the rest Lascars, Chinese, &c. The whites 
are either of British descent, or natives of Great 
Britain. The islanders are, however, very jealous 
of these last, and look upon them as intruders, 
who in return have nicknamed the natives, Yam 
Stocks. The English language is spoken with a 
barbarous pronunciation. ‘The religion of the 
established church prevails. Their customs are a 
mixture of English and tropical. Their chief food 
consists of salt meat, rice, and fish, the first of 
which they obtain in allotted quantities from the 
East India Company’s stores, at a reduced. price; 
fresh meat ‘is a luxury rarely indulged in, ex- 
cept by the upper classes, and is with difficulty 
to be had even ‘by them. ‘Their vegetables are 
generally sold or bartered to the ships and troops. 
A very few years ago, there was not a plough 
upon the island. Latterly, however, owing to’the 
exertions of the late governor, Major General 
Beatson, there are several. The majority of the 
inhabitants are shopkeepers, and live in the town, 
resorting to the country for amusement or health: 
Generally speaking, their minds are but little im- 
proved by education, and the few who have been 
brought up in Europe, on their return, soon ac- 
quire a'sovereign ee for’ 7 eriartacs _ 
neighbours. 


428 APPENDIX. 


- The enormous price of provisions, and other. 
necessaries of life, necessarily prevents much hos- 
pitality from being manifested by the inhabitants. 
With the exception of Mr. Balcombe’s family, in : a 
general the stranger could only hope: to meet, at- 
tention from the proprietor of the boarding-house 
where he lives, some of whom are the principal 
persons on the island, and a few years ago included 
amongst their number the second.member of coun- 
cil. Evening parties are, however, occasio 
given, and the young ladies in the island, some of 
whom are very pretty, and very uneducated, do 
not require a long courtship, or much persuasion, 
to induce them to quit the rock where. theyrhad 
their birth. * 

The interior of the islonahd ‘is composed of alter- 
nate ridges of mountains and ravines, the former 
of which vary in height from six hundred to two 
thousand six -hundred feet. . Diana’s Peak,. the 
highest in the island, is two thousand six hundred 
and ninety-seven feet above the level of the sea. 
The face of the country presents a most striking 
contrast,, being composed of.a great variety of 
mountains. and valleys, of barrenness and, verdure. 
Some parts consisting of immense: stupendous 
and _ sterile rocks, separated by. deep and fright- 
ful dingy coloured. chasms,. several hundred feet 
perpendicular, with huge detached masses. of 


APPENDIX. 429 


naked rock sticking up here and. there, with 
an occasional patch of green; others, of verdant 
pasturages and gardens, ornamented with trees, 
and houses erected in the valley or on the decli- 
vities, which, with a few cattle, some sheep, and 
occasionally a horse grazing along the steep sides 
of the hills, give an agreeable relief to. the eye, 


fatigued with the view of the tremendous  pre- 


cipices, and gaping red ravines in the neighbour- 
hood. | This contrast induces the beholder to con- 
sider the cultivated: portion . picturesque. and -ro- 
mantic. The view from Sandy. Bay Ridge, and 
from the summit of Diana’s Peak, is sublime. 
The. greatest part of the island however, is barren, 
and inexpressibly desolate and repulsive: in, its 
appearance, and. even.a large. portion. of that 
which is susceptible of culture is now over run 
with the blackberry,* which was introduced a few 
years.ago as a curiosity. “The roads are in gene- 
ral bridle paths, twining round the. brows of the 
hills, or creeping up the steep sides, and over the 
sharp ridges of the mountains, and sinking into 
the profundities of the ravines. There were only 
two carriages on the island, which belonged to the 
governor, and were dragged along by bullocks. 
Amongst the prettiest and most desirable spots 
on the island may be mentioned: first, Plan- 
* Rubus Pinnatus. ; . 


— 


430 APPENDIX. 


tation House, next, Colonel Smith’s, Rosemary 
Hall; Mr. Doveton’s at Sandy Bay, the: Briars, 
and Miss Mason’s. All of these have the ad- 
vantage of good gardens, shady walks, verdare, 
and brooks of water, and, comparatively, are plea- 
sant abodes.. Plantation House and grounds, in 
particular would, in any part of Europe, be es- 
teemed a handsome and romantic residence,’ 

That the reader may not be led to:imagine that I 
am inclined to enhance its beauties; I shall extract 
the description given of it in the last work pub- 
lished upon St. Helena. ‘“ Proceeding about three 
quarters of a mile is the entrance to Plantation 
House, the official country establishment. for the 
governor; it is a mansion of considerable ele- 
gance, pleasantly situated, with extensive gardens, 
and cultivated lands, laid out in good style, and 
kept in excellent order; adorned with a’variety of 
fine trees and shrubs, collected from Europe, Asia, 
Africa, and America, brought from the most re- 
mote parts of the world, and from climates the 
most opposite, yet all thriving in sangre 
—all flourishing alike.” 

It is sheltered by the immense sidgupate moun 
tains* forming Diana’s Peak, and Halley’ 8: panies 


* Inthe journeys which I was obliged to take twice 3. 
week to Plantation House, I frequently left Lorigwood amidst 
fog and drizzling rain, and found fine weather at Plantation 


APPENDPX. 431 


intersécting the island, and trending to the’ south, 
from the south-east wind, which, in exposed situa- 
tions, is so destructive to vegetation. , 
When it was understood that’ Longwood had 
been fixed upon for the abode of Napoleon, it'at 
first excited some surprise in the minds of the 
islanders, as the situation was so bleak and ex- 
posed, that it had never been inhabited by any fa- 
mily for more than a few months in the year; but 
this surprise soon subsided, as it was supposed 
that a suitable winter residence would be pro- 
vided for him, when the new governor arrived: ‘” 
Longwood is a large plain, situated on ‘the ‘sum: 
mit of a mountain on the windward side of the 
island, nearly two thousand feet above the’ level’ of 
the sea, and containing a number of gum-wovd 
trees, (conyza gummifera,) which being nearly all 
of the same size and inclination, in consequence of 
the trade-wind continually blowing from the south- 
east, present a monotonous and melancholy ap- 
House estate; and indeed the change generally began after 
having passed the mountains above Hut’s Gate. This may be 
accounted for by the clouds having been attracted by the high 
mountains, called the backbone of the island. Fine weather in 
the town, and very bad in the mountains at one andthe same 
time, was an every day occurrence. It is singular that thunder 
and lightning are unknown in St. Helena. This arises probably 


from the electric fluid being attracted by Diana’s Peak and the 
other conical hills, and conducted into the sea. 


Se 


432 . APPENDIX. 


pearance. The. leaves of the gum-wood are 
small, narrow, and chiefly confined to the ends of 
the branchlets, consequently do not afford that 
thick foliage necessary to intercept the rays of the 
sun. There is no water, except what is brought 
from the distance of nearly three miles.. No con- 
tinuous shade. Exposed to a south-east wind 
constantly charged with humidity, its elevated si- 
tuation causes it to be enveloped in fog, or drench- 
ed with rain for the greatest part of the year. 
The soil is a tenacious argillaceous clay, which 
in wet. weather collects and adheres to the shoes 
of the pedestrian, forming so ponderous a mass 
as materially to impede his progress. For a 
month or six weeks during the year there is fine 
weather, for two or three a powerful yertical sun 
prevails, and for seven or eight, the weather is wet 


and most disagreeable. Though Longwood is ge- 


nerally covered with fog and wet, the sky occa- 
sionally clears up, and the rays of the suu beam 
forth in transitory splendour. Soon after, the 
hemisphere becomes again obscured, thick fogs 


cover the plain, and rain, impetuously forced along — 


by the eternal south-east. trade. wind, drenches 
whoever has been induced to hazard a walk by 
the delusive appearance of sun-shine. These 
changes of temperature often occur several times 
in the course of the day, and are one cause of the 


APPENDIX. 433 


unhealthiness of St. Helena. In consequence of 
the tenacious nature of the clay, the rain pene- 
trates very little into the surface, and runs off to 
the ravines in the neighbourhood. The violence 
of the wind is destructive to vegetation, and, 
together with the ravages of the grub, and the 
want of water, for two or three months, renders 
abortive almost every attempt towards cultivating 
the garden. The plant which thrives best at 
Longwood is the spurge, a most offensive weed. 
That some readers may not be led to suppose 
that I have exaggerated any of the inconveniences 
of Longwood, I shall take the liberty of making 
two extracts from the History of St. Helena, 
written by Mr. Brooke, an inhabitant of the island 
for about forty years; senior member of council, 
and now acting governor, possessing a large pro- 
perty in the island, and much more inclined to 
enhance its merits, than to point out its defects. 
‘«« But it is only in the most sheltered spots of the 
island that the oak attains perfection; in exposed 
situations, the trade wind, blowing continually in 
the same direction, produces very baneful effects 
upon this, as upon most other trees not indige- 
nous to the soil.”"—page 288. And again, page 
255. ‘“ Governor Dunbar was unwearied in his 
exertions to watch over the resources and fertility . 
of the island. Experiments in the cultivation of 
VOL. II. 2F 


A34 APPENDIX. 


oats, barley, and wheat at Longwood, gave risé to 
such hopes of success, that a barn was: erected 
there; but on a failure of subsequent crops, it 
was converted into a residence for the lieutenant 
governor. This disappointment is supposed to 
have arisen either from drought, or some: pecu- 
liarity of the climate or soil; and not, as: has some- 
times been asserted, from the depredations of rats.” 
.. A-stronger proof that Longwood is the worst 
and the most unpleasant part of the island,* can- 
not be afforded, than by the fact of its not having 
been inhabited before Napoleon came to the island, 
except by the lieutenant governor as a country 
residence for three or four months annually, and 
by the occasional presence of ‘the company’s far- 
mers in a small hovel. : None of the inhabitants 
of the island ever made it a permanent abode, well 
knowing its inconveniences.: ‘This incontrovert- 
ible fact “ speaks volumes.” #0) > 

. Upon the climate of St. ‘Helena, I hope the fol- 


* Tn the sketch which T have given of the clstoche’of St*HE: 

lena, I have omitted to mention one which perhaps may not 

be considered favourable to morality. Should pregnancy take 

place in the instance of any unmarried female of a, neepceiele 

family, the seducer, if in either the. civil or military emplo 

the Hon. the East India ‘Company (who constitute about Re 

fifths of the inhabitants of respectability), is compelled to marry 
w her under pain of losing his situation. Iam fot ‘able to state’ 

whether this be a custom or a bye-law ofthe company, © |) © 


a ee eee 


APPENDIX. 435 


lowing remarks, founded upon actual observa- 
tion and experience, will not be deemed super- 
fluous on the present occasion; and to render 
them more intelligible to the unprofessional reader, 
I beg leave to: offer a few preliminary observa- 
tions. ; 
To sudden diurnal wiciteitudles of temperature; 
especially when accompanied with rain or hu- 
midity, may be ascribed the greatest part of the 
diseases which affect the human constitution. 
Rapid transitions from heat to cold render the 
extreme vessels on the surface of the body torpid, 
impelling at the same time a quantity of blood 
upon some: of the internal organs. Sudden. at- 
mospherical changes injure by the consent of parts 
between the exterior and the interior, producing, 
in some climates, such as that of England, affec- 
tions of the lungs in tropical ones, where the bi- 
liary system is’so. liable to derangement, affections 
of the liver. \The great sympathy existing be- 
tween the skin, liver, and intestines, has never been 
more strongly exemplified than by: the number 
of violent and ‘fatal. affections of the two. latter 
organs, which have occurred, and are daily occur- 
ring, in, St. Helena, where the atmospherical vi- 
cissitudes are so frequent and so conapid and where 
such humidity prevails... | 

The interior of St. Helena, as has tee slteady 

2Fr2 


436 APPENDIX. 


mentioned, is chiefly formed of successions of high, 
steep, and unequal ridges of hills, the most elevated 
of which are two thousand six hundred feet above 
the level of the ocean, divided by deep, narrow, 
and long ravines, some of which at the bottom are 
not more than a few feet above the level of the sea. 
Whoever therefore would ride a few miles, must 
calculate on passing through different climates 
every half hour; one moment becalmed inthe bot- 
tom of the ravines, he experiences the heat of the 
tropics, in a latitude of 15° 55’ south; a moment 
afterwards, passing the aperture of some chasm, 
perspiring from every pore, the temporary lull is 
succeeded by a sudden and bleak blast from the 
mountains, the effects of which; combined with 
the humidity accompanying it, are to produce a 
rapid evaporation and abstraction of animal heat 
from the surface of the body, driving thereby the 
blood to the interior. ‘ Emerging from the valley, 
covered with perspiration, a similar cutting blast, 
producing the same effects, strikes you on wen 
ing the summit of the mountains. = > 
Reckoning one degree of reduced compli 
for every two hundred feet of elevation, there will 
be found a difference of ten degrees of temperature 
between Longwood, which is about two thousand 
' feet above the level of the sea, and the town} to 
which may be added two or three degrees more, 


APPENDIX. 437 


arising from the sharp south-east wind, loaded with 
humidity, generally prevailing in the high regions, 
producing a difference of evaporation between the 
mountains and the valleys, which, combined with 
the increase of elevation, reduces the temperature 
of Longwood twelve or thirteen degrees. Add to 
the foregoing, the frequent vicissitudes of. tem- 
perature; at one moment assailed by a shower of 
rain and enveloped in fog, to the force of which 
the wind communicates such an impetus, as to 
cause it to penetrate the best great coat in a few 
minutes: shortly afterwards, the sky brightening, 
the weather clearing up, and the scorching rays 
of a tropical sun beaming forth. This continues 
for a short time, and is suddenly followed by a 
repetition of fog, rain, and mist.* This alternate 
drenching and scorching is, of itself, sufficient (as 
every medical man will allow) to produce the 
most violent inflammatory affections of the viscera, 
particularly in those of the abdomen. 
- Jt would thus appear that St. Helena, in addition 
to the general causes of insalubrity to Europeans, 
which are inseparable from a tropical climate, has 
* « Hence it appears, that St. Helena, during these last three 
years, had its full share of rain, and in much greater quantity 
than usually falls in London, which by an average of eleven years 
is no more than 21.25 inches, whereas the average of four years 
at St. Helena was 33.38 inches.” —Major General Beatson’s Intro- 
ductory Chapter, relative to the Island of St. Helena, page xxxvi. 


438 APPENDIX. 


also local and peculiar causes for -beingparticu- 
larly unhealthy, as the great mortality, to be here- 
after described, amply proves. The most trifling 
cold or irregularity is frequently suceeeded by a 
violent attack of dysentery, inflammation of the 
bowels or fever proving fatal in-a fewodays, if. the 
most active and efficacious practice isnotinstantly 
adopted. A surfeit ina) child, »which:in Europe 
would require nothing more tham ia: little. warm 
water to produce evacuation, there becomes) a 
formidable disease, requiring, the most) powerfal 
. remedies; and if neglected only for a few hours, 
terminates fatally. To Europeans \the:climate is 
peculiarly unfriendly ; and indeed, it isunfavout= 
able to longevity in all subjects, even tothe; na- 
tives; as, on examination of the parish registers; 
it will be seen, that very few. persons: pass their 
forty-fifth year.* The most prevalént complaints 
are, dysenteries, inflammations of the bowels, liver 
affections, and fevers, all of them generally of a 
violent form. sae eapacialys one liver af- 
at uw > | 2 SebY OF 
* « The only endemic disorders to, which the natives are.sub- 
ject, are of the catarrhal kind; these, as they belong to the in~ 
flammatory class, may in some measure account, notwithstanding 
their general robust health, for the few instances among the island- 
- ers of ‘longevity, according to the information’ of a ane 
friend, who has assisted this account with his opinion and ju 
ment.” —Vide Brookes’s History ¥ &. Helena, ‘Page 34, 


APPENDIX. 439 


fections, (which are indeed frequently combined,) 
appear with the most concentrated and fatal symp- 
toms, bafling the prompt exhibition of the most 
active and powerful remedies, and in spite of the 
acknowledged skill and experience of several able 
practitioners, these terminate fatally, in a propor- 
tion rarely witnessed in any British colony. Daur- 
ing the first twelve or thirteen months after its arri- 
val at St. Helena, the second battalion of the 66th 
regiment lost, by these diseases, FIFTY-sIxX men, 
out of a strength of six hundred and thirty, being 
one in eleven; and still more recently, the Con- 
queror, which ship arrived in July, 1817, has lost, 
in eighteen months, almost entirely by the same 
complaints, ONE HUNDRED AND TEN MEN, out of 
a complement of six hundred, besides one HUN- 
DRED AND SEVEN INVALIDED, and sent to Eng- 
land, being more than a third of her complement: 
The number of deaths in the two battalions of 
the 66th regiment, I cannot positively state, but 
believe it to have exceeded. one hundred and 
twenty men. A reference to the official returns 
will, however, sufficiently elucidate this point. In 
the West Indies, the proportion of deaths to the 
strength was, in the year 1814, as one to twenty, 
five; and of deaths to diseases, as, one to. thirty- 
six, and two thirds. Yet how trifling does the 
mortality there appear, when compared with that 


440 APPENDIX. 


of St. Helena. At the latter place it was so great, 
that the governor and admiral, apprehensive. of the 
effects which might be produced by a longer re- 
sidence in the island, and, doubtless, desirous of 
alleviating their miseries as far as they could, sent 
upwards of seventy of the sick in one month to 
England and the Cape. Above half of those sent 
to the last named place, (who were the worst 
cases,) have been long ere now laid in their “ ae 
graves.” 

The Conqueror was also ordered to cruize 40 
windward of the island for six weeks, without; 
however, much benefit having accrued from. the 
measure, It is worthy of observation, that the Ra- 
coon’s ship’s company had suffered severely from 
dysentery and hepatitis, while stationed at St. He- 
lena; but when sent to the Cape, they recovered, 
and became very healthy; which state of health 
continued as long as the vessel remained there; 
but, on her return to St. Helena, dysentery and 


hepatitis again ponents and a Mesen sick. list 
followed.* 


? 


* Another strong instance of the insalubrity of the climate is is 
to be found in the instance of the female convict-ship Friendship, 
which vessel arrived at St. Helena from England in the month 
of November, 1817. She had not remained more than eight or 
ten days to water, before dysentery made its appearance ; and in 
the course of a few weeks, above one hundred cases occurred. 


APPENDIX. 441 


The loss of life among the crews of the follow- - 
ing small ships, whilst they were on the St. 
Helena station, is also very great, viz. twenty-four 
in the Mosquito, complement one hundred men ; 
sixteen in the Racoon, one hundred men; eleven 
in the Leveret, seventy-five men; fifteen in the 
Griffon, eighty-five men; besides numbers inva- 
lided, and sent to England on account of the 
same complaints. It is well known to naval - 
officers, that, unless in very sickly stations, small 
vessels are generally very healthy, frequently not 
losing a man in a year. I was myself surgeon 
of a sloop of war in the West Indies, in which 
ship not a single death occurred during twelve 
months, though exposed for a considerable portion 
of that time, to the influence oe the noxious clisiaive 
of Surinam. 

The undeserved reputation for vdlctstity which 
St. Helena has hitherto enjoyed, has probably 
arisen from its being so little known, except to 
seamen and others, who, arriving after long 
voyages, were enchanted, like Danptir’s sailors, 
Previous to her arrival at St. Helena, no one instance of the com- 
plaint had occurred. 

From the 20th Nov. 1815, to the 20th of the same sail, 
1816, there were admitted into the regimental-hospital four hun- 
dred and thirty-eight patients, one hundred and seventy-nine of 


whom were afflicted with bowel complaints, The regiment was 
between five and six hundred strong. 


442 APPENDIX. 


to find themselves on shore any where; and who, 
during the few days they remained, found them- 
selves relieved from scorbutic complaints by the 
use of the water-cresses with which it abounds, 
and from its population being small, and chiefly 
composed of natives, who, of course, do not suffer 
so much as, strangers from the effects of the cli- 
* mate in which they were born. . Until the arrival of 
the.state prisoner, very few Europeans resided for 
a continuance upon. the island ;'and I can assert, 
from, personal observation, that the greatest num- 
ber of those now there, even of the officers, haye 
suffered attacks more or less severe, either of dy- 
sentery or hepatitis, in which number, I regret to 
say, I was myself included ; and that the opinion 
of the medical officers, who had the best opportu- 
nity of forming a correct opinion, from actual ex- 
perience on the island, is, that the climate is ex- 
tremely unhealthy; and, especially, that hepatitis 
and dysentery prevail to an extent, and with a 
severity, seldom to be paralleled. In. order to 
convince the public, that 1.am neither singular 
in my opinions, nor inclined to exaggerate, I beg 
leave to refer the reader to a medical inaugural 
Dissertation* upon Dysentery and Hepatitis in St. 

* «Est nullus morbus perniciosior dysenteria exercitibus in 


omnibus partibus orbis terrarum degentibus; sed in tropicis re- 
gionibus grassatur vi maxima inter milites et alios ex Europa: et 


APPENDIX. 443 


Helena, composed by the candidate for the degree 
of doctor in medicine in Trinity College, Dublin. 
The essay in question was written by Dr. Leigh, 
formerly surgeon to the second battalion of the 
66th regiment, stationed at St. Helena. 


videtur intimus nexus inter hanc et hepatitidem existere, nam 
spe conjunguntur, et raro accidit unum sine altero.”—Disser- 
tatio Medica, p. 15. ' 

In an official letter from Dr. Baildon, dated Nov. 24, 1808, he 
expresses himself as follows : ‘It will hardly be credited, that 
soldiers and others are frequently brought to the hospital as far 
advanced in real scurvy as if they had just landed after a long 
voyage, and many who are brought for other complaints are con- 
siderably tainted with this disease.” “On my arrival, I was 
much surprised with the great number of patients attacked with 
liver complaints.” 

Both of those diseases Dr. Baildon attributes to the “ exces- 
sive use of spirituous liquors.” Now, as in 1810, the govern- 
ment of St. Helena adopted measures to prevent any spirits 
from being landed, which had completely the desired effect, and 
as all houses for retailing spirits were abolished on the 15th of 
May, 1809, and wholesome beer substituted in lieu ; it is clear, 
that the prevalence of liver complaints in St. Helena since that 
period, ‘must be ascribed to other causes than to the excéssive Use 

of spirituous liquors. 


444 APPENDIX. 


No. I. RL ae Fc 
Letter from the Author to Admiral Lord Keith. 
His Majesty’s ship Bellerophon, 
' Torbay, 7th August, 1815. _ 

My Lorv,—Application having been made to 
me yesterday by Count Bertrand, to accompany 
General Napoleon Bonaparte to St. Helena, in 
quality of surgeon (as the surgeon, who embarked 
with him in France, is unwilling to proceed fur- 
ther); I beg to inform your lordship, that I am 
willing to accept that situation (provided it meets 
with your lordship’s approbation), and also on the 
following conditions, viz. that it should be per- 
mitted me to resign the above situation, should I 
find it not consonant to my wishes, on giving due 
notice of my intention thereof. That such time as 
I shall serve in that situation, shall be allowed to 
count as so much time served on full pay in his 
majesty’s navy, or that I shall be indemnified in 
some way for such loss of time as surgeon on full 
pay, as it may occasion to me. That I am not to 
be considered in any wise depending upon, or to 
be subservient to, or paid by the aforesaid Napo- 
leon Bonaparte; but as a British officer employed _ 
by the British government ; and lastly, that I may 
be informed, as soon as circumstances will admit, 


APPENDIX. 445 


of what salary J am to have, and in what manner 
and from whom I am to receive it. 
I have the honour to remain, 
My Lord, 
With the greatest respect, 
Your Lordship’s most 
Obedient humble Servant, 
Barry E. O'Meara, 
Surgeon H. M. S, Bellerophon. 
To the Right Honourable Viscount Keith, . 
Adiniral of the Red, G. C. B. 
Commander-in- Chief. 


No. IT. 


Translation of the Communication made by Sir 
Hudson Lowe to the persons composing the suite 
of the Emperor Napoleon. 

Downing Street, 10th January, 1816. 

I nave at present to let you know, that it is the 
pleasure of his Royal Highness the Prince Regent, 
that on your arrival at St. Helena, you should 
communicate to all the. persons forming the suite 
of Napoleon Bonaparte, including the domestics, 
that they are at liberty to quit the island imme- 
diately to return to Europe; adding, that none 


446 APPENDIX. 


will be permitted to remain at St. Helena, unless 
those who shall givea written declaration, which 
shall be deposited in‘ your hands, that it is their 
desire to remain in the island, and to participate 
in the restrictions which it is necessary to impose 
upon Napoleon Bonaparte personally. 


een Batuurst. 


Those amongst sheen who shall determine to re- 
turn to Europe, must be sent by the first favour- 
able occasion to the Cape of Good Hope; the go- 
vernor of that colony will be charged’to provide 
those persons with the means of passage to Europe. 

(Signed) Barsurst. | 


No.1 Uw cee 


Translation of the paper signed by ‘the French in 
Napoleon's suite. 


We the undersigned, décititap to remain in the 
service of the Emperor Napoleon, consent, Aow- 
ever frightful the abode in St. Helena may be, to 
remain there, submitting ourselves to the! restric 
tions, however unjust and arbitrary, which’ are 
imposed upon his majesty, and the porpeneentas 
service, of a labals 

(Here followed the cignataniel 


APPENDIX. 447 


“No. IV. 


Letter from the Garou, Sir Hivileun Dodie" to 
Count Montholon. 


Plantation House, August 17th, 1816,, 


Siz,—In pursuance of the conversations I hed 
already had with you on the subject of the ex- 
penses of the establishment at Longwood, I do 
myself the honour to acquaint you, that having 
used all efforts to effect a reduction in them with- 
out diminishing in any very sensible manner from 
the convenience or comforts of General Bonaparte, 
or any of the families or individuals that form his 
suite, (in which operation I am happy to acknow- 
ledge the spirit of concert with which you have 
assisted,) 1 am now enabled to transmit to'you, ‘for 
General Bonaparte’s information, two statements, 
furnishing sufficiently precise data whereon to 
found a calculation of the probable annual ex- 
pense, should matters continue on the same foot- 
ing as at present established. 

The statement No. I. has been furnished me by 
Mr. Ibbetson, head of the commissariat depart: 
ment in this island ; the latter has been framed by 
my military secretary. 

The instructions I have received from the Brit 


448 APPENDIX. 


ish government, direct me to limit the expenditure 

of General Bonaparte’s establishment to 8,000/. per 
annum ; they give me liberty at the same time to 
admit of any further expense being incurred, which 
he may require as to table and so forth, beyond 
what this sum would cover, provided he furnishes 
the funds whereby the surplus charges may be de- 
Srayed. 

I am now therefore under the necessity of re- 
questing you would make known to him the im- 
possibility I am under of bringing the expenses of 
his household on its present establishment in point 
of numbers, within the limits prescribed, unless 
I make such a reduction under several heads as 
might naturally abridge from the conveniences 
which the persons around him now enjoy; and 
having been already very frankly informed by him 
as well as by yourself, that he has at his disposal 
in various parts of Europe, means whereby the 
extra or even the whole expense may be de- 
frayed,* I beg leave to request being informed, 
previous to attempting any further considerable 


* Explanatory Note.—It was answered by the postscript of the 
letter of the 23rd August, to this part of Sir Hudson Lowe’s let- 
ter; and he had been told, that if there were a free correspond- 
ence, and if the wants here experienced were known in Europe, 
there was no doubt that millions would be offered from the dif- 
ferent countries of Eufope. 


APPENDIX. 449 


reduction, and which might prove inconvenient to 
him or the persons of his suite, if he is content 
such an attempt should be made, or if he is will- 
ing to place at my command sufficient funds to 
meet the extra charges which must otherwise be 
unavoidably incurred. 
I have the honour to be, Sir, 
Your most obedient humble Servant, 
(Signed) H. Lowe, Lieut. General. 


VOL. IT. 26 


APPENDIX. 


450 


O=0F O46. ae eee“ eayapeyg ‘oudedueyy ‘oavsp 81D soul, 
ender a"*** agnor] 94) 10g SaLsessodou 19110 PUT 6940}5 aq! 
9 ut 6 oe bbc cee ce SR rederereesesscoeccenees® saimed Tt pue " 
» ‘gjasaqsujd ¢ ‘suoseul 6 ‘giokmes p ‘saaquodivs 9 ‘19081940 % 
/ JO “OHG 
O28. 28, ero ea op onutp sratpjos & Jo Aeq ; 
Bg ge k°?* canoeaue repos bes ose emepo ns o1itp jo suot *poomBuory 0) 1040A1ng 
a4 20 0 oT 60T ****t"** ames amp Jo oSswy> ut s19919/UUHE F JO am Xq poysraany soyddas om 
et 6a? ae Ayvep soynut 8 Joy advs04 Burfaauod yiodsues3 oyqud JO ‘ond 
° 0 eu9 ereoeccessesesergrese® quowystqeisa s,aseduuog yes man) oo paqoee spuvares ysr[suq JO sasuadxyy 
OD ae ES oe” os aqnus omy jo oSavgo ur sarpjos yo Seq “ 
6 6 64 & OF OF sums oy) Farf49au0d onal aUO 405 aBusoy todas, juowyiedag yenessrumoy Aq *poyddng 
Ee O5AS wise ee eee ee Ajep sasioy St 105 afuog 
ps pit F 
way 22d qonomy ("OL 


el 


‘YNUIAH “LS AO GNV'ISI AHL NO GLINS NV TLUVAVNO@ 
WWUANIS JO LNAODDV NO TUNLIGNAdXa TVANNV aIavadOUud AHL ONIAMAHS 


‘LNAWAILVLS 


451 


APPENDIX. 


: r - 4 7 
juasord om 0} epaeromara & sv PEE sjuouNpoWs 911) Suypryour ‘ocrE1F 01. suaquiuu punos Uy apeut $1 pue ‘jivjep 
yur ssa} $1979 4 JEq) “oUasAytP oSars oy Treas for) OF AUTLUTS yoodsaa -A1dAa ut st “G ‘ON Quomeleig OGL’ “poomsuoy w 
paend uo si29yzQ ysyFug ous Jo 21qe9 OT 405 GLOF Jo osuadxe paxy & pastadaioo st OoLTTF JO mins amy ay —"awrgT PON 


£ 


| 
o 
a 
eaten ® Lod: oktwinnst waite a 
} ‘NOSJaaal “a (poutg). oe 
L & 3sc1 Gt . 
. 5 pagap 96 in on pa 
EE Se eee er eeice de sald ceed dye dcoey ere rN poppe ° FO nm peta n poqorr 
ee ; 48 <aeoHO aooding 03 Aavjeg “posodord 
ars ee enc ienga an fh ele 
-. aaoge s¥ tuns seated oor 
Gace beeen ssi 0s 04 259g 0.59 dye corte obo o8 eae paysiuany*d 
. Poppe 24 OL yo! tone» ‘0 “yua9 aad 
> 3 Li ‘i080. a) a 
i esos eI spasodoag 


452 APPENDIX. 


r: ' C-) WE 35 STs ¥ 
No. V. Es ate va 


‘Supplies allowed by Government to the ‘Glablak- 
ment at Longwood, consisting of forty-five per- 
sons, from October, 1816, to June, 1817. 


DAILY. 


Meat, Beef and Mutton included, be) » 
Fowls (No.) «) «. 4). 

Bread (Ibs.) . 4). . « 

Batter (Ibs.) 

Lard (Ibs.) . 3 29s: Coc 
Salad Oil.(pints) ... --- 8 en es 
Sugarcandy (lbs.) . 3 Sona 
Coffee (iba. «2 =f. -. 50-5 ae 
Tea, Green (\bs.) ; 
Tea, Black (Ibs.) 
Candles, Wax (Ibs.). . . . . Sa 5s 
Eggs(No.). . . - a ema 


igs, es bee 2 


i oe to 


q 
» Eat ad 


Common Sugar (Ibs.) . t see 
Cheese (Ibs.) . . - -- 45 oO ia 
Vinegar (quarts). . 2. ss fe “gar 
Flour (ibs.). .g 0). .) ee 
Salt Meat (Ibs.)" 2... 6 se Tee 
Fire Wood (cwt.) 5 
Porter, or Ale (bottles) ie 


APPENDIX. 453 


Vegetables (in value) . . . 6. bie oe Th 
Fruit Gi, value)) o's do-it dd baw seliek wl Oer 
Confectionary (in value) . .... . . 8% 


‘PER FORTNIGHT. 


Ducks (No.) 8 
Turkeys (No.)~ . 2 
Geese (No.) . . 2 
Loaf Sugar (loaves) 2 
Fine Rice (bag): CHD Rae tie 
Hams (not to exceed: 14 Ibs. eitthy° ro ae 
Coals (Gushels)* .° OSS ot 2 ss oe 45 
Fish (in value) ae sae ae 
Milk (in value)... . 98s. 
Fresh Butter, Salt, Mustard, Pups, Capers, 43 
Lamp Oil, Peas, (not to exceed in value) . 


. WINE DAILY. 


Champaign, or Vin de Grave (ote) A 1 
Madeira (bottles)... ie es 
Constantia (bottles). . . 1... . . od 
Claret* (bottles) . Pie 6 


NN. B. After the departure of the Count de Las 


* Cape and Teneriffe wine for the servants, at the rate of a 
bottle a day, was also given by government, not included in the 
Schedule ; being one pint more than the quantity daily allowed 
to the soldiers and sailors stationed at St. Helena, 


454 APPENDIX. 


Cases and Piontkowski, the meat was reduted to 
72\Ibs. — and the number of fowls to —_ int 
Se : EA Ae ria we 
DAILY EXTRA EXPENDITURE, PAID BY THE 
FRENCH. 


One dozen of Eggs" 
Eight pounds of Butter, at 3s. me pound 1 
Two pounds of Wax Candles, at 3s. 6d. | 
Three Fowls, at 6s. each oe uli 
Four pounds of RnmeeeaPRT io wa 
Two pounds of Loaf Sugar — 
One pound of Cheese . . . «4. 
Vegetables _ . . > tones 
Two pounds | of Salt. Pork... yMeitaeessoded 
One pound, of |] Lard. 9; i80)2ho 
One bottle of Oil ; 
One pound of Rice, and one oh Flour 
tie pounds of common Sugar . . 
ne bottle of Vinegar. ae 
Paper for Kitchen, and Packihread . 
Four loaves of Bread, at Is. 6d. Real 


PE eceoe 
a . 
Se aos wes» 


ecoacoscoaeoososoooo® 


coos 
“8 
° 


2) 
7 


» 


- 7 
- at 


= 


Be e é 
a 
2 


<e: 
teste 


he 


WEEKLY EXTRA, DIT TO. 


1 “he . : 
Two Turkeys. . fers on to0° = fo ia 


One Ham oyieti2e i invioianss wollte tai; 4 walle 0.0) 


APPENDIX. 455 


One Roasting Pig)... 28. OO 
One bottle of Pickles .. . «9.5. 50120 
Three bottles of Olives . . . . 2. 2.1 4,0 


£8 7 0 
~The above expenditure does not contain the 
quantity of meat bought by the French, amount- 


ing to from three to five sheep weekly, and two 
calves monthly. 


No, VIL. 


Restrictions made by Sir Hudson Leia silerodi 
municated at Longwood, on the 9th of October; 
1816; but which he had already put in ewvecu- 
tion by different orders, ever since the month of 
August preceding, and which he never communi- 

cated to the English officers of the service, 
ashamed, no doubt, of their contents. 


Heads of some proposed Alterations in the Regu- 
lations hitherto established for the persons under 
charge at Longwood. 


_ I. Lonewoon, with the road along the ridge, by 


‘Mute Gate, to the signal-gun near the en 


will be established as the limits. ry 


456 APPENDIX. 


, IL; Sentries will designate the external ‘bouns 
dary, as well as that beyond which no person can 
approach Longwood House and yaad 5 ame 
the governor's permission. 

' IEL. The road to the left of Hut'’s Gate, and re- 
turning by Woody-ridge to Longwood, never hav- 
ing been frequented by General Bonaparte, since 
the governor's arrival, the posts which observed it 
will for the greater part be withdrawn. Should 
he however wish at any time to ride in that diree- 
tion, by giving the orderly officer timely notice of 
it, he will meet with no impediment. 

IV. If he is desirous to extend his ride in ani 
other direction, an officer of the governor's: per- 
sonal staff will always (on being informed in suf 
ficient time,) be prepared. to, attend him; and, 
should time not admit, the wie officer at spt 
wood. 

The officer, re attends him, will be siaeaiile 
not to approach towards him, unless so requested, 
nor to interfere in any respect with him during” 
his ride, except so far as duty may require, on” 
observing any departure from the established 
rules, when he will ride up and Ben sisi tes 
form him of it. a Le 

V. The regulations adaeesiys in. force, for pre-- 
venting communication with any persons without | 
the governor's permission, will 


be required tobe ~ 


APPENDIX. 457 


strictly adhered to: it. is requested! therefore, 
General Bonaparte will abstain from entering any 
houses, or engaging in conversation with the per- 
sons he may meet, (except so far as the ordinary 
salutations of politeness, with which every one will 
be instructed to treat him, may.appear to require,) 
unless in the presence of a British officer. , 

VI. Persons, who, with General Bonaparte’s 
acquiescence may at any time receive passes from 
the governor to visit him, cannot use such passes 
to communicate with the other. persons of his 
family, unless .it,is so specifically papnessed in 
them. . 

VII. At sun-set, the salen map eh ah 
Longwood House, will be regarded as the limits: 
Sentries will be placed round it at that hour, but 


will be posted in such a manner as.not to incom; 


mode General Bonaparte with their personal ob- 
servation of him, should he continue his walks’ in 
the garden after that time. They will be drawn 
round the house, as heretofore, during the night, 
and the limits will remain closed until. the sentries 
are withdrawn entirely from the house and garden 
in the morning. 

VIII. All letters for Longwood will be put up 
by the governor under a sealed envelope, and the 
packet sent to the orderly officer, to be delivered 


sealed to any officer in attendance upon General 


458 APPENDIX. 


Bonaparte, who will thus be assured the contents 
will have been made known to no other person 
than the governor. 
In the same manner, all letters from persous at 
Longwood must be delivered to the orderly offi- 
cer, put up under an outer envelope sealed, to the 
address of the governor, which will insure that no 
other person than himself will be acquainted with 
their contents. Sk tr 
- IX. No letters are to be received or sent, nor 
written communication of any kind pass or be 
made known, except in the above manner: nor 
¢an any correspondence be permitted within the 
island, except such communications as may be 
indispensable to make to the purveyor; the notes 
containing which must be delivered open, to the 
orderly officer, who will be charged to “pr eee 
them.* 
The above alterations will take get from the 
10th instant. i 
(Signed) oouK. Linton es 
St. Helena, EE OMe BS anil 
9th Oct. 1816. i. 2 ape 


* Nothing can surpass the elegance of this ¢ » igen ys 
cepting its grammatical correctness! or, indeed, the Paik of 
the regulations themselves ! ton 

" are : . ah otf 


aa 


ee 


APPENDIX. 459 


No. VII. 
Translation of the Proposal made by the ‘Emperor, 
to assume the incognito. 


*, 


-Troccurs to me, that i in the conversation which 
has taken place between General Lowe and seve- 
ral of those gentlemen, things have been stated re- 
lative to: my position, which are not daaitoanstnge 
to my ideas. ° 

I abdicated into the hands of the scgilehibtallaiti 
of the nation, and for the profit of my son. I went 
with confidence to England, with intentions to 
live there, or in America, in the most profound re- 
treat; and under the name of a colonel, killed at 
my side, resolved to remain-a stranger to every po- 
litical occurrence, of whatever nature it might be. 
_. Arrived on board of the Northumberland, I was 
informed that I was a prisoner of war ; that I was 
to be transported beyond the line; and that I was 
named General Bonaparte. “In opposition to that- 
of General Bonaparte, which it was wished to 
impose upon me, I was obliged to bear, ostensibly, 
my title of emperor. 

Seven or eight months ago, Count Montholon 
proposed to remedy those little difficulties which 
were produced every moment by adopting an or- 


460 APPENDIX. 


dinary name. The admiral thought it to be his 
duty to write on the subject to London; there the 
matter at present rests. 

A name is now given to me, which has the ad- 
vantage of not prejudging the past, but which is 
not in the forms of society. I am always dis- 
posed to take a name which enters into ordinary 
usage, and I reiterate, that when it shall be judged 
proper to discontinue this cruel abode, I am will- 
ing to remain a stranger to politics, whatever event 
may occur in the world. This is my opinion; 
whatever else may have been said on this subject 
is incorrect. — pMureatide, 


. - 
A hee Se 


No. VIII... 


Translation of the Remarks made by Napoleon 
on the slip of Eas ef containing the Governor's 


reply. > 
1. Tue conduct which has been pursued ie 


for six months, cannot be justified by. ‘some 
detached phrases of a correspondence with 1 the 
ininister. A long and voluminous ministerial cor- 
respondence, is an arsenal provided with arms of 
every description. : 


2. The last regulations would be conde as 


APPENDIX. 461 


injurious and oppressive at Botany Bay; what- 
ever may be said upon it, they must be contrary 
to the will of the English government, which ap- 
proved the regulations which were in force until 
the month of August last. 

3. All the observations which Counts Bertrand 
and Montholon have made, have been useless. A 
free discussion has been interdicted by menaces: 


No. IX. 
Letter from Count Bertrand to Sir ‘Hidede Lowe, 
relative to the presents sent by Mr. Elphinstone. 


Longwood, 9th of July, 18—. 

_ Governor,—I have received the ‘five cases 
which you took the trouble of sending to me, con- 
taining a chess-board and men, a box of counters, 
and two work-baskets in ivory, sent from Canton 
by Mr. Elphinstone. The emperor was surprised 
to perceive by your letter, that. you think your 
duty required that those objects should not be 
sent. “If I acted,” you say, “in entire conformity 
to the established regulations, I ought'to have de- 
layed sending them up.”. In’ this. case, M. Go- 
veruor, it would have been soot to us vane you 
retained them. | 


462 APPENDIX. 


But to what does this refer? Is it because those 
articles have not passed through the channel of 
the ministers? In the restrictions of the minister, 
it is said, that letters must come. through his 
channel, but not articles of clothing, busts, furni- 
ture, &c. We have constantly received from:the 
Cape of Good Hope, many articles' which have 
been sent to us. Besides, Lord Bathurst, in-his 
speech, and you, yourself, in one of your letters, 
have denied, with indignation, that letters sent by 
the post, or by other opportunities, have been sent 
to London to be returned. to this place. This can- 
not, nor has not, authorized you to retain such 
objects as busts, furniture, books, or any other 
goods, which have no connexion with the security 
of detention. 

Can it be because there is a crown pon. the 
counters? No regulation can exist without being 
made known to us. Now, it never has been sig- 
nified to us, that we cannot possess objects: upon 
which there is a crown. It would be necessary, 
in that case, to make a new pack of cards for jus, 
because on those which we possess, there is a 
crown. The linen, and the small quantity of 
plate which remains to us, are often sent to aig 
and are marked with a crown. 

But from whom has this regulation, of which 
you speak, emanated? From your government, 


APPENDIX. 463 


which alone, according to the bill, has the right 
to make any? Your minister declared before par- 
liament, that no restrictions whatever had been 
made since those which had been printed and 
communicated to Europe, and which your prede- 
cessor possessed, and which had been sent to you. 
He added, that you have not made any ‘restric- 
tions, but solely adopted measures of execution. 
Effectively you have not the right to make any... 

The emperor does not desire favours from any- 
body, and wishes nothing from the caprice of any 
person whatever; but he has the right to be in- 
formed of the restrictions which are imposed upon 
him. Your government, the parliament, and all 
nations, have the same right. I therefore beg of 
you, sir, to communicate to us those new 'restri¢- 
tions, and if such exist, they would be in contradic- 
tion to the assertion of Lord Bathurst, that’they 
should have no other object than ‘the ‘security 
of detention. The emperor charges me to protest 
against the existence of any restrictions’ or regu- 
lations which shall not be legally mens to sth 
a to ae put in execution. 


~ JT have ‘the honour, &e. 
(Signed) Count cae de 4 


464 APPENDIX. 


_,., No. X. 
Letler from Count Bertrand to the tos 8 


Longwood, 16th July, isiz. 

: soil HAVE received, Sir, the marble bust of young 
Napoleon. I have given it to his father. ‘It has 
imparted to him themost sensible pleasure. I re- 
gret that you have not been able to come and see 
us, and give us some details, which arealways inte- 
resting to a father in the actual situation of affairs. 
It results from the letters which you have sent, 
that.the artist esteems the value of his work to 
be one hundred guineas.. The emperor has or- 
dered me to send you a draft: for: three hundred 
pounds sterling.* The surplus is to. indemnify 
you for the losses which’ he knows you have sus- 
tained in the sale of your little venture; as you 
were not’ permitted to land ; and the, chicaneries 
you have experienced by that event, which was 
in itself very simple, and would’ havé | procured 
you marks of esteem from every: man of feelings; 

Be so good as to communicate the emperor's 
thanks to the persons who have paid him this ami 
able attention. 


* By means of some unworthy tricks, the poor man did not 
receive the money for nearly two years. 


APPENDIX. 465 


I beg that you will acknowledge the receipt of 
this letter. 
I have the honour to. be, &e. 
(Signed) Count Berrranp. 
To M. Radowich, Master’ Gunner 
_ ©0n board of the ship Baring. 


No. XI. 


The Governor's Reply to Count Bertrand’s Letter 
relative to the Presents, — 


Castle, James Town, July 25th, 1817... 

Sin,—I have’received your Jetter of the 10th 
instant, The frequent use in it of the imperial 
title, and the tone in which you: convey your sen: 
timents to me when you employ ‘it; would per- 
fectly warrant me in declining to acknowledge it, 
as being addressed to me in an inadmissible form, 
and in referring: you to mine of the 30th August, 

1816, to Count Mouthvlon. "I shall not, however, 
avail myself of these pero) gj not; replying 
to its contents. 

The only object L had i in view in» vaddrenitig 
you on the 8th instant, was to avoid its. being con- 
ceived | tacitly participated in, or approved, the 
acknowledgment given to. the, imperial. rank, in 

VOL. II. 2u 


iid ain SI rasta arainastiisisialleaaa 


een | 


— — — —— 


466 APPENDIX. 


the crown placed every where over the initial of 
Napoleon on presents sent by a British subject 
particularly, and coming from a British factory. 
Had I suffered them to proceed without any 
remark, the inference would have, been. obyious 
I saw no impropriety in it; and I’ am too— well 
aware how far this precedent might have been al- 
leged, and what complaints would have sprung 
upon any future deviation from it, had J not ex- 
plicitly made known the grounds upon which in 
this instance I had suffered them to reach you. 5 
The donor's sentiments are his own, but I have ; a 
free right to the exercise also of my opinion, in not 
making myself the medium of them; and in suf 
fering the presents to proceed with no other qua- 
lification than what my note expressed, I went to 
the extreme boundary of what any attention to 
General Bonaparte’s desires or oy gam could 
demand of me. 
You ask me, sir, ‘* est-ce ace que ces objets ne 
sont pas arrivés par le canal du ministre?” &e. 
I should have considered myself fully warranted 
in keeping them back upon the: general principle 
of my instructions, without reference to the deco- 
_ ration upon them, until there was an express au- 
thority obtained from my government for their 
delivery, unless | assumed upon my own disere- 
tion to examine them and. satisfy myself they co- 


APPENDIX. 467 


vered no means of communication or assistance 
by which a clandestine intercourse was attempted. 

That the latter was the principle upon which I 
was always ready to act, instead of waiting: the 
delay of returns from England, was sufficiently 
apparent by my sending you the letter before the 
articles were even landed. 

You observe, sir, I rejected with indignation 
the accusation, that letters brought by the post on 
private occasions should have been sent back to 
London to return to this country. —[ rejected, sir, 
with indignation, this accusation, and the reflec- 
tions built upon it, because there was no founda- 
tion of truth or justice in them: because I revolted 
at that feeling which extractedinjury and reproach 
from acts of attention, (for in sending their family 
letters I had ‘exercised a discretion in favour of 
the persons who addressed me, not warranted by 
my instructions,) bat I did not admit that Thad 
not the right, and was not fully justified in send- 
ing letters back to England, if I thought proper 
so to do, when they came by irregular channels. 
Presents may be as obnoxious to the security of 
detention as a letter, and might require to be ea- 
amined with a minuteness that would baffle any 
purpose of ornament or ‘utility to be derived t from 
them. A letter may be concealed under the squares 
of a chess board, or the folds of a book cover, as 


Zu 2 


468 APPENDIX. 


well as in the liningof a waistcoat ; and I am not 
necessarily called upon to place my trust in any 
person by whom they are sent. If articles have 
been permitted to reach you, it has been because 
1 have felt satisfied they were not of an objection- 
able nature; and you-certainly have no reason to 
complain, sir, of the mode I have used my disere- 
tion in permitting generally every article that has 
arrived to be delivered, and in suffering many to 
proceed that had come addressed to myself, the 
transmission of which from the delicacy of the 
persons who sent them, had been left entirely to 
my option. bok) 

You observe, sir, “ seroit ce, parceque sur les 
jettons il y.aune couronne,” &e. &e. &c.; and ask if 
any regulation exists, which prevents your pos 
sessing an article with a crown upon it. 

There is certainly, sir, no specific written regu- 
lation prohibiting any article with a crown on it 
reaching Longwood, nor to prevent your posses- 
sing an object with such a decoration upon it; but 
it was in this case the imperial crown over the 
initial of Napoleon, carved, gilt, or engraved, on 
almost. every article. His own abdication—the 
convention of Paris—and the acts of the British 
parliament, supersede the necessity of any reguia- 
tion upon that head. » see vo) ah Pa Sse q 

The articles now at Longwood, with. the impe- 


APPENDIX. 469 


yial crown’ on them; were thus marked before the 
abdication. I have never disputed their posses- 
sion, nor any gratification they might afford. 
The quotation from the debates in Parliament, 
I must beg leave to observe, is inexact, as taken 
from any newspaper I have seen. —The papers 
themselves differ; for one speaks of regulations, 
another of instructions, not restrictions, being the 
same, (without any substantive alteration,) as those 
at first prescribed. 
You say, sir, “ Vous n'avez pas le droit den 
faire.” + ot 
The act of parliament, the warrant, and instrac- 
tions I possess, are, sir, my surest guides on this 
point; whilst I may at the same time, however, be 
allowed to observe, that the original instructions 
you wish to refer to as my only rule, have received 
a more ample interpretation than what their strict 
letter would imply in the degree of freedom from 
personal restriction General Bonaparte at present 
enjoys. 
You add, “ L’Empereur ne veut de grace,” &c. 
&e. »uabal 
I have not the pretension to bestow a favour on 
General Bonaparte, and still less the arrogance of 
subjecting him to any act of my caprice.. He is 
under no restriction, which my government does 
not know, and which all the world may not know. 


470 APPENDIX. 


- It isnot irrelevant.on this occasion to:observe, 
that at two interviews with General Bouaparte, he 
personally observed to me that I was a general- 
officer to act upon instructions, and not execute 
my duty as a “ consigne:” at present it is as a 
consigne, it appears {am required to ‘perform it. 
On another occasion he objected to “ aweune in- 
spection directe ow publique.” How do these sug- 
gestions accord with the narrow Jimit to which it 
is at present sought to restrict the exercise of my 
duties? The views you have now presented coin- 
cide most with my own, (seeing that every exer- 
cise of my discretion even in points where I seek 
to act most favourably, only entails fresh discus- 
sion,) but where'such opposing sentiments are con- 

veyed ‘to me, you must, sir, admit the rep neg 
reconciling them. 

You say, sir, “ Z’ Evipeneat me change de pro- 
tester contre Vexistence de toute are “ie! 
&e. &e. isq i. 

Any communication nd to me in a ?p 
name‘of the person whom you thus designate; tis 
my bounden duty to consider, wherever circuin- 
stances will permit it. The notification of'a Tegu- 
lation arising from a sudden case ‘cannot, how- 
ever, be made previous ‘to ‘the Occurrence which 
calls it forth. The matter of which you now 
speak was not of a nature to requite ‘previous 


APPENDIX. 471 


communication, but it was here, at all events, not 
carried into execution before communicated. 
I have the honour to be, Sir, 
Your most obedient, 
And most humble Servant, - 
(Signed) —H. Lowe, Lieut. General.* 


Count Bertrand. 


No. XII. 


Leiter from Count Bertrand to the Governor, 
containing the Grievances of Longwood. 


Longwood, 30th September,-1817. 

Governor,—I have made known to the empe- 
ror, that you did me the honour'to come to me 
the day before yesterday, (Sunday,) that you told 
me some anxieties had been excited in you re 
specting his ill health, and that as this was attri- 
buted to want of exercise, why did he not ride 
out on horseback ? 

I replied to you, what had been said in various 
circumstances, and 1 have the honour to repeat 
to you now, that the existence of the emperor, par- 
ticularly for the last six weeks, has been extremely 

* For the deep obscurity and rambling construction of some pas- 
sages in this state paper, it is hoped the reader will hold only its 
author responsible. 


472 APPENDIX. 


painful; that. the swelling of his legs-increases 
every day; that the symptoms of scurvy which. 
bad been remarked. in his.gums, are already such 
as to occasion bim almost constantly acute pains; 
that the medical men, attribute this to. want of 
exercise ; that.ever since the month of May, 1816, 
that is to say, for seventeen or eighteen montbs, 
the emperor has not been on horseback, has 
scarcely ever been out of his apartment, except 
sometimes, and very rarely, when he came about 
forty toises, to visit my wife; that you know per- 
fectly well what has prevented, and does prevent 
the emperor from going out; namely, the restric- 
tions of the 9th October, 1816, which began to be 
put into execution six weeks after your arrival; 
that those restrictions contain among others, a pro- 
hibition from speaking or listening to any person 
we may meet, and from going into any house ; this 
makes. him think that your intention was to com- 

promise himn-with the sentries, and. to outrage ae 
character. 

You have observed to me, that you have sup. 
pressed that part of the restrictions, and, “such is is 
the case. Admiral Malcolm, on his return | om 
the Cape, made some observations to you on, 
subject, and you decided on suspending ‘them, 
which you did by your letter of the 26th Decem- 
ber, 1816, three months: afterwards. “But you 
have several times insinuated, that “you’ believe 


APPENDIX. 473 


yourself authorized to re-establish them. at any 
moment, as well as others equally unreasonable. 
The restrictions of the 9th October, 1816, con- 
tain other articles ef the same extravagant nature, 
which are not suspended... Fresh restrictions 
which you made on the 14th March, 1817, pre- 
scribe that we are not to quit the extent of a road 
twelve feet wide. It would thence result, that if 
the emperor were to quit that road, or enter into 
any house, the sentries might fire upon him. The 
emperor ought not to recognize such ignoble treat- 
ment. Several Englishmen. of distinction, at. pre- 
sent. in the island, on that passage) being read: to 
them, (not being acquainted with the. restrictions: 
of the 9th October, 1816, aud of the 14th March,: 
1817,). reproached the emperor, for sacrificing his 
health by not going out ; but,as soon as those re- 
strictions were made known to them; their opinions: 
changed, and they declared that, no. man of ho- 
nour could act differently; and. that,) without pre- 
tending to compare themselves, with him, they: 
would in such a case have done as.he did: » .) |» 


I added, that if you wished to consult,the,of 


ficers who are. in, this colony,, there isnot one 
among them who does not; regard, the-restrictions; 
of the 9th October, 1816, and those’ of, the 14th, 
March, 1817,,a8 unjust, useless, and oppressive ; 
and that_all in the emperor’s place would aet as. 


474 APPENDIX. 


he did, holding such conditional leave to go out 
as an absolute prohibition. aL 
_IT had also the honour to tell you, that secaelh 
ing tothe terms of the bill in parliament of the 
Mth April, 1816, you have not a right to make 
restrictions ; that the bill grants that right only to 
the government, which cannot delegate it even to 
one of its ministers, and still less to'an individual 
officer; that Lord Bathurst in his speech, in the 
month.of March, in the House of Peers, declared 
that you had made no new restriction, that all his 
eorrespondence had been in favour of the detained 
persons, and that you had the same instructions 
as your predecessor; that your predecessor had 
adapted ‘the restrictions of government to local 
circumstances, ‘iri a manner, if not convenient, at 
least tolerable; that things remained in this state for 
nine months, during which tine'the emperor used 
to go out, received even some English officers at 
his table, and. sometiines had in his’ society the of- 
ficers and inhabitants of theisland ; that this order 
of things was not changed by an act of your go 
vernment ; that during those nine months, no in- 
convenience took place, and that nothing can have 
authorized you to substitute for an order of 
sb ‘reasonable, that which you have established ; 
that the emperor would go out, ride on horseback, 
and resume’ the same way of lifé, if ‘you would ¥ re- 


APPENDIX. 475 


store things to the state they were in at the time 
of your arrival; that in default of this, you would 
be responsible for the results of ‘the restrictions 
of the 9th of October, 1816, and the (4th of 
March, 1817, which you have no right to make, 
and which, to the emperor, are equivalent to an ab- 
solute prohibition to quit his apartments. 

You told me, sir, that the emperor's room was 
too small, that Longwood House was altogether 
bad, as you had declared it to be to your govern- 
ment; that the emperur having had a tent erected 
last year, because there was no: alley where ‘he 
could ‘walk in’ the shade, ‘you proposed ‘to estat 
blish a soldier's wooden barrack near the ‘house, 
where the emperor might take his walks; T-under- 
took to make known to him your proposition. He 
considered this offer asa mockery, (those ‘were 
his words,) and analogous to the conduct pursued 
for these two years. ‘If the house where lie is be 
inconvenient, Why lias he beet left theré for these 
twoyears, and why do not they give hitn ‘one ‘of 
those in the island; ‘situated in the ‘midst’ of gar 
dens, trees, shade, and water? Why leave ‘hin 
upon’ this tincultivated point, exposed to the winds, 
and having werd can stat ny stg or 
servation: of life. hed feilgact 

Let me be allowed, iis Lodi out: tive? ob- 
servation, that if you do not suppréss the *restric- 


—————— es le 


476 APPENDIX. 


tious of the 9th of October, 1816, and of the 14th of 
March, 1817, and if you do not re-establish things 
as they were in the time of the admiral, the em- 
peror cannot go out. He considers, and will con- 
sider, that determination as a desire on your part 
to.occasion his death. He is entirely at your dis- 
posal. You can make him die of sickness; you 
can make him die of hunger; it would be a favour 
to make him die by a musket-shot. 

If you assemble the military and naval Siiioes 
of this place, and the principal officers of health, - 
there is not one of them but will tell you that your 
restrictions are disgraceful, and that a man of 
honour would sooner die than acknowledge them; 
that they are of no avail to the security of the de- 
tention; that they are illegal. The text of the 
bill, and the speech of your minister, cannot leave 
any kind of doubt on this point. The medical 
officers will tell you that there is no more time to 
be lost; that in three or four weeks. perhaps ‘it 
will be too late; and although this great prince be 
abandoned by fortune, and there is an open field 
for calumnies and libels in Europe, yet a cry of 
indignation will be raised amongst all people; for 
there are here several hundreds of persons, French, 
English, and foreigners, who will bear witness to 
all that has digniintiprte one 90 of 
this great man. tii? nodes 


APPENDIX. 477 


T have, sir, always spoken to you-to this effect, 
more or less forcibly. 1 shall speak to you of it 
no more, for denials, subtilties, and arguments, are 
very useless. 

The question lies in two words ; do you or do 
you not wish to kill the emperor? If you persist 
in your conduct you will yourself have answered 
in the affirmative; and unhappily, the object will 
probably be attained after some months of agony. 

Permit me, in concluding, to answer, on be- 
half of the officers who are with the emperor, and 
also on my own, to your letters of the 29th and 
26th July last.—Sir, you misunderstand our cha- 
racter: menaces have no power over us. For 
twenty years we have braved every danger in his 
service. By remaining voluntarily at St. Helena, in 
the horrible situation in which we are, and exposed 
to the strangest proceedings, we sacrifice to him 
more than our own lives and those of our families. 
Insensible to your menaces and your insinuations, 
we shall continue to fulfil our duty; and if thére 
were. any subjects of complaint against us before 

_ your government, we do not doubt that the Prince 
Regent, Lord Liverpool, and so many estimable 
men who form it, would know very well how to 
appreciate them. They know the respect due to 
the holy ministration which ‘we fulfil;'and even 
had we to apprehend persecution, we should ad- 


Le eA as ~~ 


A7B APPENDIX. 


here to our maxim, “ Do your aity come var 
may.”* iS 
I have the honour to bey oY Dep iets " 
Governor, Bey prio le ta Be 
Your very humble and obedient Servant, 
(Signed) - Count BerTranp. 


‘No. XIIL 


Letter from Count Bertrand to his eminence Car- 
dinal Fesch, announcing the Death of Cipriani. 


j Longwood, 22nd March, 1818. . 

My latin WE Cipriani, the emperor's maitre 
d’hétel died at Longwood onthe27th February last, 
at four o’clock in the afternoon. .He was buried 
in the protestant churchyard of this-place, and ithe 
winisters of that church have paid the same duties 
to him as they would have done to a person of 
their own sect. Care has been taken to insert in 
the extrait mortuaire which 1 shall,send you, (but 
for which an extract from my letter may now 
serve), that he died in the bosom. of the Aipostolical 
and Roman church. The minister of this place 
would willingly have assisted the deceased, and this 
last. would have desired a catholic priest; but.as we 


* Fais.ce que tu dois; advieune que pourra. 


APPENDIX. 479 


have none here, he appeared not to wish a minister 
of another religion. I should be happy. if-you 
would make us acquainted with the rites. of the 
catholic church upon this subject, and if it be 
permitted that:an English minister should admi- 
nister to a dying catholic. We cannot praise too 
much the good spirit and the zeal which the mi- 
" nisters of religion \of this\place have manifested on 
this occasion. Cipriani died of an inflammation 
of the bowels. He expired on Friday, and on the 
preceding Sunday he had attended without any fore- 
boding of it. A child belonging to one of Count 
Montholon’s servants died a few days before at 
Longwood. A. femme de chambre died a few 
days ago of the same complaint, It is the-effect 
of the bad climate of this place, where very few 
men grow old. Liver complaints, dysenteries, and 
inflammations of the bowels, carry off many victims - 
amongst the natives, but especially amongst Eu- 
ropeans. We felt in this circumstance, and: feel 
daily, the want of a.minister of our religion. You 
are our bishop, we wish that you: would send us 
a. French or Italian priest. Be so good as to'se- 
lect a man of information under the age of forty, 
and, who is net prejudiced by eee prin- 
ciples. 

M. Pieron has sinsloxtohels the office of, ie 
d@’hétel; but he has. been: extremely ill; and al- 


480 APPENDIX. 


though now convalescent, is still ina bad state, 
The cook is in a similar situation. It would be 
‘necessary that either you, or Prince Eugene, or 
the empress, should send a maitre d’hétel, and a 
French or Italian cook out of those who have 
served in the emperor's household, or in Som: of 
his family. , 
' Your eminence will find added to this, 1 ‘Ist. 
‘Papers A. and B., which were found in M. Ci- 
priani’s portefeuille.. 2nd. A pin which he was in 
the habit of wearing, and which I have thought 
proper to send for his wife. 38rd. The account of 
what is owing to him, amounting to the sum of 
8,287 franes, or 3451. 5s. 10d., with a bill of ex- 
change to be paid to his heirs.. Knowing that you 
take care of his son, and that his daughter is with 
Madame, the emperor defers securing an inde- 
pendence to his two children, until he is made ac- 
quainted with the amount of the property left by 
Cipriani, who, it appeared, had large fae) i 
Genoa: 

I shall not afflict you by = juakiie! of the em- 
peror’s health, which is very unsatisfactory. It 
has not, however, become worse since the hot 
season. I think’ that these details’ should be con- 
cealed from Madame. Do not give any credit to the 
false accounts that may be prevalént in Europe. 
Keep in mind as a rule, and as the’sole truth, ‘that 


APPENDIX. 481 


for twenty-two months the emperor has not left 
his apartments, except rarely to visit my wife: He 
has seen nobody, but the two or three French who 
are here, and the English ambassador to China. 
I beg that your eminence: will present my: re- 
spects to Madame, and to the persons of the fa- 
mily, and accept the sentiments with which I 
have the honour to be; &e. aoF noah 


(Signed) Count BERTRAND. 


No. XIV. 


Extract of the Declaration signed by the Ministers 
of the Allied Power at Vienna, March 13th, 
1815. 


THE powers ie signed the treaty of Paris 
having reunited in congress, at: Vienna, and in- 
formed. of the escape of Napoleon Bonaparte, and 
his forcible entry into France, 0 owe to their own 
dignity and to social order a declaration of the 
sentiments which - event has made them expe- 
rience. 

In thus breaking the convention which had 
established him at the island of Elba, Bonaparte 
has destroyed the only legal title to which his ex- 

VOL, II. 21 “ 


-o 


482 APPENDIX. 


istence was attached. In) appearing again in 
France, with projects of trouble and subversion, 
he has deprived himself of the protection of the 
laws, and has manifested in the face of the world 
that there can be. neither peagaynae truce with 
him. 

The powers declare in consequence, that Napo- 
leon Bonaparte is placed out of the pale of civil 
and social relations; and that as an enemy and a 
disturber of the world, he is delivered up to public 


vengeance! 

Then follow the signatures : 
Le Prince de Metternich. 
Le Baron de Wessemberg. 
pain. P. Gomez Labrador. 


Le Prince de Talleyrand. 
Le Duc d’Alberg. 
Latour Dupin. 

Le Comte Alexis de Noailles 


pin fe Comte de Rasoumouski. — 


Austria. { 


‘rance. 143 


Russia. } Le Comte de Stakelberg. eailh 
Le Comte de Nesselrode. a 
Wellington!!! ween 

Great }Clancarty. jet 
Britain, ) Cathcart. ett} beatae 


Stewart. ’ ' - vytuenl) eee 


APPENDIX. 483 


: Le Comte Palmela. 
Portugal. , Saldanha. 
Lobo. 
wa . Le Prince d’Hardenberg. 
whl e Baron de Humboldt.. 
. Sweden. wenhielm. 
1 
No. XV. \ 
Protest of the Emperor Napoleon. 


I uereEsy solemnly protest in the face of God 
and of men, against the violation of my most sa- 
cred rights, in forcibly disposing of my person 
and my liberty. I came voluntarily on board of 
the Bellerophon. I am not the prisoner, but the 
guest of England. bt 

As soon as I was seated on board of the Belle- 
rophon, I was upon the hearths of the British 
people. If the government, in giving orders to 
the captain of the Bellerophon to receive me as 
well as my suite, only intended to lay a snare for 
me, it has forfeited its ey and Dries caecun, cf 
flag. 

If this act be consummated, the English will: i in 
vain boast to Europe of their integrity, their laws, 

212 


= 


484 APPENDIX. 


and their liberty. British good faith will be lost 
in the hospitality of the Bellerophon. » 

I appeal to history; it will say that an enemy, 
who for twenty years waged war against the Eng- 
lish people, came voluntarily in his misfortunes to 
seek an asylum under their law What. more 
brilliant proof could he give of his esteem and his 
confidence? But what return did England make 
for so much magnanimity? A hospitable hand 
was pretended to be held out to that enemy; and 
when he confided to it in good faith, he was timmo- 
lated ! 

(Signed) Napo.eon. 

August 4th, 1815. Pee de 


No. XVI. 
Island of Saint Helena Port Regudations. 


I. THe! commanders of the dt East Liytin 
company’s:ships, and the masters or commanders 
of all merchant vessels permitted to touch at this 
island, are not to land themselves, or suffer any 
person whatever belonging to their ships or vessels 
to come ashore, until the following regulations 
have been made known to all persons on board,— 
a list of passengers, and a roll of the ship’s com- 


APPENDIX. 485 


pany sent to the governor, and his fron er ob- 
tained for such as are to land. 

° TI: The commander of every ship’ or ‘ial is 

saphive most explicitly to declare in the first in- 
stance, whetherany disorder whatever prevails, 
or has peal board, without regard to its 
being considered by him, or his surgeon, to be 
contagious or otherwise, and report any deaths 
that may have taken place, and the causes of the 
same, during the course of his voyage. 
“TH. All letters and packets, for whatever per- 
son addressed, residing on shore (except such as 
come by regular mails, which are to be Sent tothe 
post-office), are to be delivered to the officer by 
whom these regulations are communicated, who 
will leave the same at the office of the secretary 
of government, where those to whom a are ta 
dressed will receive them. 

IV. Should the commander, or any of his pas- 
sengers, or any person whatever on board his ship; 
have under his or her charge any letters, packages 
or parcels, to the address of or destined for any 
of the foreign persons under detention on this 
‘sland—it is desired ‘they will make it’ known 
forthwith to the governor himself, putting the 
letter or parcel, if of small bulk, under a’sealed 
envelope, to his address, and waiting his directions 


respecting any package of a larger species. 


i 


4 
486 APPENDIX, 


V. The commander of the vessel only, after 
these regulations have been read and. published 
on board, is at liberty to land, when he will inme- 
diately wait on the governor, if in town, as well 
as the naval commander in chief; and if the go- 
vernor should not be in town, will call to report 
his arrival at the quarters of the deputy et sic 
general. 

‘VI. The commanders, officers, and all phe 
gers who are afterwards permitted to land, will 
call at the town major’s office to read and sign the 
island regulations, before they proceed. to. their 
lodgings, or visit any house or person whatever. 

‘VII. No passenger or other person. landing 
from ships touching there, is to leave James's 
Valley without permission, for which they are to 
apply to the deputy adjutant-general. , 

VIII. No person whatsoever, having pecnin, 
sion to land, is to visit Longwood, or the: pre- 
mises belonging thereto, nor to hold communica- 
tion of any sort, by writing or otherwise, with any 
of the foreign personages detained on this island, 
without communicating directly bis intentions and 
wishes thereupon to. the governor, and obtaining 
his: permission for the same.—And should any 
letter or other communication, from any of the 
foreign personages above alluded to, be received 
by any person whatsoever, it is to be brought 


. 


. APPENDIX. 487 


without loss of time to the governor, previous to 
answering or taking any further notice whatever 
thereof. The same rule to apply to all packages 
_ which may be received, or attempted to be de- 
livered. 

IX. The commanders of the East India ships, 
and the masters of ‘all descriptions of merchant 
vessels permitted to touch at this island, are not 
to allow any persons whatsoever, on board of, or 
belonging to their ships or vessels, to come on 
shore on leave, without the governor's authority, 
nor is any person to sleep on shore without his 
permission. 

X. No boat belonging to the ships of the Bast 
India Company, -or to. merchant vessels. of any 
description, is to land between sun-set and,sun- 
rise, nor at any time during the day, without a 
proper officer being in charge of her, and if she is 
ordered to remain on shore for any purpose, he 
must take care to keep her laying at a distance 
from the wharf to admit of other boats landing 


without interruption, Boats loading or unload- _ 


ing, are to use every expedition to gets out of the 
way of others... 

XL All boats belonging to the cpatifta 
ships, or merchant vessels of every description, 
are to quit the shore by sun-set, and are imme- 
diately afterwards to be hoisted in on board their 


~* 


488 APPENDIX. 


respective ships, except under such circumstances 
asthe admiral'may direct. vere ett 
XII. No boat belonging to a company’s ship, 
or a merchant vessel of any description, shall 
board or send a boat alongside any vessel coming 
in.—No boat will be permitted to land at any 
other place than at the wharf. oul teimen 
XIII.. No company’s ship or merchant vessel 
of any description, is to anchor at’ this ‘island 
between sun-set and ‘sun-rise, nor ‘sail after sun- 
set, nor before ten o’clock in the morning—nor 
are they to make sail at any time until the permis- 
sion flag is hoisted to each ship or vessel. © 
XIV. If the permission flag should be hoisted 
to any vessel a short time before sun-set, and she 
not already hove her anchor up and under weigh, 
she is not to attempt to move’ until the signal may 
be repeated the morning following. ©) 0 0" 
* XV. The commander of all ships ‘or vessels 
are strictly prohibited from permitting any fishing- 
boat belonging to the island to go alongside, with- 
out a permit, signed by the governor, or suffering 
any boat belonging to their ship to board or other- 
wise communicate with a numbered a 
of the island. od am 
« XVI. Should a ‘fishing-boat’ aed 4 le 
municate: with any vessel, either approaching the 
island, or at anchor off it, or with any boats be 


APPENDIX. 489. 


longing to such vessel, the commander of her, or 
his officers, are required to. ev immediate notice 
thereof to the flag-ship, and to the deputy adju- 
tant-general, taking the No. of the boat, or detain- 
ing her, as circumstances may direct. 

XVII. The commanders of ships possessing 
newspapers, which may contain late or interesting: 
intelligence, are requested to deliver them to the 
person by whom these re jons are communi- 
cated, for the information: of the governor, who 
will cause them to be carefully returned. 

> XVIII. No gunpowder is to be landed without 
previous notice being given to the commissary of 
stores, and the master attendant, in order: that 
proper Sraeeote may be adopted to pling ac- 
cidents. 

/XIX.—No bashes i mare, or salifings can be 
handed without a permit from the sirens to go 
vernment. 

XX. No wines of any sort: whatsoever ‘chal be 
landed without ‘a pelt een by the wonreenny 
to government. © 

_ XXI. The iecnnteiie piss of divecdied faring 
prohibited the importation of India’ spirits, ‘it is 
regulated, ‘that whoever shall: violate this order, 
shall incur a fine of 1002. sterling—nor is/brandy, 
gin, West India rum, cordials;:and the like to be 
landed, except’ in-small) quantities, upon’ obtain- 


490 APPENDIX. 


ing a permit for the same, and upon paying a 
duty at the rate of 12s. per gallon ; but the land- 
ing of any spirits, in whatever quantity, without a 
permit, will subject the offender to the hig as 


above. _ 
XXII. The Whaling vessels are mat to ‘how - 
their try-works overboard, whilst at this anchorage, 
under the penalty of 50/., half of whic sum will 
be paid to the informer... b. swooden ay 
XXIII. The commanders or andaiand of all | 
ships or vessels are to give forty-eight hours notice ; 
previous to their departure—provided they intend 
to remain for so long a period. This notice is to 
be left in writing at:the office of the secretary to | 
government, and the master attendant,. between 
the hours of ten in the forenoon, and two in the 
afternoon. The fore-top-sail is likewise tobekept 
loose forty-eight hours previous: to the ship. or 
vessel’s departure. gage 
XXIV. The commander or master of any ship 
or vessel is not, on any pretence whatever, to leavé 
any person upon the island, or take any person | 
from it, of whatever description, wiih: Maen 7 
permission from the governor. | ‘botdidew, - 
~ KXV. No commander: pened or. in Po 
person whavever on board the honourable com- 
pany’s ships, or any other, that:may anchor at this 
island, is to take charge of any letters or packets 


APPENDIX, 491 


for conveyance to Europe, the Cape of. Good 
Hope, South America, or elsewhere, ‘unless such 
as are made up in a regular mail at the post-office, 
or have been received from the secretary to go- 
yernment, or the deputy adjutant-general. 

_ , The commander of the ship or vessel will fill up 
* the report, of which the form is annexed, for the 
\ governor's information, and transmit the same by 

the officer who communicates these regulations. 


No. XVII. 


Proclamation, issued by Sir Hudson Lowe, a few 
days after having sent Lord Bathurst's letters, 
making an offer’ of allowing fifty persons, se- 
lected by Napoleon, to enter Longwood: >» 


Wuereas it has been ascertained, that a present 
had. been delivered to an inhabitant of this island, 
in the name or on the part of one of the foreign 
persons under detention at. Longwood; which 
present was soon afterwards. returned, in conse- 
quence of the. person to whom it had been»deli- 
vered, becoming sensible, that his acceptance of 
it, unless with the governor's knowledge and.au- 


7 + 
a ° 


492 APPENDIX. 


thority, ‘would havéibesqa: breath wf the Breda: 
mations in force; the governor, however, deems it 
expedient, in enforcement of the abovesaid: Pro- 
clamations (with reference also to the general in- 
junction contained in the warrant, dated: 16t 
_ April, 1816), to give public notice, and public no 
tice is hereby given, to all officers, inhabitants,: 
other persons whatsoever, residing on, or resorting — 
to this island, that they are not only interdicted (as 
by the Proclamation of October 15, 1815, from 
holding any correspondence or communication with 
the foreign persons under detention on it, except 
only such as may be regularly authorized by him; 
and as farther, by public Notice of the 11th May, 
and Proclamation of the 28th June, 1816) from 
receiving, delivering, or rendering themselves: the 
channel for the conveyances of any communication 
whatsoever from or to the said persons, ‘without 
his express authorization ; but where’ any unau- 
thorized communication shall have been or may 
be conveyed, or attempted to be ‘conveyed, it be 
hoves all those, who are acquainted with it, to 
give the governor immediate information of the 
same (or the nearest civil or military authority, 
should the case so require), in order that the ne 
cessary steps may be taken: thereupon, under'p 

of otherwise being considered’ as privy the 
same; and held answerable accordingly. | . 


soit 


rf 


ial 
a & 
a ®% 
APPENDIX. 49 
. Given at t castle; James. Town, ,this 16th 


day of May, 18 1 af av Molet 
Hupson Lowe, 
Lieutenant General, Governor, and 
Commander in Chief. , 


(Signed) By his Excellency’s command,, 
* ‘ | _ G, GorREQUER,, . 
Act. Mil. Sec. 
% By order of the Governor, in council, — 
_T. H. Brooke, 
ween to Government. 


canes XVIII. 
_ Longwood, 20th June, 1818. 


contents as informed by Lieut. Retids 
of your regiment, that you had charged him to 
intimate to me, ‘that you had been informed’ by 


Lieut.-Colonel Sir Thomas. Reade, that his excel- - 


lency the governor was.very angry at my being 
an’ honorary member of the 66th’s mess, and that 
I was not fit society for them; that you had seen 
part..of a correspondence between the governor 
and myself, which had been sent home; and that 
you thought I had used the governor ill.. That 
you had intended to. call a meeting of the officers, 
in order to siguify to me, ‘that until'the business 


Ed 
7% 


494 APPENDIX. 


between the governor and my as cleared up, 
I should not have the honour of dining with them, 
but that you thought it would be better to inti 
mate it to me privately by° Lieut. Reardon, in 
order that I might withdraw quietly.” 

The assertion which has been conveyed to you, 
that I have committed any action of a nature to 
render me unfit for the society of the officers of 
the 66th regiment, I declare to be a base and insi- 
dious calumny. I have demanded frequently, and 
am now ready to appear before any competent 
court of justice, to repel any thing which may be 
brought against me, whether in the form of suspi- 
cions, conjectures, reports of spies, semi-proofs, or 
direct charges. If there is any basis whereon to 
ground such aspersions, why not bring me to, 
what every Englishman is entitled to by the laws 
of his country, ‘a trial. But his exeellency, him- 
self, in a letter written from his dictation, has 
disclaimed “ bringing any accusations whatever, 
against any part of my conduct.” “It is by a fair 
and open investigation, that the’ disreputable 
source from whence the clandestine denunciation 
against me has sprung, will be clearly shown, 
and which will manifest, that a refusal com 
with verbal ‘insinuations, contrary to my’ con- 
science, has been the cause of the wrath and op- 
pression with which I have been visited. © 9°) 


7 
a 


APPENDIX. 495 


Let those, who are conscious of guilt, have:re- 
course to indirect and secret measures. Publicity, 
and not concealment, is my desire; and in order 
to clear up the business between the governor and 
myself, I shall be extremely happy to submit the 
whole of the correspondence alluded to, for the pe- 
rusal and consideration of the officers of the 66th 
regiment, by whose decision thereupon I am con- 
tent to abide, and any other scrutiny which may 
be thought proper, either by yourself or the offi- 
cers, I am also perfectly ready to submit to. 

I have too much confidence in the justice, ho- 
nour, and liberality of so enlightened a corps of 
officers as the 66th, to suppose for a moment that 
they will condemn unheard to dishonour, (a pu- 
nishment worse than death,) an officer whom they 
have considered worthy of a diurnal place at, their 
table ; and therefore beg, sir, that in case. of their 
meeting for the purpose of taking into their-consi+ 
deration the calumnies which have been, so insix 
diously instilled into your mind against me, they 
will not refuse me what is not denied to the vilest 
of. culprits; but vouchsafe me an audience inymy | 
defence prior.to coming to any decision, unless ins 
deed his excellency the governor gives an onder for 
exclusion; in which case, 1 beg to have a copy of 
the same in writing, to shew that such, a measure 
was the arbitrary act of an individual, and not the 


496 APPENDIX: 

result of the opinion of ‘a’ most respectable cone 

oficets. _ Lremain, Sir, 9° 9) 0) oer 
» With much respect, 9 9 0 


Your most obedient humble Servant,» ©) 
(Signed) Barry E. OMeaey 


Surgeon. : gy i: '? 
Lieut.. Colonel Lascelles, « hate a> int 


Commanding 66th Regiment. rng inal 


No. XIX. ph arietat 

“Translation of the Letter — alas Princess 

Pauline Povahen to Lord p Brosnan og 

| Rome, Uth July, saat ‘in 
My LoniThe Abbé Buonavita who has just 
arrived at Rome from St. Helena, which ‘he left 
on ‘the 17th of last March, has brought us the 
most alarming ews of the emperor's health. oD 
inclose you copies of letters which will give you 
the details of his physical sufferings.» The malady 
by which he is attacked is mortal in St. Helena, 
and in the name of all the members of the family, 
I claim a change of climate from the English go- 
vernment. {f so just a demand be refused, it will 
be a sentence of death passed upon him, and ‘in 
this case | demand permission ‘to depart for St: 


APPENDIX. 497 


Helena, to rejoin the emperor and to receive his 
parting breath. 

I beg of you, my lord, to have the goiduads; 
without delay, to solicit this authorization from 
your government, that I may be able to depart 
as soon as possible. As my state of health does 
not allow me to travel by land, my intentions 
would be to embark at Civita Vecchia to proceed 
to England, and to avail myself there of the first 
vessel which may sail for St. Helena; but I should 
wish that I may be permitted to go to London, in 
order to provide myself with whatever may be 
necessary for so long a voyage. 

If your government persists in suffering the em- 


peror to perish upon the rock of St. Helena, [I 


intreat that your lordship, in order to remove all 
difficulties which might retard my departure, may 


extend your care to prevent the court of Rome. 


from opposing obstacles. I know that the mo- 
ments of the emperor's life are counted, and I 
should eternally reproach myself if I did not,em- 


ploy all the means in my power to soften his last 


hours, and to prove my entire devotion. to his 

august person. If there should be any English 

vessels in Leghorn Harbour at the moment of my 

departure, I would ask as a favour that one might 

be permitted to take me at Civita Vposhia, and 

bring me to England. iv et 
VOL. II. 2k 


498 APPENDIX. 


I beg, my lord, that you will communicate my 
letter and the inclosed copies to Lady Holland, 
who has always given proofs of the greatest in- 
terest for the emperor, and assure her of my. sénti- 
ments of friendship, and receive Snenenerer 
of my consideration. 


(Signed) Princess Pavtan Boxes 


TRANSLATIONS OF THE LETTERS, INCLOSED.. , 


te hy 


From ‘Dr. Antommarchi to Sig. Simeon Colonna. 


_ St. Helena, Vth March; YS20. 

My DEAREST Frrenp,—In ‘my’ preceding letter 
of the 18th of J uly last year, I informed you of the 
disease (chronic hepatitis ) endemic in this.climate, 
with which the Emperor Napoleon was afflicted, 
and ‘of the anieliorations which had been obtained 
by a long and rational treatment, togéther with the 
successive considerable changes for the worse, by 
which the ameliorations were alternated to that 
epoch. Continuing now to give you an account — 
of the same. I shall tell you, that from the above 
mentioned time, his majesty has’ become ‘worse 
daily, so that’in ‘six months, the disease of the 
biliary viscus has made so great a progress, that 


APPENDIX. 499 


the hepatic functions are entirely disordered, and 
consequently the digestive functions are sheet 
annihilated. 

His majesty is now reduced to such a state as not 
to be able to take any nourishment except liquids, 
which quickly pass almost unchanged by the 
mouths of the absorbent vessels of the lymphatic 
system. It is not certain that this nourishment of 
liquids is well adapted to his majesty’s stomach, 
as frequently a few moments after taking, or in the 
act of swallowing, they are rejected by vomiting. 
To this effect, and to relieve my own special re- 
sponsibility, I declare openly to the imperial fa- 
mily, and to all Europe, that the progress of the 
disease which affects his majesty in this climate, 
(which is a proximate cause of such complaints,) 
and the symptoms which accompany it, are most 
serious. ri 

Dear friend, the medical art can do. nothing 
against the influence of climate; and if the Eng- 
lish government does not yma to remove him 

JSrom this destructive atmosphere, his majesty will 
soon, with anguish I say it, pay the last tribute to 
the earth. ; 

Such a crime certainly cannot be attributed to 
the medical art, but solely to the unhappy and de- 
solate situation in which his majesty is placed. 

Continue your attachment to me, pay my re- 

2x2 


500 APPENDIX. 


spectful compliments to our common friends, and 
believe me to be always, with much esteem, —__ 
Your affectionate friend, 
(Signed) FF. ANTomMaRCHI. 


P. S.—I offer the undoubted facts stated above, 
in opposition to the gratuitous assertions in ithe 
English newspapers relative to the good hea th 
which his majesty is stated to enjoy here. 


From the Count de Montholon to Her Highs 
the Princess Pauline Borghese. 


Longwood, St. Helena, 17th March, 192, 


Mapam,—The emperor charges me to render to 
your highness an account of the deplorable state — 
of his health; the liver complaint with which he 
has been tiated for several years, and which is 
endemic and mortal in St. Helena, has made a 
frightful progress in the last six.months. The be- 
nefit which he had experienced from the care of 
Dr. Antommarchi, has not lasted: several’ re- ! 
lapses have taken place since the middle of Jast 
year, and every day his decay becomes more | 
sible ; his weakness is extreme; he can scarcely 
bear the fatigue of a ride in ‘the carriage for half 
an hour with the horses at a walk; and cannot 


APPENDIX. 501 


walk in his room without support.’ To the liver 
complaint another disease is joined, equally en- 
demic in this island. The intestines are seriously 
affected ; the functions of digestion are no longer 
performed, and the stomach rejects every thing it 
receives. For along time the emperor cannot eat 
either meat, bread, or vegetables ; he is supported 
only by soups and jellies. Count Bertrand wrote 
to Lord Liverpool in last September, to demand 
that the emperor should be removed to another 
climate, and to let him know the absolute need 
which he had of mineral waters. I have entrusted 
Mr. Buonavita with a copy of the letter. The 
governor, Sir Hudson Lowe, refused to allow it 
to be sent to his government, under the vain pre- 
text that the title of emperor had been given to his 
majesty. M. Buonavita departs this day for 
Rome. He has experienced the cruel effects of 
the climate of St. Helena ; a twelve months abode 
here will cost him ten years of his life. The let- 
ters which Dr. Antommarchi has given to him 
for his eminence Cardinal Fesch, will give your 
highness fresh details upon the emperor's dis- 
ease, The London newspapers continually pub- 
lish fabricated letters dated from St. Helena,* the 


~®* At the time Napoleon was in this deplorable state, letters 
were published in some of the ministerial newspapers, purporting 
to have come from St. Helena, and representing him to be in per- 


502 APPENDIX. 


intention of which evidently is to impose upon 
Europe. The emperor reckons upon your high- 
ness to make his real situation known to some 
English of influence. He dies without succour 
upon this frightful rock ; his agonies are fright- 
Sul! 
Deign to receive, 
Madam, 
(Signed) Count pe MonTHOLON. 


qt 


From Count Bertrand to Lord Liverpool, alluded 
to by Count Montholon in the preceding Letter. 


Longwood, 2nd Sept. 1820. 

My Lorp,—lIhad the honour of writing to you 
on the 25th of June, 1819, to let you ‘know the 
state of the health of the Emperor Napoleon, at- 
tacked as it has been, by chronic hepatitis, since 
the month of October, 1817. . ee 
_ Doctor Antommarchi arrived at the end of last 
September, from whose treatment he at first found 
some relief, but since then, the doctor has de- 
fect health; others describing him to be in the habit of going 
about the island shooting wild cats. Whether those letters were 


concocted in St, Helena or forged in London, I shall not attempt 
to decide, 


APPENDIX. 503 


clared, as will be seen in his journal and reporis, 
that the state of the patient has become such, that 
the remedies can no longer struggle against the 
malignity of the climate ; that he has need of mi- 
neral waters ; that all the time he can remain in 
this abode will only be a state of painful agony ; 
that a return to Europe is the only means by 
which he can experience any relief, his strength 
being exhausted by a stay of five years in this 
frightful climate, a prey to the worst treatment. 

The Emperor Napoleon charges me to demand 
of you that he shall be transferred to an Euro- 
pean climate, as the only mode of lessening the 
evils to which he is a prey. 


(Signed ) Count BertRAND. 


P. S.—I had the honour to send this letter to 
Sir Hadson Lowe under wn cachet volant which 
he returned to me with the addition of the in- 
closed letter, This induces me to send it direct 
to you. [I suppose that he has taken a copy of 
it, which he will send you along with his own ob- 
servations, and that this circumstance “— not 
have caused any delay. 


(Signed) Count BerTRAnp. 
Longwood, 8rd Sept. 1820. 


- 


504 APPENDIX. 


Letter sent by order of Sir Hudson Lowe.to. Count 
Bertrand in reply to the preceding one.: . : 
Plantation House, 2nd vale 1620. 
Sir,—The governor's instructions not a 
him to receive any letter from the persons mp! 
ing with Napoleon Buonaparte, where the title of 
emperor is given to him, I am directed in conse. 
quence to return you the inclosed. a 
The governor at the same time desires me to 
observe, that no letter* was ever received ‘by 
from you, to the address of Lord Leb Oee ot 
the date of 25th of June, 1819. x 
: I have the honour to be, &c. 
(Signed) S. Gorrequer, | 
Military ston A 


m Ht Rp psp si 
Proclamation, in which the authority of Parlia> 
iwient id asnanel ty the Geer nar am Helena. 


nek Darah, 

(Referred to in Vol. II. p. 283.) shies oad 
7 sf leHhaa 
Prociamation by Lieut.-General Sir. Baden 
Lowe, K.C.B. Governor and Commander. in. 
Chief, for the Honourable East India Com- 
pany, of the Island of St. Helena, and com- 

* As Sir Hudson Lowe refused to receive or to forward letters 

in which Napoleon was not styled as he thought proper to name 
him, the letter alluded to was sent to England by a private hand. 


- APPENDIX. 505 


-manding His aeapiers Forces on the ‘said 
Island. 


By virtue of the powers and authority vested in 
me by a warrant in the king’s majesty’s name, 
bearing date the 12th day of April, in the present 
year, and in the fifty-sixth year of his majesty’s 
reign, authorizing and commanding me to detain 
in custody Napoleon Bonaparte, and him to deal 
with and treat as‘a prisoner of war, under such 
restrictions, and in such manver as shall have 
been, or shall be from time to time signified to me 
under the hand of one of his majesty’s principal 
secretaries of state, and to prevent the rescue or 
escape of the said Napoleon Bonaparte; in the 
due execution whereof, all his majesty’s officers, 
civil, naval, and military, and all his loving sub- 
jects, whom it may concern, are required to be 
aiding and assisting as occasion there may be; 
public notice is hereby given, that two acts have 
been passed in the present session of the British 
parliament, the one for detaining in custody the 
said Napoleon Bonaparte, and adjudging capital 
punishment on those who may be assisting in his 
escape; and the other for regulating the inter- 
‘course of shipping with the island of St. Helena, 
during the time Napoleon Bonaparte shall be ‘aie 
tained in custody. 

_ Copies of these two acts are hereunto annexed. 


506 APPENDIX. 


In furtherance of the objects for which. these 
acts have been passed, it is hereby publicly made 
known, that the various regulations hitherto issued 
on this island, in regard to the safe custody, of the 
said Napoleon Bonaparte, and of the prevention 
of any undue correspondence or communication 
with him, his followers, and attendants, are to re- 
main in full force, 

It is farther made known, that if, ‘thet shia.n no- 
tice, any person or persons whatever shall infringe 
the regulations established for his custody, or 
shall hold correspondence or communication with 
him, his followers, or attendants, who are, by their 
own acquiescence, placed under the same restric- 
tions as himself, or shall receive from or deliver 
any letters or communications to him or them, 
without the express authorization of the governor, 
or the officer commanding on the island for the 
time being, signified to them in writing under his 
hand ; such person or persons will be considered as 
having acted against the provisions and eapress 
olyjects of the said acts of parliament, and be pro- 
ceeded against accordingly. And should, from any 
- infraction of the rules established for. his custody, 
or from any correspondence or communication with 
either him, his followers, or attendants, the escape 
or rescue of the said Napoleon Bonaparte be 
effected, such person or persons will, after this no- 
tice, be considered as having been knowingly in- 


APPENDIX. 507 


strumental to, and assisting in the same, and be 
prosecuted with all the rigour which the law 
enacts, 

It is farther declared, that if any person or per- 

sons shall have avy information of any attempted 
rescue or means of escape, and shall not make an 
immediate communication of the same to the go- 
vernor, or officer commanding for the time being, 
or shall not do his or their utmost to prevent the 
same taking effect, they will be regarded as having 
connived at, and assisted in the said rescue or 
escape, and his or their offence be judged midis ithe 
laws. 
- Any person or persons who may receive letters 
or communications for the said Napoleon Bona- 
parte, his followers, or attendants, and shall not 
immediately deliver or make known the same to 
the governor, or officer commanding for the time 
being; or who shall furnish the said Napoleon 
Bonaparte, his followers, or attendants, with 
money, or any other means whatever, whereby 
his escape might be furthered, will be considered 
in like manner to have been assisting in the same, 
and will be proceeded against accordingly. 

All letters or communications for or from the 
said Napoleon, any of his followers, or attendants, 
whether sealed or open, are to be forwarded to 
the governor without loss of time, in the same 
state in which they may have been received. 


© . 
ee. a ee ee 


i 


508 APPENDIX. 


’ And whereas it is not the object of the regula- 
tion hereby promulgated, to induce any unusual © 
or unnecessary rigour, but to enforce the due . 
execution of the rules heretofore established, and 
to prevent the ill effects which might result from 
ignorance and inconsiderateness, as well as design; 
it is'in consequence made known to all those per- 
sons, whose duty calls upon them to attend near 
the place where the said Napoleon Bonaparte, bis 
followers, or attendants, reside, or who have busi- 
ness which has any relation to them, that they 
will be furnished, upon due application, with re- 
gular licences and authorities from the governor 
of the island, signed with his hand. And nothing 
is to be construed from the acts of parliament; or 
these regulations, as warranting any: violent or 
improper demeanour against him or them, so long 
as he or they observe the restrictions under which 
the laws and the instructions of his majesty’s go- 
vernment has placed them. ivr ogayes 
Given under my hand in Jenee Gath in the 
island of St. Helena, the 28th day of June, 1816, — 


(Signed) Hupson Lowe, 

’ Governor and Commander in Chief: 

ft) ) ; ibe 7) 
By command of the Governor, ho aes 


(Signed) G. GorREQuer, 
: . Act. Mil. Sec, 1 


‘APPENDIX. 509 


ADDITIONAL DOCUMENTS 


NOT NOMINATIVELY REFERRED TO, BUT WHICH 
ARE OF IMPORTANCE TO’ ILLUSTRATE THE 
WORK. 


Terms of the Capitulation of El-Arish, for the 
violation of which, part of the Garrison of Jaffa 
were shot. , 


The commandant of the Fort of El-Arish, 
and the other three commandants of the 
troops, to the general in chief. 


We have received the capitulation which you 
have addressed to us; we consent to deliver the 
Fort of El-Arish into your hands. We will re- 
turn to Bagdat by the desert: We send you the — 
list of the Agas of the Fort, who promise, upon 
oath, for themselves and their troops, not toyserve 
in Djezzar’s army, and not to return to Syria for 
the space of one year, reckoning from this day. 
We will receive a pass and colours from-you. We 
will leave in the castle all the supplies which are 
found there. The whole of the Agas in the Fort 
solemnly swear by our Lord, Moses, Abraham, 
and by the Proruet, to whom may Gop be pro- 
pitious, and by the Koran, to’execute faithfully 


S10 APPENDIX. 


all these articles, and above all, not to. serve 
Djezzar. The Mosr Hicu and His Propuer 

are witnesses of our good faith. 
\(Sigued) [sranim Niran, Commandant. of the 

Fort of El-Arish. 
Ex. H. Hapsez Mouammen, ‘Colonel 

of the Maugrebins. 
Ex. H. Havsy Zavyr, Aga of the ro 
. nauts, 
Mouammep AGa, Chief of the ‘Com- 
missaries. meet 
Lettre de E:Empereur Napoléon, adcessée. au 
Comte de Las-Cases, apres son enldvement de 
_ Longwood. ' us 

Mon cher Comte Las pelt coeur sent 
vivement ce que vous éprouvez } arraché, il y a 
quatorze ou quinze jours d’auprés de moi, vous 
étes enfermé au secret, sans que j’aie pu recevoir 
ni vous donner aucune nouvelle, sans que vous 
ayez communiqué avec qui que ce soit, Frangais 
ow Anglais; privé méme d'un domentiqne’ de 
votre) choix. fe 
Votre conduite a Sninte-Héldnea tb, pas . 
votre vie; honorable et sans. mepmnshes iteiene 
vous Je dire, yit'fa 
~| Notre: lettre 2 votre amie de Londres mierai 


APPENDIX: SIL 


rien de répréhensible; vous y épanchiez votre 
ceur dans le sein de lamitié. Cette lettre est 
comme les huit ou dix autres que vous avez 
écrites & la méme personne, et que vous avez en- 
voyées ouvertes, Le commandant. de cette ile 
ayant eu Vindélicatesse de seruter les expressions 
que vous confiez 4 l’amitié, vous les: a reprochées. 
Derniérement il vous a menacé de vous renvoyer 
de l'ite, si vos lettres contenaient encore quelques 
plaintes. En agissant ainsi, i} a violé le premier 
devoir de sa ‘place, le premier articlede ses restric- 
tions, etle'premier sentiment de l|'honneur. Il vous 
@ ainsi‘autorisé 4: chercher les moyens de répan- 
dre, par effusion, vos'sentimens:dans le sein de vos 
anis, et deleurfaire connaitrela conduite coupable 
dece commandant; mais vous étes sans artifices ; 
il a été bien facile:\de surprendre votre confiance! 
On ‘cherchait ‘un -prétexte de:saisir vos. papiers. 
Une lettre & votre amie de Londresine pouvait 
autoriser une visite de la police chez vous:; :car 
elle ne contient aucun complot, aucun mystére: 
elle n’est que Pexpression des sentimens dun cceur 
noble et franc. La conduite illégale et précipitée 
que Pon a tenue en cette occasion porte le carac- 
tére d’une’haine basse et personnelle. —_, 
_ Dans: les -contrées les moins civilisées, les 
exilés, les prisonniers, et méme les: criminels, sont 
sous Ja protection des lois. et des: magistrats. Les 
personnes nommées:pour les garder ont des chefs, 


512 APPENDIX. 


soit dans l’administration, soit dans lordre judi- 
ciaire, pour les surveiller.. Mais sur ce roc, le. 
méme homme qui fait les réglemens les plus ab- 
surdes, les exécute avec violence; il transgresse 
toutes les lois, et il n’est personne pour restreinidre- 
les exc’s de son caprice. Lewes 

On enveloppe Longwood d’un nile que Ton 
voudrait rendre impénétrable, pour cacher une 
conduite criminelle. Ce soin fait suspecter les 
intentions les plus odieuses. stro colgstan 

-Par des bruits artificieasement saute on a es-— 
sayé de tromper les officiers, les étrangers, les: 
habitans de cette ile, et méme les agens étrangers: 
qui, 4 ce que l'on dit, sont entretenus ici par 
PAutriche et la Russie. Certainement le gou- 
vernement anglais est trompé de la méme maniére 
par des rapports artificieux et mensongers. 

‘Vos papiers, parmi lesquels on savait quil . 
en avait qui m’appartenaient, ont été saisis sans 
aucune formalité, prés de mon appartement, avec 
des exaltations d'une joie féroce. J’en fus, insteuit 
quelques momens aprés; je regardai par la fe- 
nétre, et je vis qu’on vous enlevait. Un nombreux 
état-major caracolait autour de vous; je crus voir 
les sauvages.des iles de la mer du Sud, dansant 
autour des prisonniers qu’ils vont dévorer. 

Votre société m’était nécessaire: seul, vous 


» lisez, vous parlez et entendez l’anglais.. .Combien 


vous avez passé de nuits pendant mes maladies! 


APPENDIX. 513 


cependant je vous engage et, au besoin, je vous 
ordonne de requérir. le commandant de cette ile 
de vous: renvoyer ‘sur le continent; * il ne peut 
point s'y refuser, puisqu’il n’a action sur vous que 
par l'acte volontaire que vous avez signé.' Ce sera 
pour moi une grande consolation que de vous sa- 
voir en chemin pour de plus fortunés pays. 
Arrivé en Europe, soit que vous alliez en 
Angleterre, ou que vous retourniez dans la patrie, 
perdez le souvenir des. maux qu’on vous a fait 
soufirir. Vantez-vous de la fidélité que vous 


m’avez montrée, et de toute l’affection que je vous 


porte. 

Si vous voyez un jour ma femme et mon fils, 
embrassez-les ; depuis deux ans je n’en ai aucune 
nouvelle, ni directe, ni indirecte. Il y a dans ce 
pays, depuis six mois, un botaniste allemand, qui 


les a vus dans le jardin de Scheenbrunn; quelques — 


mois avant son départ.., Les barbares ont empéché 
qu'il vint me donner de leurs nouvelles. 
_Toutefois, consolez-vous, et consolez mes amis : 
mon corps se trouve, il est vrai, au pouvoir de 
la haine de mes ennemis; ils.n’oublient rien, de 
ce qui peut assouvir leur vengeance. . Ils me tuent 
4 coups d’épingles; mais la Providence est trop 
juste pour permettre que cela se. prolonge long- 
temps encore. Liinsalubrité de ce climat. déyo- 
rant, le manque de tout ce qui_entretient. la. vie; 
VOL. II. 2. 


514 APPENDIX. 


mettront je le:sens, un terme prompt a cette ex- 
istence, dont les derniers momens seront Copprobre 
du caractére anglais. L’ Europe signalera-un jour 
avec horreur cet) homme hypocrite et» méchant, 
que: les vrais Anglais désavoueront pour ‘Breton. 

-. Comme toute porte’ penser qu’on ne vous per- 
mettra pas; de venir me:yoir avant votre’ départ, 
recevez’ mes embrassemens, l’assurance dé ‘mon 
estime et de mon amitié.:' Soyez heureux, «© - 


_Votre-affectionné,: | : 
i! Q oy toinian(e "Navouson: 


Translation of. the pp Wireaneions of. the Emp 
Napoleon. . 


On the 11th, 12th, 13th, 14th, ‘and 16th’ sbagiee 
£819, attempts were made for the first time to vio- 
late the pavilion inhabited by the’ Emperor Napo- 
leon, which to this epoch had ‘been constantly Te- 
spected. He resisted against this violence by 
shutting and locking the doots.’” ‘In this situation, 
he reiterates the protestation which he has made, 
and caused to be made several times, that the right 
of his door shall not be violated unless by walking 
over his corpse. He has’ given up ‘every’ thing, 
and for three years has’ lived concentrated in the 
interior of six small rooms, in order to escape 


APPENDIX. ‘615 


from insults and outrages. If baseness is carried 
‘to the degree of envying him this refuge, it has 
been determined» to leave: him!>nosother than 
‘the tomb. — Labouring for two years» under a 
chronic hepatitis, a disease endemic im this place, 
and for i year deprivéd of the assistance of his 
physicians by the forcible: removal: of Doctor 


O'Meara in July, 1818, and of Doctor Stokoe in 


January, 1819, he has experienced’ several crises, 
during which he has been obliged to keep his bed, 

sometinies for fifteenor twenty successive days. 

At the present moment, in the midst of one of the 
most ‘violent ‘of the crises ‘that he ‘has yet expe- 
rienced, confined to’his*bed for nine days, having 
only patience, diet; arid the bath,’ to 6ppose'to the 
disease’; for Sia days*his tranquillity has been dis- 
tufbed BP thFbattep'\dn ahtathy’ ahd of outrages 
which’ the’ Prince’ Regent, Lord Liverpool, and 
all’ Europe: well know ‘he will never submit: to. 

As’ the wish’ ‘to debase and to insult him is daily 
manifested, he reiterates thé declaration he has al- 
ready made. * That he has not ‘taken, nor’ will he 
take any notieé, ror has he’ ordered) ‘nor will ‘he 
‘order any answer to be givén to any despatches: or 
packets, ‘the wording of which shall be done in a 
manner “injurious téhim; ‘and! contrary to’ the 
forms which have been established for four years, 
to correspond with -him through the intermedia- 

2L2 


a “ae a 


516 APPENDIX. 


tion of his officers; that he has thrown, and will 
throw into the fire, or out of the windows, those 
insulting packets, not wishing to innovate any 
thing upon the state of affairs that has existed for 
some years. 

(Signed) NAPOLEON. 


Longwood, 16th August, 1819. 


This declaration I have been informed was cal- 
led forth by the following circumstance: while 
Count Montholon was sick, Sir Hudson Lowe, 
ingenious in inventing new vexations, refused to 
correspond with Count Bertrand, and wanted to 
insist upon having a direct correspondence with 
the emperor, either by the visit of one of his 
officers twice a day to him, or by letter. To 
attain this, he sent Sir Thomas Reade or Ma- 
jor Harrison to Longwood several days, who en- 
tered the house, proceeded to the outer door of 
Napoleon’s apartments, against which they con- 
tinued to knock for some time, exclaiming, “‘ Come 
out, Napoleon Bonaparte !”—“ We want Napo- 
leon Bonaparte!” &c.; concluding this scene of 
uncalled for outrage by leaving behind them pac- 
kets of letters addressed to ‘“ Napoleon Buona- 
parte,” written in the usual Plantation House 
style. ; - 

THE END. 


"iwi 


saat - 4dereuaieald 
™ ‘hwnd 
it bomids 


. 
‘ 


; ite yn thre wi atid wilt 
; : , ‘ nie 
h sa203 


a7 


are . Ln ae 
= ve ye 
Le : oe ites ay 
= ; ~ . he Pee a 
i ~~ Pee 
. é = Fs 
wid:: EX ta t- sy eubyi Meaty 


8 e° a 
~ ony £ : Bs ’ . 


Oo Wedges. rede. on or ape 


(i Alm 


eo 


° fu REN he eb rg 

» : , a "3 Risa! et 
M . 

- SEPONNER® ah Min. Fagg oe ‘ 


Peak "Tabs ; bef 


INDEX. 


— 

Asstinence, Napoleon’s, ii, 257 

Accouchement of the Countess Bertrand, i,. 988" 

————__— of Marie Louise, i ii. 367. 

Adamant, arrival of, i. 317 , 

Fi romeag English, i. 483 

Albuera, battle of, ii. 194 _ 

Alexander, emperor of Russia, his character, i, 228, 248, ‘His 
views on Turkey, 382. Asks rNapstegy ’s advice respecting the 
conduct of bis ambassador in China, 510, His,attention to 
military trifles, ii. 48. sip op that mpetien should marry 
his sister, 159 mile 

Alexandria, i. 375 : asa | 

Algerines, i. 171, 306, 502 gnodun exaust heel 

Allies, their declaration at Vienna, ii, 481 dic 

Ambassadors, not the representatives of vovereigns, ik. 175°" 1 fl 

————— Persian, anecdote of, ii. 292 

Amherst, lord, his embassy to China, i. 469. Ought to ‘have 
gone through the Ko-tou, ‘475, 509. ii. 68. Arrives at, St, He- 
lena, and visits Napoleon, 112. The emperor's opinion of his 
embassy, 174 wilted 

Amiens, the Fae Be of, +d violated b the Hi ii. 21 G 

Anecdotes, i. 35, 58, 105, 124, 1 teh Sa 435, 488, 496. 
ii. 4, 5, 35, 36, 65, U8. 124, 146, =, 164, 219, 220, 268, 
292, 300, 348, 361, 369 , 

Anglesea, marquis of, wounded at Welereny i ii, 162 

Angouleme, duc d’, ii. 392 

——_—— duch hess of, i. 487 

Antommarchi, Dr., his letter to Signor 8, Colonna, ii, 498 

Archambaud, i. 165 

Arcola, ii. 2, 226 

eth English, condemned by Napoleon, i i, 478. ii, 252, 


— 


520 INDEX. 


Army, Napoleon’s confidence in, ii. 268 

Artois, count d’, his conduct at Lyons, i. 104. His escape, ii. 
270 

Assassination, defended by Talleyrand, ii. 191 

—————- Napoleon’s few precautions against, ii. 225 

- fears of at Longwood, ii. 272 

- of General Duphot, ii. 353 

Assassination (intended) of Napoleon, i. 339, 341, 344, 345, 354, 
449, 461 


of Joseph Bonaparte, i ii. 310 
——. of Saliceti, ii, 312 
—_—_—__—______- of Sir H. Lowe, ii. 390 
Atheism, denied by Napoleon, i. 444 

Austerlitz, battle of, i. 225 


Austria, the emperor of, his private uniderstandis ad 
“after the return from Elba, i. 297. “His ¢ piss $i ii. 9. 


bids the murder of Na ie 42. Implores ; pardon of 
leon, 43. His ideas o f high birth, 296 pose 


: ey pees 
nA 
Baccace, excess of in the English armies, is 50 alitedl he 
Baildon, Dr., ii. 443 d a 1719 a vob caeesl 
Balcombe, Mr..i: 5. ii. 103 r ce See tral no ~ » 
oto Me: i. S80, 415'"/ % vooReecny 1 Bo eee 
— ee Misses, i 385, 415 o> i asting yes 


Balmaine, count, i. 168, 475, 511. ii. i. 14, 295 B fa od ast 
Balston, captain, ii. 89 nn tel eae tke ey 
Bankruptcy, peer ii, 189 pattern tt Lot arn ny 
Barber, Mr., ii. 373 Y So Golimietes> Yaw ey 
Baring, gunner of the, ii. 98, 102, 108, 114, 464 a 


Baring, Mr., letter of his firm to Bertrand, ii = Ma f 
Made get 


Barras, clinracter of, i. 188. ii, Av, 935, 
~ chief by the convention, 361 


Barrére, ii. 171 eit A hs tieiy bas es 
Bathurst, lord, i, 19. ii. 75, 142, 397, 445 4 STE vee on 
Bavarians, defection of, ii. '394 » ees ra tsi 
Baxter, Mr., i. 278, 285, 286 © % 100390 A. 


Beauharnois, Eugene, his first thterhen wit sn i 
Bed-room, Napoleon’ 8, described, m 40° 7 e a 
Beetroot, sugar from, i. 423 # Jo siUphe aaa 
Belgians, attached to Napoleon, i. 424 5p see gf 
Belgium, ii. 56 

Bergen- -op-Zoom, siege of, ii. 194 
Berri, duke de, i. 417 o « 
Bernadotte, ii. 43, 364 a. 
Bernstorf, his despatches opened, ii. 288° 


INDEX. 521 


Bertrand, count, accompanies Napoleon to St. Helena, i.2. Takes 
‘up his abode at Hut’s Gate, 17. Receives a visit from Sir H. 
Lowe respecting the necessity of Napoleon being daily seen 
by some British officer, 38. Condemned to death by the 
French government, 81. Remoyes to Longwood, 169. His 
brother no longer an exile, 425. Bill drawn by him for Sir 
H. Lowe’s approval, 426. Receives a letter from Messrs. Ba- 
ring and Co. ii. 180. Wishes for a certificate of life for the 
countess, 184. Letter to Sir H. Lowe respecting Mr. Elphin- 
stone’s presents, 461. To the gunner of the Baring, 464. 
To Sir H. Lowe respecting the grievances at Longwood, 471. 
To Cardinal Fesch, 478. To Lord Liverpool, 502— ‘ 
countess, i. 17, _ Her accouchement, 
Bessiére, Madame la Maréchal, i. 454 
Bingham, Sir George, i. 244 : 
——— lady, i. 434° 
Blacas, i, 225, 486,499 0 to a 
Blakeney, captain, ii. 210 ‘ = Eile lonl 
Bliicher, character of, i. 200, His contempt for the French, 429. 
Saved by his Cossacs, 429 = joes: 
Bonaparte, Buonaventura, ii. 297 _ 
Joseph, i. 232, 359; 360. ii. 310 ; 
Lucien, ii, 291, 293 een * 
Napoleon, Leaves the Bellerophon for the Northum- 
" berland, i. 1, His habits during the yoyage to St. He ats 7- 
Arrival at St. Helena, 8. Residence at the Briars, 11. Re- 
moves to Longwood, 15. Begins to write his memoirs, 17. 
Generosity to an old Malay, 19. Space allotted for his walks, 
_ 20. Precautions against his escape, 21. His opinion. of 
Murat, 24, of Miss Williams’s “ Present State of France,” 24. 
His hours of rising, 24. Habits at Longwood, 25. Refuses to 
see Sir Hudson Lowe, 27. Subsequent interview with Sir 
Hudson, 28. Opinion of Sir G. Cockburn, 29 and 34. Dis- 
approves of, and alters, the paper sent for the siguature of his 
friends, 31. His aversion to St. Helena, 33. Interview with 
Captain Hamilton, 33. With Colonel and Miss Wilks, 34, 
Anecdote of Corvisart, 35. © Reproaches the English govern- 
ment for sending out ships without chronometers, 36, ( 
tions O’Meara as to his precise situation, relative to himself, 
. 47, His opinion of Sir H. Lowe, 43, 48, 94, 128, 163, 170, 
211, 229, 235, 244, 248, 279, 284, 297, 301, 357, 443, 445, 
156. ii. 141, 187, 262,345. Apprehensions of the; roe 45. 
ected with catarrhal, symptoms, 48. Charac Sir J. 
“Moore, 55. Of Kleber, 56. Account of Villeneuve and of 
his death, 56. Character of Barré, 57. ‘Aneedoted ta ‘proof 


J t - 


tll elie 


declrstion, 157. His reasons for re’ whe 16 the title of « 


179. Of the Empress yorepnire, F 179. Eugene Eugene Beaubar- 
nois, 180. Indisposed, 180. bag "Or ‘ge ‘His 
‘reason for encouraging the Bink bs 
185. Of Carnot, 187. Of Barras, 188. 

' His intention of crowning Hard os, item 
Moscow, 191. Abode there, 193. 04, 


O22 INDEX. 


of the riy of St. Helena, 58. His practice in case - 
‘lady, 60. For iso peinione respecting manne 60. ae 
tion Feapering:, arden, 61. His idea of nec 


_provements in London, 62, His opivion of Sir P. M on 
65. Of Lord Holland, 66. Receives Mr, Baxter, 68. His 
toilette, 82. Complains rf a pain in his right side, 83, Re- 
ceives Colonel Keating, 64 ides out for the first time for 


eight weeks, 88. His birth-day, 89. His conversation with 
Sir H. Lowe, 94. His opinion of Sarazin, 96. Writes a letter 
‘to the English Che uae complaining of Sir H. Lowe, 101. 
Complains of beng fF rived of mo, DewaPapery ‘101. - 
racter of the ki of Prussia, 1 he Bourbons, 103. 
Anecdote of an z woman, "105. Character of or de ig 
Wishes to send sealed letters to bankers in Paris or 

-: Pape a we plate to has ese Pie ior sale, 120: 

tended mode of living in Englan 

Leopold, 138. Number of intone elena Take ie at. oe 


rines, 171. Of the Neapolitans 171. Of othe ate 
debt, 172. Of the English as soldiers, 173. Of the battle of 
Waterloo, 174. Of Wellingtary 175. OF Pitt’s ‘politics, 176. 
Of the English seamen, 177 OF. the French, en, 177. 

_ Of the American, 178. _ Seriously indisp d, 178." 


Of religion, 197. Of man, 198, conket seater 
tenarteee 199. Of Blucher, 200. Oft ‘the En iglish s old 
Of the Italians, 202. Of the Prussians, jans, anc We 
ss 0, Lie Oa a OF a 
, General -O’Hara, e si 03 
Of the Neapolitans, 206. His private i cotnading wa the <- 
Emperor of Austria after the return from Elba, 206. Always 
willing to make peace with England, 207. His chara od of 
Sir Sydney Smith, 209. Challenged b by Sir S, Smith, 21 
his intentions with regard to Spain, 2 aid, “Opinion of 


rand, 214, Account of Duroc, 219, Anxiety for s 
225, Of the distresses in. England, ney tbe ae 


Saxony, 228. Of the King of E 
228, Fears for his memoirs, 229 9. Opitiion of ‘his 


INDPX% | 523° 


Joseph, 282. His concern for O'Meara, 233. Wishes Las 
Cases. to leave St. Helena,'234. Opinion of Desaix, Kleber, 
Soult, Moreau, 237. .Of Lasnes, 238. Of Massenia,'239. Of 
Pichegru, 240. » Recounts his early life, 249. ° Denies: having 
ever offered his setviees to England, 250. Of Gen. Paoli.’ Of 
the English expedition to Copenhagen, 254. Of the’ English 
smugglers, 252. - Of the expedition to Walcheren, 254. Of 
Robespierre, 259. » Of the situation of England, 260. Of the 
probability of a revolution in France, 272. Of Georges’ con- 
spiracy, 273. Of Moreau’s death, 274) ' Of St. Priest’s death, 
275. “Narrow escape on the island of Lobau, 276. Attack of 
nervous fever, 276.. ‘Wishes his body to be burnt, 277. Cha- 
racter of Pozzo di Borgo, 290. Desires to have an interview 
with Las Cases befdre: his ‘departure; 291. Protests against 
Sir H. Lowe’s conduct; ' 295)! f stove O’Meara witha snuff- 
box, 303.. Of the'attack. on Algiers, 306.) “Of ‘Nelson, 308. 
Of the treatment of the French prisoners; 328. — Of'the detain- 
ment of the English travellers; 326,’ Of Miot; $28. Reply to 
the charge of poisoning. bis. sick, and causing four thousand 
Turks to be shot at Jaffa; 329.'\ Visits Countess Bertrand, 338. 
Account of Ceracchi’s conspiracy, 339. Of the infernal machine, 
340. Of the attempt to assassinate him at Schétnbrunn, 344: 
Of a similar attempt ‘against him, in ‘his own’ chapel, 345. 
Intended to invade England, 349. Opinion of the canaille; 
351. Would ‘abolish flogging in the. navy, 351. » More. na- 
tional spirit in England) than in’ France, 352: osed a 
commercial treaty with En 853. Had. not’ aimed at 
universal dominion, 354.°\ His mode of paying’off the English 
national debt, 354..;.Of Catholic; erhancipation; 855. | Ange 

towards Sir H. Lowe for having accepted’ Admiral Malcolm’s 
intermediation, and then not moving in the business, 357. Mes- 


sage to Sir H. Lowe, 358.° Di owith Sir H. Lowe, \re- 
specting his restrictions, 358, (360,368; Complains ‘of. the 
glish, 369. | Disputes respecting the restrictions, 371.» His 


belief in fatality, 373. . The English should Have ‘retained pos- 
session of Alexandria, 875. Letter'to the Emperor Paul, 378: 
Of his assassination, 379. .Agreement with him to invade 
India, i.) 381..- Dangersto India from the ‘Russians, 381, 
Anxiety for Count: Montholon;! 383: Of Grouchy, 385: Of 
pert x ~ Ney, 386.) er ee Lge oh at 

e'sovereign of the: people, 388: The English gui ‘in- 
terest, 359. Remarks upon Le v00d, 390 Titesin hess 
tricating England from her difficulties, 395. Of Sir H. Lowe’s 
cruelty, 396. Of Carnot, 400. Of Clarke, 400; His inten 
tions towards England, 402. Denies having expressed any 


524 INDEX. 


abhorrence of the English uniform, 402. Asks O’Meara his 


opinion of himself, 403. Denies having ever committed any | 


crimes, 404, His mode of acting, 404. Of Warden’s book, 
416. Exposes its errors, 416. Of the prisoners at Jaffa, 416. 
Of Wright, 417. Of Lord Castlereagh, 421. wiper. ore | 
421. Of the means of relieving the commercial distresses of 

England, 423. France would have been independent of colo- 
nial produce, 423. The Belgians attached to him, 424. Nearly 


taken prisoner by the Ublans, 427. People more anxious to learn — 


the sottises than the qualities of a great man, 430. The answers 


sent up by Sir H. Lowe full of imbecility, 434.. Of Talleyrand, — 
434. Of the report of his gg Mahometan, 486. B His 


contest with the Imans, 436. lans for making canals in 
Egypt, 438. Of Menou, 439. the 13th of oe veedediaies 
440... Of the French bulletins, 442. Of the English sey, 44 
442, Of Talleyrand’s mission to Warsaw, 447. rn for 


Of Lavalette, 449. Of Pichegru’s conspiracy, ja 


dame, Montholon, 456, | Complains of swellings in Ibis 
456. . Of Pichon, Chateaubriand, &c., 456. Of Fox, 458. 
his treatment at Elba, 461. Of Ferdinand of Spain, 461. Of 
Josephine, 461. Of Waterloo, 463. Of Wellington, 463. His 
contempt for libels, 466. . Of Goldsmith, Pichon, ‘and the 


Quarterly Review, 467. Of his wre pvr 2. 467. “Tntentions - 


with respect to England, 469.. Of Lo 


471.. Refuses to see Lord Amherst, if Bageerntyt tie * a 


Lowe, 472. Of the plague, 473, Of 
aie 473... His.encouragement to French trade, 474.. Of 

Amherst’s,embassy, 475. Of his departure from Egypt, 
476. Conversation ahi Captain Cook and Mr. Mackenzie, 
477. Liked by the English, sailors, 478. Of ears ‘and 
Wellington, 479. Of the English national pe gee . OF 
Good Friday; 481. His oath at his coronation, 481. Of Hoche; 
482. Of the English admiralty, 483... Of French ‘and 


liberty; 484. Of Lord Castlereagh, 486... OF Blacas’s f° 


486, Of Louis, 487:. Of Mademoiselle Raucour, 488. — 


the burial grounds independent of the friars, 489. ‘Would not — 


consent to the peace of Chatillon, 490; Of Davoust, tere 


and .Massena, 492. Of Clausel, Gerard, and Soult, 493. 
Cornwallis, 496. . Asylum’ in England. offered to him by Lord 
Castlereagh, 497. Of Baron Stein, 498.. His power to « 
Prussia and Austria, 499.. Of Metternich, 499. Lord $ 
worth’s interview with him, 500. The machiavelism of the 
= ish Ministry, 502. His dislike to the pirates of 
Tunis, 502. Of Lord Exmouth, 503. “Assisted in the 
oenue of the Meuse by the English seamen, 505. His guard 


eo 
7 


INDEX. 525) 


formed by them at Elba, 507. Delighted with the races, 507. 
The English ought to have submitted to the Chinese etiquette, 
510. His advice to the Emperor of Russia. on the same sub- 
ject, 510. Refuses his consent to Talleyrand’s pro of pro- 
curing the assassination of the Bourbons,’510, ployed in 
writing an account of the seven years’ war of the Great Fre- 
derick, 511. His opinion of medicine, ii: 2... Anecdote of 
the Marseillois, 4. hibited the making of eunuchs under 
pain of death, 7. His habits of business, 9.,, Opinion ofthe 
Emperor of Austria, 9. Of the Corsicans, 12. Continues, to 
write his observations on the works of Frederick the Great, 15. 
Of the Corsicans, 17.. Of Sir H. Lowe, 18.. Of the French 
prisoners in England, 19. Of the attack by the English.on 
Copenhagen, 20. Of the seizure of the Spanish frigates, 19. 
_ The peace of Amiens violated by the English, 21. _Eng- 
lish offer to assist in making him King of France, on condition 
of his surrendering to them Malta, 21. Of Captain Wright, 
24. Of the French and English prisoners, 26... Of. the 
Princess of Wales, 32... Of Prince Leopold, 33. Of the 
lots against his life, 33. Of the Venetians, 36... Of Count 
Entraigues, 36. Of Moreau, 40. Of Pich ’s plot, 41. 

' Of the Emperor of Austria, 42. Of Bernadotte, 43. (Of 
Bruyes, 44. Of the French and English sailors, 47.' Of the 
Emperor Alexander, and the king of Prussia, 48, Of the Eng- 
lish armies, 50. Of the English cavalry, 51... Of Russia, 53; 
Of the Emperor Paul, 53. His own final intentions in regard 
to Europe, 56: Of the Duke d’Enghien, 59. Of ,Pichegru, 
59. Of Cromwell, 59. Of Madame de Stael, 65. Of the em- 
bassy to China, 68... Of the proper rlicy of England, 69— 
77. Of the French prisoners, 84. Of Santini, 92.. Anxiety 
to possess his son’s bust, 98. Character of his mether, 100, 
Of Josephine, 131. Of Murat, 104. Of the Neapolitans, 105. 
Possibility of his remaining in France after the battle of Wa- 
terloo, 106. His title to the crown of France, 113; Visit from 
Lord Amherst, 117. His general policy, 120... Of Wurmser, 
124. His precautions against the plague at Jaffa, 128. . Let- 
ter to Sir H. Lowe, 130. Message to Sir H. Lowe, 132. Thinks 
that he is harshly treated, that he may be driven to suicide, 
142. Reply to Lord Bathurst’s speech, 142. Of Poussilguere 
145. Of the Mamalukes, 146. | His’ birth-day, 146... Anec- 
dote of two English sailors, 146. Of the Prince of Orange, 146, 
Of the Queen of Prussia, 150. Malta the fittest place for. his 
abode, 151. His wish to visit England. incognito, 154, His 
ee to attack the allies in Paris, 157. > Alexander’s wish that 
should marry his sister, 159. Of Narbonne, 160.. Nearly 


526 INDEX. 


taken _—- at Waterloo, 161. Of the concordat with the 
Pope, 165. Of Spain, 166, His History of Corsica, 169... His 
e-essay at Lyons, 168. Of Robespierre, 169. : OF Marat, 
70. Of Hebert, Chaumette, Collot «’Herbois, 170. Of Marie 
Antoinette, 172. | Anecdote df Sieyes, 172. Of the e 
to China, 174. \-Of ‘Captain ‘Wright, 181. Of Sir S, Smith, 
182. Of 'Lord- Wellington, 184. ‘Of the means of relieving 
the distress of England, 189.’ Of English manners, 192. Of 
Marshal Jourdan and the: battle of Albuera,: 194... Of Well- 
py ade mode of carrying on sieges, 194... Conversation with 
miral’ Plampin respecting. naval affairs, 196. His. in- 
tended invasion .of India, 197.\° Of Surinam; 201. Of the 
pontons, 202. Of the Manuscrit .venu de St. Héiéne, 204. 
Of Sir H. Lowe’s offer to build-him a\iiew house, 206. Of Mr. 
Boys, 211. Of the English: Catlhiolics, 21z) Much: pleased 
with the races, 213. Of Miss G**, 209. Persists intstaying 
at home to avoid insults, 223. OF the Edinburgh Review, 225. 
Takes ‘no. precautions’ against ‘assassination, 225,» Nearly 
drowned when a boy, 227. His property seized by ** 
Of the talents: requisite’ for ‘a gédd general, 229.) Of earth- 
uakes, 232. Of the proper policy of the English in regard to 
ia, 232)' Seriously indis 7235. Of patron» saints, 
246. Anecdote of an Italian’ priest; 247. Of medical-men, 
248. Anecdote of Sieyes; 250. °-Of Larrey, 251: -His:dis- 
like to medicine, 256. His abstinence, 257. .Communicates 
his wishes to Sir H.' Lowe through Bertrand, 264. Of his re- 
ception by the French on his return from Italy, 267. His con- 
fidence in the French army, 268. \ Refuses to be styled Ge- 
neral Bonaparte, 273. Refuses the advice of O'Meara, 279. 
His grief x his son’s being disinherited from the succession to 
the Duchies of Parma, &c., 285. His Taye private, 
286. . Of the London post-office, 286. Of Lord Cochrane, 
291. \ Anecdote ‘ofa Persian’ ambassador in Paris, 292, Of 
Lucien; 293. Of his fuster-brother, 294. | Of Talma, 295. 
His wishes respecting his body after death, 338..° Di 
tion of the English custom ‘of shutting: up shops on y> 
= Refuses to see Mr: Baxter, 346. Anecdote of Richelieu, 
Of' his’ having’ been generally acknowledged emperor, 
350. Of the treaty i Tolenane, 358 Of the Venetians, 355. — 
The ‘convention saved by him, 359. His humanity to: his 
soldiers, 861. His conduct’ to Col. Pepin, 361. Of Marie— 
Louise, 367. His respect for the laws; '369.. Of this marriage, 
370. His plans against England,’ 378. His government in 
France, 884, His admiration of Corneille, 391, His opinion 
of Maitland, 392, Causes of his downfall, 393: Of the cam- 


INDEX. 527 


paign of 1818, ii. 398. Letter to the empress in favour of 
O’Meara, 417. Presents to O’Meara, 417. His proposal to 
assume the incognito, 459. His protest, 483. Lettre adres- 
sée au Comte de Las Cases, 510. His serge + nk 

Bonvivant, ii. 369 

Bourbons, i. 186, 388, 394, 408, 492,487. ii. 59, 120, 1640 

Bouvet de Lozier, i. 451 

Boys, Mr., censured by rig ii, 210 

Briars (the), account of, i 

Brienne, battle of, i. 421 » 

Brook, Mr., ii. 184 

Brook’s History of St. Helena, extracts from, ii. 433 

Bruyes, admiral, ii. 44 

Bulletins, i. 442, ii. 898 

Burdett, Sir Francis, ii. 84 

Bust of young Napoleon, ii. 98, 102, 108, 114 


CAMBRIDGE store-ship, ii. 366 

Cambronne, ii. 269 

Campan, Madame, ii. 172 

Campaign of 1813, ii. 393°. 

Campbell, colonel, i. 460 © 

captain, ii. 1 

Canaille, i. 351, 427, 440, 879, 385 

Canals, intended by Nepoleoni in Egypt, i i. 438 

Cannes, ii. 268 

Canosa, prince of, ii. 305 

Capri, commanded by Sir H. Lowe, ii. 302. “Sorrendered by 
im to the French, 329 

Carnot, sketch of his life, i. 187. Clarke's conduct towards 
him,400. His character, i. 172 : 

Caroline, queen, ii. 188 

Cassetti, ii. 301 

Castlereagh, lord, i. 260, 394, 895, 401, 421, 459, 468, 496 
497. ii. 158, 164, 221, 352 

Catholics, emancipation of, i. 855. ii. 211, 224 BP 

Cavalry, English, inferior'to the French, ii 51> me? 

Caulaincourt, i. 428, 489. ii. 221° . 

Ceracchi, his attempt against the life of Napoleon, i. 339° 

— Napoleon’s coachman, i, 343 
arles, a mulatto, i. 265 

Charles, prince, his character, i. 203 

Charlotte, princess, ii. 146. Her death, — Sit it 

Chateaubriand, i. 457. iit ae, 363 rol zsel 

Chatham, lord, ii. 22 we Hh Genel 


ot te — Pew ~~ -_ 


TT 


¥ 
a 

528 INDEX. 
Chatillon, peace of, i. 490. ai. 156 ii BISh totegtene 
China, i. 471, 475. ° ii. 68, 174, 404 1b ieyiton 
emperor of, his edict, i. 509 ron seit comes? 
Churchill, Mr., i. 476 t= ‘ b.sime) vewel 
Misses, i. 476 Gd6 .) Josviene 
Ciphers, easily read, ii, 285 | , Daf 1 eondawell 
Cipriani, dangerously ill, ii. 386. His death, 399.5 i dh voveed 


Clarke, lis conduct to Carnot, i. 400, . His character, — —_ 

Clausel, i. 493 

Cochrane, lord, ii. 291 do obrnaads oninsisll 

Cockburn, Sir George, sails with Napoleon, i i. vd Eveni ng parties; 
13. Repairs Longwood, 14... Stations two .cruizets off St. 
Helena, 32. Calls on Gourgaud’s mother in Paris, 413, His 
opinion of Napoleon, 431. His own oe the e 


ror, ii. 140, 240 2) stew ony * Labret 
Codicil to Napoleon’s will, ii, 339 ph Pie yes 
Coffee, grows i — South of Franee, i i. 424 »  boemneht 
Cole, Mr, j ii. best ss tOUIABRO 


Colonies, Bogs France independent of their produce, 14293 
Commerce, 


Commerce, treaty of, pro by "Napoleon to , i. 353 
Commissioners, of France, Russia, and Austria, their arrivalat) 
St. Helena, i.63. Sir H. Lowe’s aversion to them ii. 270— 


Concordat of the Bourbons with the auiere ii, 164, (0B: therm 
Condorcet, ii. 152 reus oni shad 
Congress of Vienna, their determination to send Napoleon 
Elba to St. Helena, i. 84 wine wane 
Conscription, ii. 38]. ! yi ed Neiitn dw abe \iweyel> 
Conspiracies savinet Napoleon, tS dorrn Y sda wren. 
————. by Ceracchi, i. 339 alt aid Wolbetde aed 
by St. Regent, Imolan, &c. i. 841, 854 UO bene 
————— by a young man at Schéenbrunn, i. 344. > 
by a Saxon, i. 347 (66s akeantP 
by Pichegra, i. 449 .:0n° 08ehH : i{ are 
—. Ly the allies, i. 461 md Lb ipietagiek! 


Conspiracy, Napoleon’ 8 disregard of, 1.995, ocyiacns armborteweys 
Convention, in danger, ii. 359. Offer. the chick jendiingnsibv$e 
Napoleon, 360. Saved by Nepoleons§ omen S ition ore 


Cook, captain, i. 477, 479 > dorrsnrereieh ile ereehe 
Cooper (French), anecdote of, ii. 369 ee) > far oa 
Copenhagen, the expedition tc, i. 251, ii. 20 at 2 eaeed 
Corneille, ii. 391 sls ‘ed ott Bie Seco 
Cornwallis, marquis of, i. 496 rus 1 oe it mete 
Corsica, history of by Napoleon, ii. 168 a ie fuastsd) 
Corsicans, their character, ii. 12, 17 i Set “aan? 


stress of the English, i. 395, 423. iA nae 


INDEX. 529 


Corvisart, his character, i. 35. Refuses to amt Louis, 487, q 
Coster, i: 449 gris frat 
Cossacs, i. 427, 429 
Courier newspaper, ii. 181 i 
Crime, Napoleon denies having pemoaiited any; { 404, 468 
Crescentini, ii. 7 

Cromwell, ii. 60) 

Curate of St. Roque, i. 488. A&E i silodiee .tois 


D’Ancouzeme, due, ii, 392 
duchess, i. 487 
D’Artois, count, i. 104; ii 270 
Daru, count; ii. 35; 
David transport, arrival of, i. 391 
Davie, captain, ii. 118 : 
Davoust, i. 432, 492 
Deadwood, camp;at; i..20, 265. . Races at, ° idem, ii. 212, 
Dab (the national), of England, i. 172, 855, 39, 
claration of the allies, ii. 481 
Deciphering, (private office for,) in; tape ii, roqreny --~ 
Defection of the Bavarians, ji. 894 , ls 
Dejeuné de trois Amis, ii, 225, 
D’Enghien, duke, i. 335, 417, 450, 468. ii. 59... 
Denon, i. 435 
D’Entraigues, count, his arrest by Bernadotte, ii. 37. 
e oan 37. Escapes to Switzerland, 38, Calumniates 
Napoleon, 38 I 
Desaix, i. 237, 310... ii, 39, yunlern 
Desgenettes, his conduct at Jaffa, i. 331, 
Desnouettes Lefebvre, i. 
Desig Napoleon’s belief in, ij 199, 373, ii. 4,5, 6, 226, 256, 


Directory, French, their conduct beset oes ii, 267, 
Corrupted by the Venetians; 355. ie'n crite 

Disturbances in England, i, 426 

Dominion, (universal,) not aimed at by Napoleon, i 354, 461 

Dorset, duc of; ii. 323 jap cx 

Douglas, major, i. "210 

Downfall, Pn pessoal ar its causes, ii. 398. 5. 8 Cort 

Drake, i. 282 wad 

Dubois, ii. 367. 

Duphot, general, ii. 353 

Duroc, i, 219, ii. 52. 


Epinsurcn Review, ii. 205, . 
VOL, It. M 


oo Se Oe 


530 INDEX. 


Education, ii. 385. aud * 
Egypt, Napoleon’s i for making canals there, i. 438. - Rea- 
sons for Yesving 4 8 it, 4 hen? 


El-Arish, capitulo, 1 ii. 509 

Elba, Napoleon’s reasons for quitting it, i. 459 

Ellis, embassy to China, ii. 404 von 

Elphinstone, Mr., his presents to Napoleon, ii. 17, wae rc 

Emancipation, catholic, i. 355. ii. 224 “ea70 

Embassy, Lord Amherst’s to China, i, 469, 475, 509. ii. 68, 174 

Emperor, disputes with Napoleon concerning that title, i. 154, 
159, 161 mv 

Enghien, duc @’, i. 335, 417, 450, 468. ii. 59 

England, a ne 260, 349, 411, 423, 426, 461, 469, e748: di 
ii. 77, 155, 

English, Napoleon’s opinion of them, i. 244. 889. ii. 19. "Pheir 
islike of the French, 52. Their detention in~ France; ‘87, 


Their preference of the bottle to women, 193 sed 
English commerce, remedy suggested by Napoleon for its relief, 

i. 395, 423. MNOS 
—-— manufactures, i. 473 wed rages 


——— national debt, i. 354. ii. 67 

travellers, their detainment: in Hare i. 326. - will 
change the English feeling towards Napoleon, 420 6 

Entraigues, count d’, ii. 37, 38 LL amherteed 

Escapes, Napoleon’s at Arcola, ii. 226. At types 226: | |From 
drowning, 227 

Esling, battle of, ii. 168 ii) teal 

Eunuchs, the making of, prohibited by = ii.6 

Exmouth, lord, his expedition against Algiers, i. 503 

Expenditure, table of that established at Longwood, ii. 450 


Experiment, her arrival at St. Helena, ii. 742 OPHAGEA ispes 
io. 
Facan, colonel, ii. 111 opposed 


Fatalism, Napoleon’s belief in, i. 199, 873. ii. 4. Anecdote in 
confirmation of it, 5. Napoleon’s belief in it, 6, 226, 256, 261 

Fehrzen, major, ii. 52 ara 

Ferdinand, king of Spain, i. 405, 461. ii. is, 166 hier ia 

Feére, (regiment de la,) ii. 227 ‘ oo a 

Festing, Captain, i. 462 

Fétes, given to Napoleon on his return from Italy, >i. 267 - $8 

Firing, (insufficiency of,) at i ood, ii. 81. Furniture broken 
up to supply the want of it, 191. Fresh complaints of its de- 
ficiency, 195. Sir H. Lowe regulates it sf the ba 
at Plantation House, 200 

Flogging in the navy, i. 351 pe 


INDEX. ‘531 


Fontainbleau, (treaty of,) violated by the/allies, i: 460 = > 

Fouché, his character, i. 163; Worse than Robespierre, ii. 170. 
Never in the confidence of Napoleon, 173 

Fox, i. 297, 458... ii. 121, 124 

Franceschi, Cipriani, ii. 301 

Frederick the Great, his seven years’ war, iv 511. ‘is 15. His 
character as a general, 229 

Freemantle, admiral, ii. 330 

Freemasons, i. 185. ii. 42 

French heiresses, ii. 221 

French prisoners, i. 323 

Generats, talents requisite to, ii./229 ) 

Gentilini, i. 165 

Georges, i. _ 303, 451 

Gerard, i. 

Goldeith, i. 467 

Good-Friday, i. 481 

Gor, captain, i. 511 

Gorrequer, major, i. 109, 111, 121, 128, = 282. 

Government, (Napoleon’s,) defended, ii. 384 

Gourgaud, i. 508, 509... ii, 241 

Graham, general, ii. 195 a 

Grassini, ii. 7 

Grouchy, i. 385, 482 

Gunner, (of the Baring,) his present of a bust of young g Napo- 
leon to the emperor, ii. 98, 102, 108, a Count Bertrand’s 
letter to him, 464 

Gustavus, anecdote of, ii. 65 


Hatt, William, dismissed from Longwood, ii. 74 
Hamilton, captain, his interview with Napoleon, i. 33. 
Harrison, major, his conduct to Napoleon, ii. 516 
Haugwitz, i. 226 
Hebert, ii. 170 
Heiresses, French, ii. 221 
Hepatitis, (first appearance of,) in Nepoleon, ii. 257 
Hobho house, Mr., sends his “ Last of the Emperor Ni 
to Bonaparte, i. ite eres yale H. apt ii. 347 
Hoche, general, i i, 482 \n 
Hodson, major, i. 433 
Holland, Lord, his pr rotest epion the pana reading =" Bona- 
parte’s detention bill, i. 66 
Lady, Napoleon’s message “ Mena ii, 516 
2m 


532 INDEX. 


Jarra, i. 328; — _ ~ih “ OM 
Jews, encoura y Napoleon, i. Warn? 20) BAIR 
Imans, Nagdaed ’s religious contest. with thei, i. 436 iz 
Imolan, one of the contrivers of cae ied mache, i. oun 
Impuissance of Gustavus, ii, 65 Hie 
supposed, of Napoleon, ii 65. as dying 
Incognito, proposals made by the bar ert to hentai ity 4D 
India, i. 375, 381. ii, 196, 232 
Innes, captain, ii. 1 th), Cpl eee ne) 
Invasion of England, i. 849. ii. 378 {- oH, hoa ay 
Intrigue, anecdotes of b Napoleon, ii, 218, 220 Lf 
Joseph Bonaparte, his character, i. 232. Sovereignty of Spanish 
South America proposed to him, 359 His Po gress 


poleon, 360, 310 Hie 
Josephine, the empress, i. 180, 226, 462, 467. ii. 101. ae) 
Jourdan, marshal, his character, i ii. 194 Vi 4 IROSAN 
Journal, Las Cases’, seized by Sir H. kawent i. : 308 paiatue). © 
Treland, i. 469, 482 ty am A-how 
Italians, their fidelity to Napoleon, i. eo fd wiv. wiegeks 20 
Julia, arrival of i: 358 TOD ap RC 
Keatine, colonel, presented to Napoleon, i. 84 © ok el RIS? 
Kleber, his character, i i. 56, 237, 438 « <1 2RS BY Bea? 
Kolli, baron, ii, 119, 157 Yi, astepaie? 
Ko-tou, i. 469, 475, 509, ii. 68, 174, 177 » me Mae? 


» LaBepovers, at the battle of Waterloo, ii, ee At Grenoble 269. 
His character, 365 
La Haye, i. 449 ere PAR PUTS 
Lama, the Grand, ii. 91 
Larrey, his opinion. that it would be am act of. humanity to-both- 
ply with the wishes of the sick at oath) jw 331. His cliaraéter, 


ii. 251 | TOES MONAT 
Lasnes, his character, i, 239 OSS of Sip bid 
Lavalette, i. 448 Wi oti aaaregt 
Las Cases, count, i. 217. Taken into- custody, 221 hin a 

wishes him to leave St. Helena, 234, Alters his. opinion of 

H. Lowe; 241, 243. His motives for: ‘following Ni on, 270 

277, 280, Léeaves ‘St. Helena, 298, Sends : a- 

e 426. The cause of Napoleon's irritation ist Sir 

we, 446, 455 tg phe: bib 
jun. bis letter to Mr; O'Meara, "i 898: Lb pusiio 
Takdetdaie, lord, i. 20. ii, 351 ha ob Pad sah 
Leipsic, battle.of, iij 395 © mat oqah, . 7 Did creme 
Musa, i, 502 S 4 ee” 


INDEX, 533 


Leutils, ii; 210 i% 1 Hpi62 oF ans 
Leopold, Prince, ii. 83, 138 > Le 
Leslie, his pneumatic machines for making ice, i. 90 
Letters, regulation of, as applied to Napoleon and his suite, i. 20. 
“All that pass through the London post-office, opened, ii, 287. 
Libels, Napoleon’s contetnpt for, i. 432, 456, 466. ii. 64, 338 
Liberty, French and English compared, i.484° | 
——~— declared by Lord Castlereagh to be merely an usage, ii. 
159. ‘The battle of Waterloo fatal to it, 385 
Liver-complaint, its prevalence at St. Helena, ii. 435. 
Liverpool, lord, packet addressed to him from Longwood, ii, 262 
Lobau, island of,i,275 = mn : 
Lodi, ii. 20) * This 
London post-office, ii. 289 ‘ 
——~—- Napoleon’s wish 'to visit it ineognito, ii. 154. 
Longwood, description of, i. 10!) Improvement of, 14. Napo- 
leon there, 15. The drawing-toom on fire, 80. Seareity and 
bad quality of the watef, 370! Incredible number of rats, 494. 
Scarcity of fuel, ii. 31. Overrun with spurge, 143, Scarcity 
of fuel, 191; Idem, 195. State of Count Montholon’s apart- 
ments, 210, “Earthquake, 229 : 
Lorri, Ignatio, ii. 294 “i ; rsital 
Lowe, (Sir Hudson,) his arrival at St. Helena, i. 26. His installa- 
tion, 27. Visit to Longwood, 27. First’ interview with'Na- 
poleon, 28. Sends a declaration’ to Longwood for the signature 
of Napoleon’s suite, 31, His changes relative to the treat- 
ment of the French, 37. Orders theshopkiee pérsito-givethem 
no credit, 37. Forbids all communication with them,’ 37. 
Places sentinels to keep off all visitors from: Longwood, 37. 
Grows more suspicious, 38. Pays several visits to Longwood, 
and at last obtains an interview with Napoleon, 38. Alarm 
at a tree that overhangs the ditches, 39, Orders it to be 
grubbed up, 39. Visits Count Bertrand, 39. Informs him 
that Napoleon must be seen daily by some British officer, 39. 
Wishes Napoleon to dismiss O’Meara, 48, Issues a procla- 
mation forbidding any person to bear letters, to or from Na- 
poleon, or any of his suite, 48. Wishes to reduce Bonaparte’s 
establishment, 89. Sends a letter to Longwood, demandi 
12,000/. per annum for the maintenance of Napoleon a 
suite, 98. Threatening language respecting Napoleon,| 99. 
Complains of Napoleon’s letters, 124. Expects. an apology 
from Napoleon, 134. Imposes fresh obligations on the ih, 
139. Letter to Napoleon in aaswer to: his declaration, 158. 
Regulations respectirig sentinels, 188. Objects to let the pro- 
duce:of Napoleon’s be at the disposal of the popes 220. 
Makes a fresh reduction in the allowance of meat ahd wine, 


534 INDEX. 


221. Threatens to send Las Cases off the island} 277. Allows 
Las Cases to return to Longwood. ~ Letter to Napoleon, 292. 
Refuses permission to Las Cases to see Napoleon :previous-to 
his departure, 297. Sends up some coffee for the use of Na+ 
poleon, i. 323. Mistakes the meaning of the phrase “ nous 
ecrivons,” in @ letter of Bertrand’s, 365. Interference inthe 


kitchen, 367. Selects the newspapers for N ’s perusal, 
- 391. Desires O'Meara to repeat Napoleon’s conversations, 
392. Has recommended Bathurst to raise O’Meara’s 


salary to 500/. per annum. His economy, 425. Surprise at 
the French expenditure; 426. Anger inst Las Cases. for 
sending provisions to Napoleon, 426. ws more liberty to 
Napoleon, 433. Inspects the ditches, 441. Declares his wish 
to accommodate, 456. Expects Captain Poppleton to be a spy 
on the followers of Srtbewsieat ii. 8. Changes the livery of. 
poleon’s servants, 93, aches O’ Meara with not having vin- 
dicated him to Napoleon, 13 129. His minute examination of the 
bills, 187. His anger against Mr. O’Meara for a 
Napoleon’s horse for Miss Eliza Balcombe, 212. F: ing lent 
books to Napoleon, 214. His dislike to the commissioners, 
270. Disputes with Bertrand respecting the conveyance of 
letters, 272. Refuses to allow Napoleon the title of emperor; 
276. Anecdote of his being duped when commanding the 
island of Capri, 300. His letter to Count Montholon, 447. 
His reply to Count Bertrand, 465 

Louis, his letter to Napoleon, i. 418. His aqalities, 487. ‘His 
timidity, 459. Forced upon the French, ii. 59 h 

L’ Ouverture, Toussaint, i ii. 198 stress 

Lucien ae ii, 291, 293 : 2 epost 

Luxembourg, ii, 229 : : 

A uu 
Macartney, lord, his embassy to Ching ii. 174, 17 1? wus 
Machiavelism, more practised by the English ministry than any 


other, i. 502 wit tart 
Mechine, infernal, i. 340, 354, 438. ii. 33 VA ese WT 
Machines, too numerous, i. 474 Rieti) 
‘Macirone; colonel, ii. 94 in prtadody TY 
Mackenzie, Mr., i. 477 : tree piel ihm teat 
M‘Lean, Dr., i. 232 080,21 
Mahometanism, i, 436 } Pe zor 
Maitland, captain, ii, 392 ' “ wr =) er 
Mabratta ea ii, 223 | 712 Ditonto nd iaett 
’s remedy for, i.60 . st 


pn ha (Sir Pulteney), r Aaasiloel to Nepldennglh i. ox Takes 
leave of him, 123. 4 rag from the Cape, 221. Interview 


INDEX. 535 


with Napoleon, 311, 363, 462. Defends Sir H: Lowe, ii. 17, 

110. Sails for England, 114 a 

— lady, i. 462. ii. 109, 114 

Malouet, ii. 22 

Malta, i. 151 

Mamelukes, ii. 145 

Manning, Mr. ii. 89 

Mantua, siege of, ii. 124 

Manuscrit venu de Ste. Héléne, ii. 204, 211 

Maresca, ii. 301 

Maret; ii. 419, 170 

Maria transport arrives at St. Helena, ii. 179 

Marie Antoinette, ii. 172 

Marie Louise, i. 467.. ii. 159, 225, 367 

Marchand, i. 234, 293 

Marlborough, ii. 229 

Marmont, his treachery, ii. 157 

Marriage (Napoleon’s), particulars of it, ii. 370 

———— Napoleon’s opinion, i. 60 , 

Marseilloise, characterized by Napoleon, ii. 5 

Massena, his character, i. 239, 387, 384, 492. ii. 342 

Masseria, i. 256 

Maxwell, captain Murray, ii. 117 

Meade, general, i. 114, 115 

Mehée de la Touche, i. 449 

Menou, i. 439. ii. 359 

Merry, Mr., ii. 124 

Metternich, i. 500 

Meuron, i. 124 

Meeurs et Coutumes des Corses, ii. 17 

Meynell (captain), presented to Napoleon, i. 65. The emperor’s 
anxiety on account of his illness, 1i. 24 ‘ 

Ministry, the English, i. 442, 473, 484, 501. ii. 21, 28, 41, 60, 
154, 240- 

Miot, i. 328 

Moira, lord, ii. 232 , 

Mole, i. 406 Le 

Money, raised in London for Napoleon’s expedition from Elba, 


ii. 21 
Napoleon’s, seized by **, ii. 223 
Monks, Napoleon’s aversion to them, i. 489 ; ‘ 
Montchenu (marquis of), his arrival at St. Helena, i. 63. His 
manners, 218. Comes to gS not to dine with Napoleon, 
431. His imbecility, 476. His indecent language, 508 
Montholon, general, i, 303, 384. ii, 16, 52, 210, 500 


a on . -_- 


536 INDEX 
Mentholon, Madame; i 457 ek lene iat 
Moore (Sir John), his character, i155 65 1 0) ofio® OFF 


Moreau, his character, i. 237.) ‘His share in Georges’ conspiracy, 
273. His death, 275. : Privy to Pie! ’s conspiracy, 452. 
His character, ii. 35. Anecdote of his death, 36. His conduct 
towards Pichegru, 40. His celebrated retreat ¢ondemned; 40 

Madame, anecdote of, ii. 35 Qe hor coin 

Moscow, conflagration of, i. 194. Napoleon's ‘retreat. from; ii. 
16, 310 )Of Vii eondisth até sh onsv tena 

Mouton, Duvernet, i. 387 iOF, jb temerrel 

Murat, death of, i. 23. His character, 24. His bad conduct; 
206. His official papers falsified, 486.) His expedition to Sicily, 
ii. 9. His declaration ting the: battle of) Waterloo, 95. 
Napoleon’s intention of dethroning him, 104. His: 
364 : pet 


, G82 2oceris ether 

Mussey, 450 O22 rnlacoweaY 
Sal Gb prereset 

Nasoss, ii. 223.0 07% .i) Ji do #teluoltae fenoslognt) eogiteniM 


Naples, descent upon, by Sir J. Stewart, ji. 230.5. © — -2— 
Narbonne, his character, ii, 160. His birth B6Orer > sot! sel 
National debt (English), Napoleon’s ‘mode »f paying it, i, 355, 

395 BEL <i ghivetohh 
spirit, greater in England than im: Franees iy 3527-482 
Neapolitans, character of, i, 171, 206.! ii,1Q5.) sb 
Nelson, lord, i. 308 Obb ie odomeT’ af hosel? 
Nemapegers (English), editors of, in the pay of the Bourbons, i. 


Ney, his promise to bring back Napoleon in an iron cage, i. 336 
-—— his conduct at Fontainbleau, 447 : Pi i tote. 
. eto) ash esenaiaal) f9 ean 
Oara, Napoleon’s, at his coronation, i: 491) 9 1iqan) tisereaty 
Ocean, her arrival at St. Helena, ii, 974 9 oo Pisin we 
Officers of the 53rd, their camp at Deadwood, i. 902: Introduced 
to Napoleon, 23. Receive hints from Sir H. Lowe) ithat their 
visits to Madame Bertrand were not agreeable to him, 37% 
O’Hara, General, i. 203 S62 fi not tow 
O'Meara, Mr. Reng. his first interview with Napoleotiti. 8. His © 
certificate from Captain Maitland, 6; Questioned by Sime. 
Lowe respecting Napoleon, 38. Questioned by Napoléon' as 
to his precise situatiott ih regatd/to himself, 48:!Histeply, 48. 
Singular interview @ith Napoléon, 112,° -Offers:to. ‘14%. 
"Assists Coant Bertrand:in:translating/ the-new restrietions) 148. 
| Dines with the commissioners, 168... Attacked. by: -thesliver 
complaint, 232. Attention of Bonaparte to him, 233, \En= 
deavours to effect a reconciliation between N 


INDEX, 537 
H. Lowe, 289. Is presented with a snuffbox by Ni 


apoleon, 
303. Defends the character of the English ladies against 


Pillet, 227. Is requested by Sir'H. Lowe to report Napoleon’s 
conversations, 393," leven a letter from young Las Cases, 
393. Gives Napoleon his opinion of himself, 403, ;More fit 
to write about Napoleon than any one, 430/' ‘Defends the 

tice of medicine in a conversation.with Bonapante, ii. 2. 
Disputes, with Sir H. mg 80, Dispute with Sir H. Lowe 
respecting the ne 63... Dines with Lord Amherst, 
116, lamwvegabea baie Sir H. Lowe, in presence of Sir Ty 
Reade, 137. Ordered by Sir H. Lowe to hold no conversa4 
tion with Napoleon except on medical subjects, 163, Refuses 
to betray Napoleon’s confidence, 163. allied by Napoleon 
on his supposed attachment for Miss * *, 218, Reproached | 
Sir H. Lowé for not having defended ‘himself fem the Engli 
ministry against Napoleon, 242. Has @ long conversation 
with Bertrand am a F the bulletins of health, 273, .Vio# 
lently abused b og it Lowe, 282. Disputes with Sir ay 

Lowe, 298. Ordered : quit the goyernor’s house, 299, 
sured by Sir Hy ‘Lewes or buying goods for the French ‘at 
Longwood, 336, Refuses to go again to Plantation House; 
847. alt informed. by. Sir H, Lowe oe ms is only tolerated to 
visit Napoleon, ii Interrogatedby t € governor respect= 
ing his conversations with Napoleon, 357, | Parthersdisputes 
Bek Sir H: Lowe, 361. ‘Refuses to give up his rights.as an 
lish officer, 375. Recounts to the emperor the manner of 
hie’ treatment by Sir H. Lowe, 385,’ Is informed that he. is 
not to pass.out of Longwood, 399. Tenders his’ resignation’ 
in consequence, 399. Has an audience of Napoleon, 399... Is 
released, 402. Is requested by the colonel of the 66th to with- 
draw from the mess, 407. Letter from the-calonel, 409, ‘Let 
ter in reply, 410, Dismissed from attendin ingon Napoleon by 
me British government, 414. a ee os ce — 
~of Napoleon fromethe emperor) himself, 417; is parting 
from the emperor, 418., His lever to tae wary aids. oe. 
Ondéver Lascelles, 496. Ate 
ner,,.colonel, ASB ne 0 vitsen woaled vy rorreetsT 
Oudinot, i. 386 ‘i Jnéhe Ve to obese 489 1 “nbs eae 


Pas, his ars: and death, i. 432 oe 

Paoli, i. 251 i 

Paul, emperor of Russia, i 378. His. sttination, a9 “lis 
intended invasion of ‘India, th Adem, yee: 

Pauline, i, 224, ii, 496) 6) 4 en inoe ogingn¥!) 

Peltier, ik 385, 407, 407, 433 ( otourt # shan eid iy 


538 INDEX. 


Pepin, colonel, ‘i. 361 Wy wees 
Peraldi, i. 309 CL. |) a 
Phaeton, frigate, her arrival at St. Helena, i, 26 syiotiey * 
Philadelphia, society, formed against Mapeiedts i. . 338 athens 
Phillipeaux, i. 210 : e 
Piccioli, ii. 324 ie 


Pichegru, his character, i. 240. Proofs that he committed sui- 
cide, 334." His conspiracy, 449. Betrayed by d’Entraigues, 
ii. 39, Napoleon’s intentions towards him, 59 

Pichon, i. 457, 467 

Pillet, i. 321, 327. ii, 27 

Piontkowski, i. 165 we J volte 

Pitt, i. 176, 458 7 

Plague, i. 473. ii. 127 - : yo 

Plampin, admiral, ii. 112, 196, 931 us 

Plate (Napoleon’s), broken up for sale, i. 120. Sold, 180) 299 

Podargus, ii. 109 

Poles, their attachment to Napoleon, i. 190. To cold weather, 
better soldiers than the French, 190 

Policy of Napoleon in case of landing i in England, ‘ii. 378 

Polignac, i. 453 

Poniatowsky, win sep intention of making seo! king, i: Jl 

Pontons, i. 323. ii. 19,25, 192, 202 

Pope (the), ii. 101 - PSEOT A Be 

Poppleton, captain, i. 167, 189, 217, 276, 365, 430, 433, 440. 
ii. 8, 94 

Port regulations at St. Helena, ii. 484 

Post-office (London), all letters opened there, ii. 286 

Poussilguere, ii. 145 

Pozzo di Borgo, i. 290, 308. ii. 306 e . 

Pradt, abbe de, ii. 208 « 

Predestination, Napoleon’s belief in, i. . 199, 373. ii. 4, 5, 6,226 
256, 261 ¥ 

Presents, Napoleon’s, to Mr. O’Meara, i SOS 41 4E PF eget 

Mr. Elphinstone’s to the emperor, ii. 117, 461 

Priests, i. 395. Anecdote of one in Italy, ii. 346 

Prisoner, Napoleon nearly made one by the Ublans, i. 427. ont 
the close of the battle of Waterloo, ii. 161 es Ws 

- French, how treated by the English, i, 323. ii. 19, 25 25, 


Turkish at Jaffa, i. 328, 416 
Prize-essay, by Napoleon, ii. 168 
Proclamations, Sir . Lowe’s, i ii. 408, 491, 504 
Protest (Napoleon’ 3), inst Sir H. Lowe’s conduct, w 296, 
Against his being made a prisoner, ii. 483 


202 


INDEX. 539 


Provisions, scantily supplied to Napoleon, ii. 86. Indifferent 
quality, 94, 112 
Prussia, king of, his character, i. 102, 122; ag 498, ii. 48.55.0500 
queen of, her character, ii. 150. : j 


Races, at Deadwood, i. 507. “ii. 212 
Rails (iron), to surround Napoleon’ 's house, i. ae 443 
Rainsford (Mr.), his death, i. 508. 
Rapp, i. 467 
Rats, numerous at Longwood, i. 494 
~— hunting of them, i. 493 
Raucour, Mademoiselle, her funeral 
Reade, sir Thomas, i. 123, 128, 138, 222, 230, 211, 201, 365, 
390, 508. ii. 15, 112,245, 270, 516 
Réal, ii. 138 
Ne. snier, general, ii. 48 
Religion, Napoleon’s ideas of, i. 197, 444 wigs 
Resignation, tendered by Mr. O'Meara, ii. 399 sul yh ga® 
Restrictions, imposed on Napoleon’s suite, ii. 445. ue 
on Napoleon, i. 455. ; 
Review, Edinburgh, ii. 205, 225 
Quarterly, i. 319, 406, 467, ii. 181 
Revolution, probability of one in France, i. 272: The Sormece 
one defended by Napoleon, ii. 349 ] 4 
Richelieu, anecdote of, ii. 348 
Ripsley, captain, ii. 1 
Riviere, i. 449 
Robespierre, i. 258, ii. 169. 
Romanzoff, ii. 160 
Rome, capture of, by the French, ii. 353 
Rosey, captain, i. 455 
Rovigo, duke of, ii. 138 
Rousseau, i. 165 : 
Russians, dangerous to the rest of Europe, i. 385. ii. 53, 69 


Saints, patron, ii. 247 

St. Denis, i. 231, 398 

St. Helena, Napoleon’s arrival at, i. 8. Deserip tion of, 8. Its 
poverty, 58. ii.201. Farther description of, 421, 434. Its 
port-regulations, 484 

St. Hilaire, i. 449 

St. Priest, general, his death, i. 275, 

St. Regent, one of the contrivers of the infernal machine, i. ar 

St. Roque, the curate of, i. 488.. 

St. Victor, i. 449 

Saliceti, ii. 300 


540 INDEX. 


Santini, i. 165. ii..76, 92. His intention: p of mip Sint? 


Lowe, 390 vifbins 
Savary, his character, i: ree: SMex an pamphlet 

Wright, ii. 182. py siads3 
Saxe, Maréchal, ii. 229 nh 
Saxony, king of, his shareaits i, ree Whi Cl sore 
Schéenbrunn, i. 344 ©)! fi ie 1A ee 
Scott, released from prison, i. 374 ws Ay busta 
Schwartzenberg, his character, i. 203 il 
Seamen, American, superior'to the English, i. us. voit eee 


English, Napoleon’s opinion'of them, i. 177. Their 
friendship for him, 478. His esteem for them, 505. | Assist 
“him in forming a bridge of boats over the Meuse, 505. “Form 
his guard at Elba, 506.)' Compared with the French, ii 47. 
Anecdote of the escape of two from Verdun, 146.88 fit’ £83 

Sections, their attack on the convention, ii, 359 ~ r th che 

Shipwrights, not sent to Algiers or Tunis by Nepolevit, i. 502 

Sicily, Murat’s expedition to) ii. 9,’ Plot to drive the ae 
out of it, 12 

Sieges, English mode of carrying them on, ii. efi = 


Sieyes, anecdote of, ii. 172, 250 i ' sips y 
Skelton, colonel, i. 235 AOL Lie rf Aan ite 
—— Mrs. i. 455 f Feta shee 


Smith, sir Sydney, his chatadter, is 208. ee saat 

209. Challenges Napoleon, 210. His. on Wri: 

162. His conduct towards Kleber, 163° jtrintqns esl 
ee Mr., ii. 160 Obb 4 orSivid 
Smugglers, English, i. 252, ii, 21 arisitytod 
Sone presented by Napoleon to Mr. O*Meara, Ge 808. ii. 

417 a THs SH x 
Soldiers, English, i. 172, 200. ii. 50 %! : 220 
Sault his character, i. 105, 386, 493. His cond oer 

i. 194 I 2 opSseens) 
Spas, Napoleon’s intentions with regard to it, ieQAD) «0 6! 
——— queen of, ii. 166 


Spurge, Longwood overrun with it, ii, 143° 9) oo ee 

Stiel, Madame de, her character, ii. 65. “Not ‘the authores of ; 
the Manuscrit venu de Ste, Hélen = whet ; A: eevsald 

Stanfell, captain, i462 ii Be ri ey 1 aTD! P 


Statue, Napoleon’s, presented by hiowill ‘to. Mr. O'Meara, iiv4 #7 
Stein, Baron, i i. 498 haf) opiehtht: 2% 


Strange, sir Thomas, i. 267, 268,270.09) 6 ts 

Stuart, general, ii. 48, 880) io 27 iIIgao och) lo soo Jeger 

Sturmer, baron, i. 300, 475, ii, 27,395 9 8 0) oe 

Subsidies, English, ii. 140 Ohb - apisi¥are 

Suchet, i. 492 mtry} 
* 


INDEX. 541 


Sugar, made from beetroot, i. 423 

Suicide, ii, 142; 167, 261 

Suite (Napoleon’ ) restrictions imposed « on ‘ieimny ii. 445 ‘Do- 
cument signed by them, 446 

Sunday, observation of, in England, ii. om 

Surgeons, ii. 2, 248 

Surinam, Napoleon’s intention of invading it, ii. 201 

Surveillers, count, ii. 416 

Suspension of arms in 1813 nen to Napoleon, ii, 893 

‘Suzzarelli, ii. 300° i ial 


Tante¥rano, his character, i: 214. His. eonduct i in regard:to the 
Duke d’Enghien, 335. His treachery and Paes iruces 421. 
His triumph, the tridmph: of immorality, 434. His mission ~ 
to Warsaw, 446. Proposes to Napoleon the assassination of 
the Bourbons, 510, His character, ii. B71, 174. Defends ds- 
sassination,. 191, .Féte. given by him to, Napoleon, 266, 
Wishes io to celebrate the anniversary of ihe eepetsias of Waa 

I ‘ nt is : 

— Whidi i. 435 i *“,soortd 

eee ii. 295 > ‘a ¥ 
itle, Napoleon persists in retaining that emperor, ii. 4 

Titles, Napclaads opinion of them, i. 164 

Tolentino, treaty of, ii. 853 : 

Tortoise, arrival of, aoe 409: 

Toulon, siege of, i. 


he, le, English.) ace for its distress, peer on = 


Tecan ii. 229 ae 


Turkey, its approaching fall, i. 376, 382 i a 
Untans, i. 427, 428 

Undaunted (the), sailors of, fond of Napoleon, i. 478 

Usher, captain, i. 506 


VanpamMeE, anecdote of, i. 124 

Varennes, Billaud de, ii. 170 

Vendémiaire, the 13th of, i, 440 

Venetians, their massacre of the French, ii. 355. Their intrigues 
to corrupt the directory, 355 

Venice, occupied by the French troops, ii. 36. 

Victorious, i. 205 

Villeneuve, admiral, Napoleon’ s account of his conduct and the 
manner of his death, i. 56 

Virion, general, i. 325 } auD-dhool Sise yd. 


= 


- INDEX. 


Wieemuiecetpeiitid to, 1.255 | walt 


eS a ae 


Walis arden, Napel ii, 215 
“oy sie Sheet 
soners at Jaffa, ee ree 


res ng Maret, ais 
4 ’s conversion: ‘to fe 195 


, 446 ; respecting Wright, 
ontholon, 456. 


inl 
Walon, ic 175, 463, 479, ii. 184, 194, 229, 342 pot sdf 
tworth, lord, his. interview with Napoleon, i. 500. His eb 


bers ps 123. codes 
Williams, Miss, Napoleon’s opinion *. her « “ Present State of 

France,” i. 24 =e 
wire. Sir Robert, i. 311 ag . Ce 

are of, ii. 372 ; Ty (nah atl ati 
Wives, sale 224 | hoslogat ealtit 


Women, too many allowed to follow. the Engl aig cerwion ii.80. 
Anecdote of the French, 50. Thieeee craton, 3B 
Engli r the bottle, 192. The life of conversation, 1 


~Woun ’s, ii. 226 — 
Wright, captain, i. 334, 417, 449. ii. 24, 182, 215 ‘*. 
¢ ; : ; te att 75 °S3 uw 


Spies 9 


ghusband, Mrs., i. 508 


BOL Rd aneatl 

fy) boausbt 

Te aiqan veda a 

me eR ‘ Mon wena" 

Li jie we 

cimAabrad 

LL. a4 sniteaad 
14g fous -aj 

eek 

; nally v 

¥hool ho anni 
jo ?anent 


¥ ony 


eee eis MDZ PiatlsteunysZentrun 
taatsBibliothe! Digitale Bibliothek 


O'Meara, Barty Edward, 


Napoleon in Exile; or, a voice from St. Helena the opinions and 
reflections of Napoleon on the most important events of his life and 
‘government, in his own words ; in two volumes 

Bd. 2 


London (1822) 


Biogr. 3331 p-2 
urn:nbnide:bvb:12-bsb10069435-5 


