* >i 
al 
. 


; THE 
is ta 
«be 


BONAPARTE LETTERS 


> 
oA 
«7 


Bee |, AND 
| DESPATCHES, 


SECRET, CONFIDENTIAL, AND OFFICIAL; 


“~~ 


» 


ss FROM THE ORIGINALS 


rf 


“ , 

» went , a % 
: ; or A y . 

: P ; . 

‘ 2s dank 

a Pay. : y) . ak 
‘ vires te Wty « TA CAPT h Mae I 
“ . aS Oe ee y a Us i ‘ 1 ape 
F le Le eye ; Smell & ~ nN Dat, he, is ae Gee. ; 
Po f : See Tee: DL Sr ia ‘ 
[Papa ae eS tare eis 


IN HIS PRIVATE CABINET. 


VOLUME I. 


. LONDON: 
_ SAUNDERS AND OTLEY, CONDUIT STREET. 
ae 1846. 


t 
“*. 
| 


J 


‘¥,SHOBERL, JUNIOR, — fG ee . PRINTER 
To Mis Royal Mighness “LSAG Prince Albert, — 


HAYMARKET, LONDON, 


INTRODUCTION. 


2 It would certainly be held to argue either ex- 


ai at this time of day, that one of the most extraor- 

dinary personages of the eventful age in which he 

lived, if not the most extraordinary of them all, was 
_ Napoleon Bonaparte. The glory with which he sur- 
oH rounded himself in so superlative a degree was of 
that nature which is most apt to dazzle the great 
mass of mankind, to captivate contemporaries, and 
to win the admiration of posterity. But such were 
the powers and resources of his mind that, had any 
¥ . other combination of circumstances thrown him into 
a different career, it can scarcely be doubted that, 
_ whatever it might have been, he would have acquired 
_ the highest distinction to which it was capable of 
leading. He would have shone, had he been a states- 
man, a diplomatist, an actor, and nothing more. 
History has industriously deduced the prominent 
ures of his character from his actions, but many 
minute traits have escaped its observation. Both are 
sketched by his own hand unreservedly in this work, 
a 2 


/ 
. 
4 


treme affectation or the grossest ignorance to deny, 


a 


PA ee lg a ee ee 


, ? 
8 kee 


iv INTRODUCTION. 


which contains the Secret and Official Correspondence 
of this remarkable man during what may be termed 
his apprenticeship to power, the years between his 
appointment to the command of an army and his 
usurpation of the government to the heads of which 
he had ever professed the greatest deference. 

In these Letters, not intended to meet the public 
eye, he has laid bare the sentiments and motives 
which influenced his actions during the busy years 
over which they extend, and thus raised a monumen- 
tum ere perennius—a monument more imperishable 
than that designed to cover his ashes in the capital 
of what was once his mighty empire. They display 
his unrivalled judgment, sagacity, foresight, and dis- 
crimination—his indefatigable perseverance, activity, 
industry, and that attention to the minutest circum- 
stances, without which the success of the most ably 
combined plans may be endangered. But the monu- 
ment, like a medal, has its reverse: There we dis- 
cover the recklessness of the means employed for 
accomplishing ends—the duplicity, fraud, hypocrisy, 
perfidy, rapacity, cruelty, which cast a shade over 
those higher qualities that would excite unmixed 
admiration but for the purposes to which they were 
applied. 

It is not the design of these introductory remarks 
to give an analysis of the work here presented to the 
public ; it is, in fact, of so miscellaneous a nature, as 
not to be susceptible of analysis: their object is 
simply to refer, in a desultory manner, to a few of the 


ES SS ee eer ee ee OS SBatiaees The 


INTRODUCTION." x 


subjects which it embraces, so as to enable the reader 
‘ to form some idea of the pre-eminent importance, 
m value, and interest of this collection. They shall 
commence with some brief notices of that instrument 
by which the mighty events recorded in it were 


‘ a ta 
Ng casa! SE 


mee achieved —the Army. 
* In the various wars which have carried French ar- 
ee, 
Ee: mies into almost every country of Europe, they have - 4 


ea invariably contrived to earn universal execration, not 
merely by the most oppressive exactions and requi- 
2 sitions, but also by the wanton destruction of all 
r that they could not consume or carry away. This 
ue. barbarous spirit seems to have been first called forth 
, by the inhuman devastation of the Palatinate of the 
is Rhine, by the express command of Louvois, minister 
of Louis XIV., in 1689. To ensure the safety of the 
ia f rench frontier in that quarter, the neighbouring pro- 
inces, some of the most flourishing in Germany, were 
“converted into a desert; and to prevent the enemy 
b« from turning the towns into fortresses, Heidelberg, 
_ Manheim, Worms, Spire, and many other cities, toge- 
ther with a great number of villages, were plundered 
Ss burned. In Spire, the French soldiers, ferocious 
s their republican successors a century later, broke 
- open 1 the tombs of the Salic emperors, strewed their 
au shes to the winds, made footballs of their sculls, 
and carried off their silver coffins. Madame de Main- 
tenon called the attention of the King to these abo- 
 minations, and Louis forbade the minister to barn 
Triers, as he had already determined to do. Two 


vi INTRODUCTION. 


days afterwards, Louvois reverted to this measure, 
adding that, to spare his Majesty’s conscience any 
uneasiness, he had taken the whole upon himself, 
and sent off a courier with orders for its execution. 
Irritated at this pertinacity, the King snatched up 
the tongs, and would have struck Louvois, had not 
Madame de Maintenon stepped between them. The 
minister left the apartment in great perturbation. 
Louis called him back. ‘ Send off a courier imme- 
diately,” said he, with flashing eyes, “and take care 
that he arrives in time; for, if a single house is 
burned, your head shall answer for it.” Soon after- 
wards Louvois provoked the King by some new con- 
tradiction to such a degree that he grasped his cane 
to chastise him. ‘Still Louis had not the resolution 
to dismiss his troublesome minister, whose pride was 
so hurt by these humiliations that he survived them 
only two years. 

Ever since the time of Louvois, pillage and devas- 
tation appear to have been almost considered as part 
of the duty required of the French soldier. Nor is 
this wonderful, prescribed as such conduct has been 
by the government and practised by the officers. In 
the Seven Years’ War, when Great Britain formed an 
alliance with Prussia, and France, of course, ranged 
herself on the side of Austria, the commander of the 
French forces sent to invade Hanover was directed 
by his government to leave nothing in the electorate, 
but to cut down every growing tree level with the 
ground. Such was the rapacity of the Duke de 


INTRODUCTION. Vil 


Richelieu during the six months in which he held the 
command there, that his own soldiers called him by 
Y ies no other name but /e petit Pére la Maraude; and so 
; far was he from wishing to conceal his numberless 
___extortions, that he built with them a splendid palace 
in Paris, which was denominated by the people, as it 
ated may be to this day, le Pavillon d Hannovre. 
* Their conduct in the other countries of Germany was 
perfectly consistent with these directions and con- 
duct. Hence, the victory of Rossbach was univer- 
sally hailed as a national triumph over foreign hordes, 
which proved themselves, whether among friends or 
foes, more destructive than a cloud of locusts, more 
sayage than the most ravenous beasts. ‘ It is not 
the Prussians,” says a Saxon memoir of that time, 
_.“ who have laid waste our fields, our vineyards, and 
our gardens; it is not the Prussians who have tram- 
pled down our growing crops, who have robbed on 
the highway, who have plundered our houses, who 
hhaye carried off and destroyed our provisions; it is 
not the Prussians who have desecrated our churches 
and made a mock of all that is sacred. No—it is 
our friends, the French and the troops of the Em- 
. pire, our so ardently wished- fer deliverers, who have 
_ plunged us into these miseries.’ 
In continuation of these grievances, it is recorded 
that whatever they could not consume or carry away 
Sy _ was destroyed or rendered useless. They broke in 
_ pieces household furniture, casks, and other vessels, 
tore up papers and books, ripped open beds, and 


ad aah ies a: 


Vili : INTRODUCTION. 


strewed the feathers over the fields, and slaughtered 
cattle which they could not remove, and left them to 
putrify in the deserted farm-yards. Twenty villages 
around Freiburg were rendered desolate because the 
French had sojourned in them. Nor were the private 
soldiers alone to blame for these wanton excesses, of 
which their officers set them the example. Thus it 
is related that the Marquis d’Argenson, who com- 
manded the French in Halberstadt, whenever he was 
about to leave a house in which he had lodged, was 
accustomed to break in pieces the furniture, and to 
destroy the looking-glasses with a diamond. 

These complaints, preferred by Germans, are fully 
confirmed by the testimony of Count St. Germain, 
who commanded a division of the French army at the 
battle of Rossbach. Writing to a friend, he says: 


‘*T head a band of robbers, of murderers, who de- - 


serve to be broke upon the wheel, who ran away at 
the first musket-shot, who are always ready to mu- 
tiny.” Again: “ The country is plundered and laid 
waste for thirty leagues round, as if fire from heaven 
had fallen upon it: our marauders have scarcely left 
the very houses standing......They plundered, mur- 
dered, violated women, and committed all possible 
abominations.” 

To characterize the conduct of the troops of the 
great nation in Germany during subsequent wars, in 
the time of the Republic and the Empire, would re- 
quire a mere repetition of the circumstances detailed 
above ; while the wholesale destruction and pillage 


INTRODUCTION. ix 


carried on in Portugal and Spain by every man, from 
the highest to the lowest, belonging to the French 
armies which successively visited those countries, is 
too well known to need animadversion. Our business 
at present is with the army of Italy, while commanded 
by Napoleon Bonaparte. 


to the young General, they impress upon him to 
“ make a point of maintaining rigid discipline, and 
sparing the inhabitants all the vexations and disasters 
which the scourge of war so frequently brings with 
it, and which order and well-regulated administra- 
tions are alone capable of repressing.” (Vol. i., p. 8.) 
The same injunction is repeated on several subsequent 
occasions, on one of which Carnot, writing in the 
name of the Directory, refers to a severe order which 
Bonaparte is supposed to have given, and an extraor- 
_ dinary power which he had been obliged to confer on 
the Generals of Division. (Vol. i., p. 51.) This pas- 
sage affords undeniable evidence that the government 
had invested him with sufficient authority to repress the 
excesses of the troops, and the incessant complaints 
: in the letters of his Generals furnish evidence equally 
undeniable that they could not wring from him any 
; paerer whatever for that purpose. 

ee reambile, the soldiers of the army of Italy proved 


; Diiscionsly to the traditional custom of theit profes- 
: “sion : and if the General-in-chief thought fit to wink 
_ at their outrages, it was perhaps for fear of compro- 


In the very first instructions given by the Directory. 


I FP! Pei OE oe SV, 


Xx INTRODUCTION. 


mising his popularity among them. Before he had 
been a month at the head of the army, we find La- 
harpe, an honest Swiss, who commanded one of its 
divisions, remonstrating on this subject in very ener- 
getic. terms. ‘ The boundless licentiousness,” he 
says, “‘to which the troops give themselves up, and 
which cannot be remedied, because we have not a 
right to order a scoundrel to be shot, is hurrying us 
into ruin, dishonouring us, and preparing for us the 
most cruel reverses. As my character for firmness 
will not permit me to witness such things, much less 


_to tolerate them, there is but one course for me to 


take—that of retiring. In consequence, General, I 
beg you to accept my resignation, and to send an 
officer to take the command entrusted to me; for 
I would rather dig the ground for a livelihood than 
be at the head of men who are worse than were the 
Vandals of old.” (Vol. i., p. 36.) 

This letter of Laharpe’s is dated the 17th of April: 
and on the 20th two other superior officers, Cham- 
barlhac, chief of the 70th demi-brigade, and Maugras, 
whose rank is not mentioned, write to tender their 
resignation for the same cause. To such a length 
was the propensity to pillage carried, as to thwart 
even the military operations. Serrurier’s division 
had taken the village, castle, and heights of St. 
Michael, near Ceva, when his troops “fell to plunder- 
ing, in spite of all-his efforts to restrain them. The 
enemy took advantage of this stupidity to return to 
the charge, and in an instant the conquerors lost 


INTRODUCTION. xi 


everything.” — On the following day, April 20th, 
_ Serrurier himself reports : ‘‘ Several corps have been 
without bread for these three days: the troops abused 
_ this pretext to abandon themselves to the most hor- 
_rible pillage. The corps have somewhat rallied, but 
there are still wanting a considerable number of men, 
who have gone off to get provisions in all possible 
5. ways. I am ill seconded by the officers, who pillage 
too: they were drunk yesterday, like the others....... 
x If bread does not reach us, the soldiers will not 
march.” He adds: “ We are still in want of a great 
many muskets; there were two thousand deficient 
before the affair.” 
_ “Unless we receive bread to-night,” writes Laharpe 
on the same day, “we shall be without an ounce to- 
morrow, and, should it even arrive, there would not 
"be sufficient to give a quarter of a ration to the three 
brigades and to the cavalry. All the agents, store- 
* isepérs, and others, in all the administrations, are 
 thaking requisitions at random: the peasants of the 
_ these parts are absolutely ruined: the soldiers are 
_ destitute and their leaders disconsolate : rogues only 
“are enriching themselves. There is not a moment to 
be lost, General, if you would save the army, if you 
_ would not have us be considered in Piedmont as men 
_ worse than the Goths and Vandals... .It cannot be 
doubted that the inhabitants, driven to despair, will 
t arm and slaughter every French straggler. Above all, 
“itis urgent to put a stop to that host of illegal re- 
- quisitions ; or, if they must continue, it would be 


sa AI y's 


xil INTRODUCTION. 


better to assemble the inhabitants, shoot them, and 
then finish plundering; for it comes to the same 
point. Bread! bread! and again bread!” (Vol. i., 
p- 38-41.) 

One more passage from a letter of the same Gene- 
ral’s, two days later, presents so frightful a picture 
of the state of troops belonging to a nation calling 
itself civilized,as makes one shudder. ‘ The soldiers 
are more busily engaged than ever in theft and plun- 
der: peasants have been murdered by our men, and 
soldiers have been killed by the peasants. Words 
cannot adequately describe the horrors that have been 
committed. The camps are almost deserted, the 
soldiers roaming over the country more like ferocious 
beasts than men; those who do not join in the atro- 
cities patrolling the while, with superior officers at 
their head; it is of no use to drive them from one 
place, they only run to murder at another. The 
soldiers are culpable, but those who reduce them to 
the alternative of plundering or starving are much 
more guilty. In the name of humanity, in the name 
of liberty, which wretches are assassinating, rescue us 
from this situation! Send us wherewithal to prolong 
our miserable existence without committing crimes. 
Who would have thought that the brave fellows of the 
army of Italy, after making so many sacrifices, would 
have no other reward but the cruel alternative of 
being famished to death or turning robbers! The 
contributions which, judiciously levied, would have 
enabled us to live, are become impracticable; the 


INTRODUCTION. : xiii 


ldier destroying in a moment what we could have 
ived upon for a week without ruining the inhabi- 
e ” And he winds up with the indignant apo- 
% ‘strophe, ‘Can there exist a Providence, since its 


t Be oad of the administrations!” (Vol. i., p. 42, 3.) 
ay § ot was not many days afterwards that, in a night- 
attack of the Austrians on his division, Laharpe was 
hot by his own soldiers, by mistake, as it is alleged ; 
oe: “but his zeal in repressing their outrages seems to ren- 
er it questionable whether that: mistake may not 
have een wilful. 
There were other officers of high rank in the 
Italian army whose minds revolted at the atrocities 
which they could not prevent. On the 9th of May, 
General Dallemagne writes: “ Up to this day, I have 
been ‘making yain attempts to check pillage: the 
- aes. which I have stationed are of no use. Ter- 
Xx e examples are required; but I know not whether 
oe the power to make those examples. An honest 
| and humane man suffers and feels himself dishonoured 
in 1 marehing at the head of a corps in which wretches 
are 80 numerous. Were I not at the most advanced 


xiv INTRODUCTION. 


licentiousness, insubordination, and excesses of the 
soldiers, were certainly not excused but palliated in 
some degree by the extreme inattention shown to 
their most urgent necessities. Numberless are the 
complaints scattered throughout these Volumes of the 
destitute state in which they were left, without cloth- 
ing, without provisions, without bread, even in some 
instances without arms. It is not surprising that, 
under such circumstances, examples of a mutinous 
spirit, of cowardice, and of desertion, should have oc- 
curred: the only wonder is that an army so neglected 
could be kept together at all. General Despinois, 
writing from Brescia on the 4th of August, says, “‘ The 
division of which you have given me the command 
cannot exist in the state of disorganization in which 
it is at present. It is in want of everything, and not 
a creature to furnish it with supplies, no commissary 
of war, no agent, not even a medical officer, or an hos- 
pital for the wounded. It is always the case that, 
when a prey to distresses and suffering all sorts of 
privations, the soldier is disheartened, and it is this 
mischievous impression too that we ought to hasten 
to destroy.” (Vol. i., p. 265.) 

Augereau, in a letter dated August 23rd, draws 
this deplorable picture of a brigade which had just 
joined his division: “ Indeed, the condition of that 
29th is pitiable: it has at mosta hundred bayonets ; 
it has no clothes, no shoes; I found in it volunteers 
under arms without any covering but a shirt and 
linen trowsers. These troops must necessarily be 


—— 


INTRODUCTION. XV 


armed, equipped, and clothed, or left in the rear: for 
they cannot be brought before the enemy in this 
state, occasioned by the carelessness of the chief.” 
(Vol. i., p. 315.) 

Massena makes, on the Ist of September, still 
more grievous complaints. ‘The soldiers,” he says, 
“suffer cruelly : two-thirds of my division, at least, 
are in want of coats, waistcoats, breeches, shirts, &c., 
and absolutely barefoot. This deficiency of clothing 
gives us a great many sick, and will give us a great 
many more, if people never do anything but promise 
without sending us necessaries. I give you notice, 
General,”—it is Berthier, Chief of the Staff, to whom 
he is writing—“ that, if the movement of the General- 
in-chief takes place, the soldiers whom I command 
cannot march in any way whatever; it is physically 
impossible, unless one would choose to leave half of 
them half-way. I have no hesitation to tell’you that 
if the same attentions are not paid to my division as 
to the others, I will give in my resignation and re- 
nounce the profession. Let it not be supposed that 
Tam swayed by ill humour; it is as a free man and 
fond of what is right that I thus express myself.— 
Ihave long been applying at Verona for flour, for the 
purpose of setting to work the ovens that are within 
reach of my division. I know not from what diabo- 
lical speculation it is that they will never send any- 
thing but bread ready-baked at Verona, which, 
when it arrives here, is always mouldy, at least two- 
thirds of it. When liquids are sent to us, it is always 


Xvi INTRODUCTION. 


in musty casks; and, before they are landed and 
delivered at the magazine, half the quantity is always 
gone.” (Vol. i., p. 336.) 

General Kilmaine, writing on the 4th of October, 
says, “ Everything that comes from the magazines of 
Cremona is of such execrable quality that the soldiers 
had as lieve drink water as the wine, which they call, 
and justly, poison; and they care so little for what 
is dignified with the name of brandy as to leave it. 
I am afraid that all this causes us to have a great 
number of sick. All the demons conspire against 
our poor army of Italy. I know of no better way to 
put an end to these abuses than to give up the con- 
tractors to the justice of the soldiery.” Towards the 
conclusion, he gives this significant hint, ‘Cloaks 
begin to be indispensably necessary for the cavalry : 
there ought to be at least a hundred to each regi- 
ment.” (Vol. ii., p. 43, 4). 

On the 25th of October, General Chabot writes, 
“The destitute state of the troops, who are in want 
of every kind of clothing, is certainly liable to occa- 
sion some discouragement. Almost all the men are 
naked, without shoes, and with little covering for the 
winter which is approaching.” 

Louis Bonaparte, brother of the General-in-Chief, 
to whom he had recently come in quality of his aid- 
de-camp, having been sent to General Vaubois at 
Lavis, thus describes the state of his division on the 
3rd of November: ‘“ The troops are without shoes, 
without coats— in short, they are naked, and are 


INTRODUCTION. XVii 


beginning to be daunted: they looked yesterday with 
respect at the fine appearance of the Austrians in 
order of battle: they are in the snow; their state 
ought to be taken into most serious consideration. 
With what consequences would not our defeat be 
attended! The officers in general are worn out: 
there were some who amidst the fire talked only of 
retiring to their homes.” The Austrians, he re- 
marks, “ fight as they never did before: it is a ran- 
cour, a fury, that borders on despair.” (Vol. ii., 
p- 105.) 

If such was the pitiable condition of the acting 
soldier, we may he prepared to expect that those in 
hospitals did not fare very sumptuously. Keller- 
mann Junior, who, it would appear, was commissioned 
to inspect those at Brescia, describes them in these 
terms: “The hospitals are not so bad as those of 
Verona, but, with the exception of the wounded, the 
others are absolutely destitute of things and medi- 
cines. A wretched, filthy paillasse, swarming with 
vermin, one coarse sheet for each bed, seldom washed, 
no blankets, considerable crowding—such is the spec- 
tacle presented by the fever hospitals of Brescia: it 
is heart-rending. ‘The soldiers justly complain that, 


_--after conquering the wealth of Italy at the expense 


. of their blood, they are debarred not only from the en- 
| joyment,of comforts, but from receiving that care and 
those attentions which their situation requires. Bread 
and rice are the only tolerable articles of food.” The 
lodgings of the soldiers are represented as surpassing 
VOL. I. b ¢ 


we. yo 


XViil INTRODUCTION. 


in wretchedness those of the sick. ‘They are totally 
out of repair. The most excessive filthiness prevails 
in the rooms, in the corridors, and in the courts. 
The soldiers are in want of straw; they have nothing 
but the refuse of the prisons of the city: the unfor- 
tunate sick on their passage are sent to the fort to 
sleep: they ascend to it, and these hapless conquerors 
of Italy, in recompence for all their hardships and 
their wounds, find none but damp, unwholesome 
lodgings, rotten straw, full of devouring insects, no 
accommodation whatever, not even wood for cooking 
their meat. These most severe privations, which they 
endure here, they endured yesterday, and they will 
again endure to-morrow as they pursue their route: 
nevertheless, M. le Commissaire will forsooth pro- 
vide for their wants!” (Vol. ii., p. 4, 5.) 

If, as this whole Correspondence seems to prove, 
the General-in-Chief possessed the most ample autho- 
rity for restraining the licentiousness and the spirit 
of plunder which prevailed among his troops, but 
neglected to exert it, it appears equally certain that 
the commissaries, agents, and civil officers of his 
army, were wholly independent of his control; 
though, it is true, these Letters furnish arguments for 
a totally different conclusion. ‘‘ No pity,” writes 
Carnot, in the name of the Directory, on the 16th of 
May, “ for dishonest: administrators, who devour the 
subsistence and dilapidate the resources of the repub- 
lican armies! Point them out to the Directory, 
citizen-general; bring them to trial; you are on the 


ts 


INTRODUCTION. xix 


spot; you are well acquainted with their infamous 
conduct and scandalous robberies; make necessary 
examples of them, examples capable of deterring 
those who may be tempted to imitate them in future : 
it is the only way to extirpate that mania for rapine 
which impunity and connivance have so disastrously 
spread over almost the whole surface of the Republic. 
On these shameless vampires ought to fall the first and 
the just punishment reserved for audacious guilt.” 
(Vol. i., p. 104, 5.) From this language but one 
inference can be drawn—that the General was in- 
vested with ample authority for the correction of the 


‘abuses of the civil administration of his army: but 


let the reader turn to his letter of the 12th of Octo- 
ber, filled with energetic denunciations, and it will be 
impossible to doubt his willingness to punish. “Ever 
since I have been at Milan,” he says, “I have been 
engaged in making war upon knaves. I have had seve- 
ral tried and punished, and I must denounce others to 
you. In making open war upon them, it is clear that 
I interest against myself a thousand voices, which 
will not fail to exert themselves to convert public 
opinion. I can conceive that, if, two months ago, J 
aspired to be Duke of Milan, I should now want to 
be King of Italy; but so long as I have strength 
and your confidence”—he is addressing the Direc- 
tory—‘ I. will make merciless war on rogues and 
Austrians.” 

Commencing with the administrators general of the 
finances of the army, rogues on a great scale, he de- 

b2 


“tu 
‘ a 


XX INTRODUCTION. 


scends to the commissaries, who, with few exceptions, 
are also “ nothing but rogues; they ought to watch, 
and they furnish the means of robbing by signing 
everything.”” Among the delinquencies of this class, 
he says that a commissary named Flack was accused 
of having sold a chest of bark, sent as a present to 
his army by the King of Spain. He then proceeds, 
* You have, no doubt, calculated that your adminis- 
trators would rob, but that they would perform their 
duty and have a little shame: they rob in so. ridicu- 
lous and impudent a manner, that if I had a month’s 
time there should not be one of them who would not 
be liable to be shot. I am continually having them 
arrested and brought before a council of war; but 
the judges are bought; there is a fair here; every- 
thing is sold. An employé accused of having laid a 
contribution of eighteen thousand francs on Salo has 
been sentenced to merely two months’ imprisonment. 
And then how would you set about proving? They 
all hang together....The denunciations which I 
make are denunciations in soul and conscience, as if 
upon a jury. You are aware that it is not in my 
place and with my character that I should denounce 
them to you, if I had time to collect material proofs 
against each of them; they all cover one another... 
But I am obliged to set out to-morrow for the army : 
great joy for all the rascals, whom a glance at the 
administration has made me acquainted with. 

“In short,” he thus winds up, “ we want for 
agents, not the tools of stockjobbers, but men pos- 


INTRODUCTION. xxi 


sessing large fortune and a certain character. I have 
none but spies. There is not an agent in the army 
but wishes for our defeat, not one but corresponds 
with our enemies: almost all have emigrated on 
some pretext or other: it is they who make known 
our number and dissolve the spell: accordingly, I am 
more upon my guard against them than against 
Wurmser ; I never have any of them with me; I feed 
my army during its expeditions without them, but 
that does not prevent them from hatching tales after 
their manner.” (Vol. ii., 26-29.) 

Reverting to the peculations of the army agents, 
the General, writing on the 6th of January, 1797, 
repeats that “ everything is sold,” adding, “ the army 
consumes five times as much as it needs, because the 
storekeepers forge orders and go halves with the 
commissaries of war. The principal actresses of 
Italy are kept by the employés of the French army : 
luxury, licentiousness, and peculation, are at their 
height. The laws are insufficient.” He then re- 
commends a remedy, arbitrary enough it must be 
confessed—the appointment of one or three syndics 
to be sent yearly to the army, whose authority should 
last only three or five days, and who during that time 
should have power to cause any administrator of the 
army to be shot. “ Such magistrates,” he says, 
“ would make everybody respect public opinion, and 
observe a certain decency not only in manner and 
expences, but also in the daily service. Marshal Ber- 
wick,” he proceeds, ‘“ caused an intendant of the 


xxii INTRODUCTION. 


army to be hung, because he was in want of provi- 
sions; and we, in the midst of Italy, having every- 
thing in abundance, spending in a month five times 
as much as we need do, are frequently in want. 
Imagine not, however, that I am soft, and that I 
betray the country in this essential portion of my 
functions. I have employés arrested every day; I 
have their papers examined, their chests inspected ; 
but I have none to second me, and the laws do not 
grant sufficient authority to the General to strike a 
salutary terror into that host of rogues. However, 
the evil is diminishing, and, by dint of scolding, pu- 
nishing, and putting myself into a passion, things 
will, I hope, go on with a little more decency.” 
(Vol. ii., p. 205, 6.) 

In truth, all the orders of the Directory at home, - 
all the proceedings of its instrument, the army in 
Italy, exhibit a system of rapine, robbery, and spo- 
liation, so monstrous as scarcely to be paralleled in 
the history of civilized nations. Practised with éclat 
by the heads of the government and their able and 
willing agent, the General, and with all but impu- 
nity by the civil officers of the army, there would 
have been too striking an-inconsistency in calling the 
naked and starving soldiers to a rigid account for 
their outrages. The wretched inhabitants of the 
countries occupied by the French troops, victims of 
this threefold extortion, were encouraged by revolu- 
tionary artifices to seek a melioration of their fate 
by forming themselves into republics independent of 


INTRODUCTION. xxiii 


their late rulers, but under the influence and protec- 
tion of France, which failed not to exact an exor- 
bitant recompence for the favour; while others rose 
to exterminate their oppressors, and drew upon them- 
selves a cruel vengeance, for that most heinous of 
offences against their invaders. 

In this Correspondence, we find the Directory, so 
far from approving the formation of republics in the 
conquered provinces, with far-sighted policy dis- 
couraging any measures which would be liable to 
obstruct the free disposal of them on the conclusion 
of peace; though at the same time urging the ex- 
pediency of sowing revolutionary ideas in the Sar- 
dinian and Austrian dominions. 

The extent to which these introductory rémarks 
are necessarily limited, forbids even a rapid sketch 
of the political convulsions of the period which these 
Volumes embrace : indeed it would not be necessary, 
as every historical reader must be familiar with those 


-events. On one point, however, a few observations 


may not be inadmissible. 

The conquest of Upper Italy brought the Gallic 
invaders in contact with the States of the Pope. An 
army marched against Rome; but the treaty of To- 
lentino, acceding to all the demands of the French, 
stopped its progress. The Directory having wrung 
from the old pontiff Pius VI. thirty millions (of 
franes) in money, bullion, diamonds, and necessaries 
for the army, and an unknown value in pictures, 
statues, and manuscripts, had, we find, serious in- 


XXiv INTRODUCTION. 


tentions of extinguishing not only the temporal 
power of his Holiness, but the very religion of which 
he was the head. Rewbell, writing in the name of 
the Directory on the 4th of February, 1797, re- 
commends to Bonaparte to do all that shall appear 
possible “‘ to destroy the papal government, either 
by establishing there a form of internal government 
which should render the government of priests odious 
and contemptible, so that the Pope and the Sacred 
College should not have the least hope left of ever 
seating themselves again in Rome, and should be 
obliged to seek an asylum in some other place, or at 
least should have no temporal power whatever.” 
(Vol. ii., p. 249.) 

This was no new or exclusive idea. Cacault, the 
French minister at Rome, had some months pre- 
viously suggested the formation of three republics 
out of the States of the Church. The establish- 
ment of the Transalpine, Cispadane, and Ligurian, 
had produced an absolute mania for republics. ‘ This 
may take place,” continues the writer, ‘and yet the 
Pope, the head of the universal Church, be suffered 
to reside as priest, with his court of priests, and as 
pontiff, wherever he pleases, in the same manner as 
he resided at Rome, before any donation of the 
French had rendered him sovereign of a territory.” 

General Clarke coincides in these sentiments, but 
objects to the time, as unseasonable for the execution 
of such a plan. ‘“ France,” he says, “ is again be- 
come Roman Catholic, and we are perhaps on the 


INTRODUCTION. XXV 


revolution to be seconded among us by the priests, 
and consequently by the country, which they have 
found means to govern again. If one could have an- 
nihilated the Pope three years ago, it would have 
been the regeneration of Europe: by overthrowing 
him at the present moment, should we not run the 
risk of separating for ever from our government a 
. great number of French submissive to the Pope, and 
: whom he can rally round him. I firmly believe that 
} it is for the interest of almost all States to reduce 
his power, still almost colossal, to an absolute cipher; 
but the prejudices of kings and nations are adverse 
to that interest. It requires thirty years’ liberty of 
the press in Italy and France to bring about that 
moment, and to break down the spiritual power of 
the Bishop of Rome. Spain, Naples, Sardinia, and 
all Italy, would join our enemies, rendered irrecon- 
| cilable, and would never forgive us for having de- 
stroyed a power which subjugates and shackles them, 
but which the authority of time and that of absur- 
dity, inculeated from principle, causes them to respect 
and cherish.” 

The guardian angel whose interposition and pro- 
tection saved the Holy See from the destruction then 
meditated was Bonaparte, who, aware of the boundless 
influence of the Pope and the popish clergy over all 
Catholics, had for some time taken pains to gain their 
good will—perhaps foreseeing, in those prophetic 
visions which might already have begun to float before 


{ 
point of needing the Pope himself for causing the 
| 
| 


XXvi INTRODUCTION. 


his imagination, to what advantage that influence 
might some day be employed. Thus, in October, 1796, 
he charged the French minister at Rome to assure 
his Holiness that he was “‘ more ambitious to be the 
saviour of the Holy See than its destroyer.” (Vol. ii., 
p- 81.) 

Another of these efforts displays the master in the 
art of cajoling. The French troops having possessed 
themselves by stratagem of Bergamo, he writes on 
the 1st of January, 1797, to a high functionary of the 
Venetian republic, “It is with pleasure that I seize 
this opportunity to do justice to the desire of public 
tranquillity manifested by the Bishop of Bergamo 
and his respectable clergy. I am convinced of a truth 
which is daily demonstrated to my sight, that, if the 
clergy of France had been as discreet, as moderate, as 
attached to the principles of the Gospel, the Romish 
religion would not have undergone any change in 
France; but the corruption of the monarchy had in- 
fected even the class of the ministers of religion: 
there were no longer to be seen in them men of 
exemplary life and of pure morals, like Cardinal Mattei, 
the Cardinal Archbishop of Bologna, the Bishop of 
Modena, the Bishop of Pavia, the Archbishop of 
Pisa: in conversing with these venerable personages, 
I have sometimes fancied myself carried back to the 
first ages of the Church.” (Vol. ii., p. 189, 190.) 

These demonstrations were just then thrown away, 
for the Pope, at the instigation of Austria, was engaged 
in hostile preparations, and, when threatened with a 


| Soa ee 


INTRODUCTION. XXvii 


visit from the French, he even ventured to launch a 
proclamation against them to this effect: “ The dis- 
turbers of the public tranquillity, the unjust oppres- 
sors of justice, of religion, of all laws, are advancing. 
They burn to make their vices and their villany tri- 
f. umphant; deaf to the remorse of their consciences, 
they despise God himself, who can blast and annibi- 
late them in a moment: people, you to have to defend 
religion, your country, and your livelihood! Swear, 
every one of you, to save religion, to defend the 
country, the State, and the sovereign—or to die!” 
(Vol. ii., p. 237.) 

This spirit, however, evaporated as soon as it was 
known that a French corps was on march for Rome; 
his Holiness then wrote immediately to his dear son, 
General Bonaparte, informing him that, “ desiring 
to put an end of his own accord to the differences 
existing between us and the French Republic,” he had 
appointed plenipotentiaries to settle them. He adds, 
* Assured of the sentiments of kindness which you 
have manifested for us, we have abstained from any 
removal from Rome, and you will thereby be per- 
suaded how great is our confidence in you.” (Vol. ii., 
p- 256.) The General found the papal negociators 
at Tolentino: the result of their conferences was a 
treaty, acceding to all the demands of the French; 
and there he replied to the letter of his Holiness, in 
which he congratulates himself on having had it in 
his power to contribute to the personal tranquillity 
of the pontiff. ‘ All Europe,” he says, “ knows the 


XXVili INTRODUCTION. 


pacific inclinations and the conciliatory virtues of 
your Holiness. The French Republic will be, I hope, 
one of the truest friends of Rome”—(Vol. ii., p. 263.) 
compliments dearly paid for by the increased penalty 
extorted from the Pope. 

It is evident from these Letters that there was no 
scheme too base to be entertained by the Directory. 
After the reduction of the Castle of Milan, they gave 
orders for its demolition. ‘‘ It is useful,” they say, 
** to cause this demolition and that of the barracks at 
the parade to be regarded as that of another Bastile, 
which Austrian despotism had hitherto employed to 
keep under its yoke those flourishing countries which 
seem peculiarly formed for liberty. By favour of this 
idea, which you will accredit among the people, ex- 
cite a generous enthusiasm for the fall of that cita- 
del: it will awaken the ancient hatred of Lombardy 
against the emperor, and make it dread the return of 
his domination.” (Vol. i., p. 224.) 

The following scheme is of a much more treacherous 
character. The Grand-duke of Tuscany was not only 
at peace with France, but observed a strict neutrality ; 
the rapacity of the Directory was, nevertheless, ex- 
cited by the property in Leghorn belonging to English 
merchants, and by their orders an expedition was 
sent to secure that prize. Soon afterwards, they 
wrote to Bonaparte, through Carnot, to this effect: 
“ Reports are in circulation that the emperor, ac- 
cording to the probabilities of a health always pre- 
carious, is approaching his end. ‘To take advantage 


INTRODUCTION. XXix 


of this event, it is necessary that you should be in- 
formed of it with the utmost possible celerity when 
it has taken place. Keep up for this purpose secret 
correspondence with Vienna. The Grand-duke of 
Tuscany, heir to the imperial throne, will not hesitate 
to repair to his capital immediately after the death 
of his brother. The point will then be to prevent 
him, to seize him as an enemy of the Republic, and to 
occupy Tuscany militarily.” (Vol. i., p. 244.) The 
Emperor (the late Emperor of Austria) lived to dis- 
appoint this notable scheme of his adversaries. 
Impatient to gain possession of Mantua, in which 
Marshal Wurmser had shut himself with the remains 
of his army, these petty schemers made a decree de- 
signed to frighten him intoa surrender. This decree 
was, transmitted to Bonaparte ; but, surmising that it 
might produce a precisely contrary effect to that 
which they intended, they left him to judge whether 
it was advisable to communicate it to the gallant old 
soldier. Their notion was “to induce him to sur- 
render Mantua, by exciting in him a dread of being 
sent to Paris and there tried as an emigrant, if he 
holds out to the last extremity, and by offering him 
-an honourable capitulation, if he consents to deliver 
up that place to you.—We ought not,” adds the 
writer, “to neglect any of the legitimate means 
which can be useful against an obstinate enemy.” — 
Legitimate means!—yes! with the unprincipled all 
means are legitimate! Wurmser, however, though 
born in Alsace, was no emigrant: but it was easy to 


XXX INTRODUCTION. 


put any construction upon the laws against emigrants. 
Bonaparte had delicacy enough not to insult Wurm- 
ser, or to expose the malignity of his masters by send- 
ing him this decree. (Vol. i., p. 366.) 

Another of those mean, sneaking artifices, which 
can be entertained only by men without honour or 
conscience, relates to a person to whose name we 
have no clue. It is thus detailed by Delacroix, 
minister for foreign affairs, to General Clarke, under 
date of December 30,1796. ‘I am aware, like you, 
how important it is to the interests of the Republic 
not to give up to the personal sentiments of a man, or 
to a more enterprising enemy, a secret which may 
have an influence on the destiny of one of our national 
allies: but it seems to me that you have in your 
hand a surer and easier expedient for attaining this 
end. Supposing it were possible to induce Count 
de M...... to come to France, his apprehension here 
would inevitably make a great noise, and might pro- 
duce serious inconveniences. He might conceive sus- 
picions and find means to conceal his papers from us. 
He is now in a country subject to military govern- 
ment: but, just arrived from Tuscany, he must feel 
perfectly secure; he must have his papers at hand; 
it would be easy to seize them by causing him to be 
arrested on the slightest pretext. As soon as we had 
possessed ourselves of the papers, he might be set at 
liberty. The government would be in possession of 
a mighty means of influence over the power to which 
those papers relate; the momentary detention of the 


INTRODUCTION. XXxi 


Count de M. would not compromise us in the least, 
and could only be considered as a mistake. Such, 
General, is the way in which I think that affair ought 
to be conducted.” (Vol. ii., p. 192.) 

Numberless traits scattered through these Volumes 
serve to confirm the homely adage, “ Like master, 
like man.” If the conduct of the Directory was 
_- marked by rapacity, hypocrisy, duplicity, cunning, 
and even low cunning, that of their willing tool 

Bonaparte rivalled it in those odious qualities; and, 
on points to which his own knowledge did not extend, 
he found no want of prompters. Thus the French 
minister at Venice instigated him to attempt to in- 
tercept the Archduke, who had been governor of 

Lombardy before the invasion of the French, and who 

was retiring from Venice with all his treasures to the 

Austrian dominions. (Vol. i., p. 137.) Thus, too, 

Faipoult, the republican minister at Genoa, suggested 
the means of facilitating any enterprise which might 
be meditated against that city. (Vol. i., p. 190.) 
The dawning manifestations of a naturally ambitious 
spirit, elevated by extraordinary success and un- 
bounded flattery, could not escape the notice or fail 
to excite the jealousy of the Directory. They formed, 
in consequence, the plan of dividing the army of Italy, 
and associating General Kellermann with Bonaparte 
in the conduct of the military operations in Lom- 
- bardy and the more eastern provinces of the Peninsula. 

In this early part of his career, however, he could no 

more suffer a rival in authority than he would have 


XXxii INTRODUCTION. 


endured one when seated, a few years afterwards, on 
the imperial throne of France. The Letters in which 
he urges his objections to this plan are extremely 
interesting, and they were forcible enough to induce 
the Directory to forego the intention. Differing 
afterwards in opinion with the Directory respecting 
the treatment of the Pope, he expressed his senti- 
ments without scruple, and tendered his resignation on 
the plea of impaired health. (Vol. i., p. 387.) Being 
indulged like a spoiled child with permission to follow 
his own judgment on the matter in question, we hear 
no more of complaints of ill health, or offers to resign. 

General Clarke was the person appointed by the 
Directory to negociate a peace with Austria. Thiers 
roundly asserts that he had another mission—to 
watch Bonaparte: and he has so ably summed up 
the grounds for the implied jealousy of the Directory, 
that his exposition will not be thought misplaced 
here. 

“ The genius of that young man,” says this histo- 
rian of the Revolution, ‘‘had appeared so extraordi- 
nary, his character so absolute and so energetic, that 
without any precise motive he was supposed to have 
ambition. He had insisted on conducting the war 
as he pleased, and had tendered his resignation when 
a plan that was not his own had been marked out for 
him; he had acted like a sovereign in Italy, grant- 
ing to princes peace or war under the name of 
armistices; he had loudly complained because the 
negociations with the Pope were not conducted by 


| 
. 


INTRODUCTION. XXXili 


him alone, and had required that they should be left 
to his management ; he had treated Garrau and Sa- 
licetti, the commissioners, very harshly when they 


- yentured upon measures of which he disapproved, 


and had obliged them to leave the head-quarters; he 
had taken the liberty to transmit funds to the 
different armies without any authority from the 
government, and without having recourse to the 
indispensable channel of the treasury. All these cir- 
cumstances indicated a man who liked to do himself 
all that he thought himself alone capable of doing 
properly .... On seeing him excite Upper Italy 
against its old masters and create or destroy States, 
people would have supposed that he meant to make 


himself Duke of Milan. They had a foreboding of 


his ambition, and he had himself a presentiment of 
the reproach. He complained of. being accused, and 
then justified himself, though not a single word of 
the Directory furnished him occasion to do so. 
“Clarke, then, was sent not only to negociate but 
also to watch him. Bonaparte was aware of his 
errand, and, acting with his habitual haughtiness and 
address, suffered him to perceive that he was ac- 
quainted with the object of his mission, but subdued 
him in a short time by his ascendency and his fasci- 
nating manner, and converted him into a devoted 
adherent.” 
Bonaparte, being’ appointed joint plenipotentiary 
for treating with Austria, conceived that the ne- 


gociations ought to be deferred till the reduction 


VOL. I, e 


¥ 


XXXiv INTRODUCTION. 


of Mantua; while Clarke urged the expediency of 
their immediate commencement. This subject is dis- 
cussed in the Note addressed to his colleague which 
has already been quoted; and one argument by 
which he supports his opinion is the deplorable state 
of France at home, notwithstanding the glory and the 
enormous plunder acquired abroad. It is instructive 
to contemplate this picture, which is sufficient autho- 
rity for assuming that peace was not less needful for 
the Republic than for her adversary. 

“ What,” he says, “is our position at the moment 
that I am writing ?—The lassitude of war is felt in all 
parts of the interior of the Republic. The people 
ardently wish for peace; the armies murmur loudly 
because it is not made; that of Italy, and even the 
bravest of that army, talk of and desire it. The le- 
gislative body wills, nay, commands it, as it were, no 
matter on what conditions, and its prolonged refusal 
to furnish the Directory with funds for continuing 
the war is a proof of this. Your finances are null; 
agriculture claims, entices, or recalls the hands which 
it sent to protect it from the foreigner ; war would 
have, every day, an almost universal immorality, 
which might in the sequel overthrow the Republic : 
in short, all parties, harassed, wish for the end of 
the revolution; and if our state of internal misery is 
prolonged, the wearied people, not finding benefit in 
that which is, will be disposed to seek it in another 
order of things, which will give rise to new revolu- 
tions, and we shall have for twenty or thirty years all 


: INTRODUCTION. XXXV 


the calamities which these convulsions bring in their 
train. In the course of this winter, whether there is 
fighting, or whether things continue undecided, great 
part of our soldiers will return to their homes, from 
which nothing will be able to draw them: for, from 
want of money, we have neither internal police nor 
gendarmerie, and our constituted authorities are far 
from being all pure and proof against seduction. 
We must, therefore, have peace; and, for recovering 
the enthusiasm which has enabled us to conquer, it 
is necessary that our enemies defer the conclusion of 
it, and that there be not a creature in France who is 
not convinced that the government has been desirous 
of a reasonable peace, and that it has been rejected 
from ambition or from hatred of our principles.” 
(Vol. ii., p. 201.) 

The fall of Mantua soon reconciled the difference 
of opinion between the two negociators. 

The English reader will smile at the absurd no- 
tions entertained by the French on all subjects con- 
nected with our country and nation. Carnot, writing 
on the 18th of May in the name of the Directory to 
Bonaparte, acquaints him that they have reserved for 
him the conduct of the marauding expedition against 
Leghorn “ to chastise the English ; because they con- 
sider that operation as of superior importance; be- 
cause the fate of the island of Corsica depends upon 
itin some measure; because zt will make London trem- 

_/ Ue, and give a mortal blow to the English.” (Vol. i, 


p. 119.) A few days later, Carnot again writes : “ The 
c2 


XXXV1 INTRODUCTION. 


expedition to Leghorn is the first thing to be under- 
taken after the defeat of Beaulieu: it [the Directory] 
leaves to you the choice of the time and the means of 
execution, and it will learn with warm satisfaction 
the news of this triwmph over the perfidious English.” 
(Vol.i.,p. 123.) A glorious achievement, truly —the 
seizure by a buccaneering army of unresisting mer- 
cantile establishments, in the dominions of a prince at 
perfect peace with the rapacious republicans! 

The instructions prescribing the conduct to be pur- 
sued towards Leghorn and Tuscany, from the pen of 
Carnot, are well worthy of the statesmen from whom 
they emanated, and the occasion on which they were 
given (Vol. i., p. 88): indeed, that whole letter is a 
most interesting: study for all who would wish to 
learn to what base and sordid arts the republican 
rulers of great nations can stoop in pursuit of their 
schemes of rapine and robbery. 

The simplicity of Carnot, expressing surprise at 
the daring attacks of our Tars upon shipping on the 
French coast, and requesting Bonaparte, in the name 
‘of the Directory, “ not to suffer the approach of these 
pirates to the coasts of the Mediterranean,” is truly 
laughable. (Vol. i., p. 192). Equally preposterous 
is the representation of Gentili, whom Bonaparte 
had sent to command in Corsica, which the English 
were then evacuating, that our fleet was ‘in infinite 
dread of the Spanish squadron, which,” he says, 

‘must by this time have joined ours. It would be 
most fortunate,” he adds, “if they could but get out 


—— 


INTRODUCTION. XXXVil 


_and go to meet them: the superiority of our force 


and the fears of the enemy would ensure us the vic- 
tory, and those gentry would not escape unscathed 
out of the Mediterranean.” (Vol. ii., p. 89.) Gene- 
ral Gentili had not very long to wait for the grati- 
fication of his wish. The fleets did meet, and the 
fight off St. Vincent’s showed in what way the fears 
of English sailors are expressed. 

Of the character of the Italians the French govern- 
ment seems to have formed the most contemptuous 
opinion. After it had plundered them by its agents, 
military and civil, of everything that could possibly 
be extracted from them, it is not likely that they 
would rise in its estimation. Thus the minister for 
foreign affairs characterizes them as “destitute of 
energy, the slaves of the most degrading prejudices, 
who would ill support the part of a free people :” and 
Bonaparte himself seems to have valued them no 
higher. (Vol. ii., p. 403.) The pacification of the 
Continent permitted him to direct his views to the 
invasion of this country, and he has the candour to 
admit “ the people of England are of more worth than 
the Venetian people, and their /éberation will for ever 
consolidate the liberty and happiness of France ; or, 
if we force that government to peace, our commerce, 
the advantages which we shall procure for it in the 
two worlds, will be a great step towards the consoli- 
dation of liberty and public prosperity.” (Vol. ii., 
p. 408.) 

When, at a later period, he seriously applied him- 


XXXVlii INTRODUCTION. 


self to the execution of this benevolent design, he 
certainly acquired an ample confirmation of his idea 
that the English character is indeed of a different 
stamp from the Italian, or that of any other nation 
which he had ever encountered. 

In the month of August, 1796, after that series of 
obstinate actions in which, according to the admis- 
sion of an accomplished French officer, “if despair 
had not forced us to fight for the preservation of our 
lives, the republican army would have been destroyed 
without resource;” and when “ Bonaparte killed 
seven horses in two days,” so excessive were the 
fatigues, the General makes a rather humorous report 
to the Directory of the cowardice shown by the 
commissaries and other civil functionaries. “ It 
was indispensable,” he says, “to allow the troops a 
few days’ rest, to rally the scattered corps after so 
violent a shock, and to reorganize the service of the 
administrations, absolutely broken up. Some of those 
gentlemen ran all the way to the Gulf of Spezzia with- 
out stopping. — The commissary of war Salva leaves 
the army; panic-struck, he beholds enemies every 
where; he crosses the Po, and communicates to all 
he meets the terrors that bewilder him; he fancies 
that the Hulans are at his heels. In vain he scam- 
pers away for two days and two nights; nothing can 
raise his spirits; writing to all quarters, Run for your 
lives! he arrives within two leagues of Genoa, and 
—dies in twenty-four hours of a violent fever, in the 
delirium of which he fancies himself wounded by a 


=, 


INTRODUCTION. XXxXix 


hundred swords, and still those of the terrible Hulans. 
Many commissaries of war have not shown more bra- 
very. 

“‘ Such, citizens directors, is the inconvenience of 
the law which requires that the commissaries of war 


_-should be civil agents, when they need courage and 


military habits to a greater degree than the officers 
themselves : the courage which is necessary for them 
is wholly moral; it is never the fruit of the habit of 
dangers. I have therefore felt on this occasion how 
essential it is to appoint to the office of commissaries 
of war none but men who have served in the line for 
several campaigns and given proofs of courage. Any 
man who yalues life higher than the national glory 
and the esteem of his comrades ought not to form 
part of the French army. It is revolting to hear 
every day persons of the different administrations 
confessing, and almost boasting of it, that they were 
afraid.” (Vol. i., 319, 320). 

In Volume ii., p. 61, General Baraguay d’Hilliers 
relates that he had to encounter an engine of super- 
stition, so frequently employed in Catholic countries, 
and capable of being converted into a more mischie- 
yous instrument than even the weapons of war. “I 
found at Lodi,” he writes to the General-in-Chief, on 
the 20th of October, 1796, “sparks of a religious 
fanaticism which was seeking to burst forth: they 
were performing miracles there ; priests certified them, 
devotees circulated them, and idiots believed them. 

* I thought it right, under these circumstances, to take 


xl INTRODUCTION. 


a double measure : the first was to send for the bishop. 
I spoke to him with firmness; I declared that, if 
another miracle was wrought in his diocese, and the 
priests continued to abuse the tribunal of penitence, 
to calumniate the French and to arm the superstitious 
credulity of the people against them, he should be 
personally responsible to me for it; that I would 
bring him, as well as the higher clergy, before a mili- 
tary commission as an agent, a spy, of the court of 
Rome, and an apostle of maxims contrary to the pub- 
lic tranquillity, and to the ministry of peace which 
was his vocation. On the other hand, being informed 
that, in the Lodisan, the people complained of a pro- 
hibition, issued I know not at what period, to ring the 
bells for the service of the Catholic worship, I autho- 
rized them to be rung in each parish three times a 
day at necessary and useful hours.” 

It will be seen (vol. i., p. 31) that the attention of 
the Directory had early been turned to the wonder- 
working image of the Virgin Mary at Loretto and the 
treasures accumulated there, ‘‘ estimated at ten mil- 
lions sterling.” This appeared too rich a prize not 
to tempt the rapacity of the needy rulers of France, 
and an expedition for securing it was suggested by 
them to their General. By him, however, the attempt 
was judged to be too hazardous at that time; and 
it was not till his invasion of the Roman States in 
February, 1797, that he could conveniently rifle the 
Casa Santa. ‘“ Loretto,” he reports to his employers, 
‘contained treasure to the amount of nearly 3,000,000 ~~ 


% INTRODUCTION. xli 


; livres tournois; they have left us the worth of nearly 

' _ one million ; I send you the Madona with all the re- 

lies into the bargain. That chest shall be addressed 

direct to you, and you will make what use of it 

you think fit: the Madona is of wood.” (Vol. ii., 
p- 259). 

In the Letters from the pen of Bonaparte himself 
there are incessantly occurring passages strikingly 
characteristic, and some almost oracular. 

He writes to the Directory, “I should be glad if 
you would send me two or three adjutant-generals, 
who have been in the cavalry, who have fire and a 
firm resolution never to make scientific retreats.” 
(Vol. i., p. 81.) 
| . On another occasion he says, “ Here all is going 
on tolerably well: but the dog-days are coming on 

at a gallop, and there is no remedy against their 

pernicious influence. Miserable beings that we are, 
~ we can only observe nature, not overcome it!” (Vol. i., 
p- 149.) On how many subsequent occasions did his 

- experience confirm this observation ! 

_ As for generals of division,” he tells the Direc- 

tory, “ unless they are distinguished officers, I beg 
} you not to send me any; for our mode of making war 

here is so different from the others that I cannot 

trust a division till I have tried in two or three affairs 

- the General who is to command it. . . . It is most essen- 

tial for the army and for the Republic to send hither 

to me young men to learn to carry ona war of move- 

ment and mancuvres; it is that which has enabled 


——— ee 


NT SS 


} 


: 


xlii INTRODUCTION. 


us to obtain great successes in this army.” (Vol. ii., 
p- 230.) 

Again, writing to the Directory, he applies for 
** some good officers of artillery,’ for those that he 
has, with two exceptions, “are not capable of draw- 
ing a fléche, and only play stupid tricks: yet there is 
no want of officers of engineers and artillery ; but 
these are peace officers, fit only for the desk, who 
never see fire: accordingly, the works of the engineers 
are universally complained of in the army.” (Vol. ii., 
p- 229.) 

About the same time that this was written, Au- 
gereau reports that he has ordered an officer of engi- 
neers superintending works at the téte de pont of 
Ronco ‘ to be watched, and to be prevented from 
slipping away before the bridge is finished.” (Vol. ii., 
p. 210.) 

On the 16th of April, 1797, Bonaparte writes from 
Judenburg, the limit of his march into the Emperor’s 
German dominions, ‘‘ The best Generals and the best 
troops are before me.—When you enter heartily upon - 
a campaign, there is nothing that stops you, and 
never, since history has recorded military operations, 
has a river proved a real obstacle. If Moreau is 
determined to pass the Rhine, he will pass it, and if 
he had passed it already, we should be in a condition 
to dictate terms of peace in an imperative manner, 
and without incurring any risk; but he who is fearful 
of losing his glory is sure to lose it. I have crossed 
the Julian and the Noric Alps upon ice three feet 


INTRODUCTION. xliii 
deep; I passed my artillery by roads which carriages 
had never travelled, and everybody believed the 
thing to be impossible. If I had had nothing in view 
but the repose of the army and my personal interest, 
Ishould have stopped short beyond the Izonzo. I 
flung myself into Germany, to extricate the armies of 
the Rhine and to prevent the enemy from taking the 
offensive there. I am at the gates of Vienna, and 

_ that insolent and haughty court has its plenipoten- 
tiaries at my head-quarters, The armies of the 
Rhine cannot have any blood in their veins if they 
leave me alone: then I shall return to Italy. Entire 
Europe shall judge of the different conduct of the 
two armies: they will then have the whole force of 
the Emperor on their hands; they will be over- 
whelmed, and it will be their own fault.” (Vol. ii., 
p. 299, 300.) 

Indeed, all his Letters relating to himself personally 
are peculiarly interesting. It is unnecessary to par- 
ticularize; but there is one of so extraordinary a 
tenour that it must not pass unnoticed here. 

It is dated November 14, 1796, amidst that series 
of hard-contested fights. which preceded the san- 
guinary battle of Arcole. In these affairs, the “ spoiled 
child of Fortune,” as it became customary to call the 
French General, was not always victorious, and his 
army of course suffered severely. ‘ The wounded,” 

_~ he writes, reporting to the Directory, “ are the flower 
of the army: all our superior officers, all our best 
generals, are hors de combat: all that come to me 


; 


xliv INTRODUCTION. 


are so silly, and they have not the confidence of the 
soldiers. The army of Italy, reduced to a handful of 
men, is worn out. The heroes of Lodi, of Millesimo, 
of Castiglione, and of Bassano, have died for their 
country, or are in the hospital: the corps have no- 
thing left but their reputation and their pride. Jou- 
bert, Lannes, Lanusse, Victor, Murat, Charlot, Dupuis, 
Rampon, Pigeon, Menard, Chabrand, are wounded ; 
we are abandoned at the furthest extremity of Italy. 
The presumption of my strength would be beneficial 
to us; and they are publishing in Paris, in official 
speeches, that we are but 30,000 men. 

‘In this war I have lost few men, but all the 
superior men, whom it is impossible to replace. The 
brave men who are left me have before their eyes 
inevitable death, amidst such continual chances and 
with forces so inferior. Perhaps the last hour of the 
brave Augereau, of the intrepid Massena, of Berthier, 
a is at hand; then, then, what will become of 
these brave fellows! This idea makes me cautious: 
I dare no longer confront death, which would be a 
subject of discouragement and disaster for that which 
is the object of my anxiety. In a few days, we shall 
try a last effort: if Fortune smiles upon us, Mantua 
will be taken, and Italy along with it.” 

It is to be observed, however, that this appa- 
rently desponding letter, in which, by the by, the 
writer has not displayed the most scrupulous adhe- 
rence to truth, was really designed to move the 
Directory to send him further reinforcements. His 


INTRODUCTION. xlv 


employers must no doubt have been aware of this 

propensity to distort or falsify facts to suit a par- 

ticular purpose—a propensity manifested alike in his 

. reports, his proclamations, and his addresses to his 
soldiers, in this early part of his career, and later in 
those too famous imperial compositions, which gave 
rise to the proverbial saying of the sarcastic Parisians 
concerning any person who dealt too freely in hyper- 
bole—* He lies like a bulletin.” 

But wherefore extend these remarks? Surely 
sufficient evidence has been furnished that this Cor- 
respondence conveys the fresh and living impres- 
sions made by transactions of the moment, and a 
vivid reflection of those disgraceful schemes, artifices, 
and maneuyres, which could originate only in minds 

, thoroughly imbued with the atrocious principles of 
the revolution--that it was designed to be what it 
professes to be, secret and confidential—to meet no 
eyes but those of the persons addressed — unlike the 
Memoirs written or dictated at St. Helena, from re- 
collection, after the lapse of twenty years, for the 
purpose of exculpation or of producing effect. 

In the last of the General’s letters to the Directory, 
announcing the conclusion of the treaty of Campo 
Formio, he places himself by the closing declaration 
inasingularly awkward dilemma. After recapitulating 
the motives which had influenced him in this impor- 
tant transaction, he proceeds :—‘‘ If I am mistaken in 
all these calculations, my heart is pure, my intentions 
are upright: I have silenced the interest of my glory, 


Lz , 
. 
om 


xlvi INTRODUCTION. 


of my vanity, of my ambition; I have kept in view 
the country and the government alone; I have an- 
swered in a manner worthy of myself the unlimited 
confidence which the Directory has been pleased to 
grant me for these two years. I have merited by 
my services the approbation of the government and 
of the nation; I have received repeated marks of its 
esteem. J have now no more to do but to mingle 
again with the crowd, to grasp once more the plough 
of Cincinnatus, and to set an example of respect for 
magistrates and aversion for military rule, which 
has destroyed so many republics and ruined several 
States.” —(Vol. ii., p. 389.) 

Was this declaration sincere, or was it a piece of 
acting, in which, as these Volumes will show, the 
General was an adept? If the former, never was a 
more decided self-condemnation pronounced—if the 
latter, a more consummate political charlatan never 
lived. 


CONTENTS 
OF 


THE FIRST VOLUME. 


PART I. 


PAGE 
FROM THE OPENING OF THE CAMPAIGN IN ITALY IN 
1796 TO THE CONCLUSION OF THE ARMISTICE. WITH 


THE KING OF SARDINIA 


A . 1 
PART II. 


FROM THE OCCUPATION OF TORTONA TO THE INVEST- 
MENT OF MANTUA 


my #570 
PART III. 


FROM THE TAKING OF BOLOGNA TO THE SECOND 
BLOCKADE OF MANTUA 


of) rem Oe 
PART Iv. 


FROM THE BATTLE OF ROVEREDO TO THE RESUMPTION 
OF HOSTILITIES BY A NEW AUSTRIAN ARMY 


- 328 


i 
Yaar 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


PART I. 


FROM THE OPENING OF THE CAMPAIGN IN ITALY IN 1796 TO 
THE CONCLUSION OF THE ARMISTICE WITH THE 
KING OF SARDINIA. 


The Executive Directory to General Bonaparte, Commander- 
in-Chief of the Army of Italy. 
Paris, 16 Ventose, year 4 [March 6, 1796]. 
The Executive Directory addresses to you herewith, 
eitizen-general, the instructions which it has drawn up for 
the conduct of the ensuing campaign in Italy. It has 
thought it right to add the authorization which it gives you 
by the present to possess yourself of the fortress of Savona, 


- in ease circumstances should render that measure useful for 


the security of the army of Italy; and it recommends to you, 

in this case, to treat the republic of Genoa with all the con- 

sideration which our political situation in regard to it requires. 
LETOURNEUR, President. 


Instructions for the General-in-Chief of the Army of Italy. 
The French Republic has two principal enemies to con- 
tend with in Italy—the Piedmontese and the Austrians. 
The latter, though the less numerous, are formidable, as well 
from their hatred to France, and their infinitely superior 
resources of all kinds, as from their more intimate connexion 


- with our natural enemies the English, and above all from 


the power which their possessions in Italy enable them to 

exercise over the court of Turin, which is obliged to yield to 

almost all their demands, and even to their caprices. From 

this state of things it results that the more immediate inte- 

rest of the French government ought to be to direct its 
VOL. I. B 


2 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


oepe Bp efforts against the Austrian army and possessions 
in Italy. 

It “d easy to conceive, in fact, that any military move- 
ment against the Piedmontese and their territory is in some 
measure indifferent to the Austrians, who, as we have seen 
in the last campaign, seem to care very little for the dis- 
asters of their allies, and who, in moments of danger, instead 
of seeking to protect them efficaciously, immediately separate 
from them, and strive only to cover the country belonging 
to themselves, which furnishes abundantly the resources 
they stand in need of. 

Creat as have hitherto been our successes in Italy, we 
have not advanced far enough into that country to with- 
draw Piedmont from the yoke of the Austrian army, which 
has always remained master of its fate by the positions which 
it has taken. 

When we consider the true interests of the court of Turin, 
we find them, in some measure, essentially connected with 
our own, and we have no doubt whatever of the desire 
which that court must feel to see the ambitious Austrian 
driven out of Italy, and to obtain the Milanese as an indem- 
nification for the countries irrevocably united to France by 
the first article of the republican constitution. 

This conjecture, the probability of which needs not to be 
supported by the arguments that the subject itself suggests, 
seems to give rise to the following question : 

If it is to the interest of the Pisdmontdes to unite with 
the French to drive the Germans from Italy, why is not 
the court of Turin solicitous to join its arms to those of the 
Republic to cago ger as speedily as possible an object at 
once profitable and glorious ¢ 

The solution of this question must tend to enlighten us 
on our political position in regard to Italy, and also on the 
best course to be pursued for conquering our enemies, and 
more particularly the satellites of Austria in that country. 
Placed between the provinces subject to the latter and to 
the French Republic, Piedmont is forced to act a part in 
the present war; and, if she had resolved to remain in a 
state of neutrality, she would have had to suffer all the evils 
of war without being able to enjoy a valuable prerogative 
for a state of moderate strength in comparison with her 
neighbours, that is, the respect which the troops that she 
can join to those of one of the belligerent parties, and the 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 3 


danger of a defection on their part and of their going over 
to the side of the enemy, necessarily ensure to her ; which 
guarantees to her the certainty of experiencing the least pos- 
sible annoyance at any rate from the power to which she 
allies herself. 

- Without absolutely — the idea that the King of 
Sardinia may have been urged by family considerations into 
the coalition against France, it may be asserted with truth, 
that our position at the commencement of the present war, 
and the necessity under which we found ourselves to gain 
possession of the ci-devant Savoy, and the ci-devant county 
of Nice, as well to attack the Austrians with advantage as 
to incorporate them with France, for the security of our 
frontier in that quarter, have, in some measure, forced the 
court of Turin to join the party of our enemies in order to 

e our efforts ; but, since our successes in Frimaire, the 
hope of an idemnification out of the Austrian possessions in 
Italy, in case of a junction with us, would no doubt have 
induced the court of Turin to change sides, if France, 
searcely out of the storms of the Revolution, had had it in 
her power to offer it the subsidies ensured to it by England 
and Austria. 

The King of Sardinia, certain that France would not 
him a peace which would place Piedmont in a state 
of neutrality, which, in the h dina of success on the part 
of the Austrians, would evidently become null and even 
dangerous to the Republic; forced to continue the war, 
was obliged to secure the means of carrying it on at the 
least ible cost, and could find them nowhere but in the 
subsidies and aids of all kinds, which his present allies alone 
eould afford him, Piedmont, crushed hy the weight of taxes, 
cannot furnish him with the facility of acting in a manner 
more independent and more analogous to the views upon the 
Milanese which it is natural to attribute to him; and, from 
this state of things, we must conclude that the court of 
Turin will not sincerely consent to a defensive and offensive 
alliance with us till we can furnish it with the same succours 
that it receives from its present allies. 

~The Republic, then, not being in a condition to furnish 

suecours, must not reckon upon an alliance of this 
kind, until Piedmont shall be forced by the overthrow of the 
Austrians, or the presence of our armies in her territory, to 
turn her’arms against our common enemy. 

; B2 


4 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


If circumstances should bring about this propitious event, 
we might expect that the Piedmontese, in obtaining the 
object of their desires, and a considerable indemnification, 
(the Milanese, &c.) will purchase it by all the sacrifices which 
an already exhausted State is 2 of supporting; for not 
only will they have to provide their own army with all that 
it has need of, but the armies of the Republic will have to 
be principally fed and maintained by them ; and, if the state 
of things should force-us to act in that We ra, as in a con- 
quered country, we should, it is true, do it as little harm as 

ssible; but we should do a great deal, since it would be 
indispensable to secure our march by the provisional es- 
sion, and until the peace, of the — fortresses of Pied- 
mont situated on our side, and the demolition of which 
would guarantee to us for the future a solid peace and 
alliance with the court of Sardinia. It results from what 
has been said that the sole attack of Piedmont would not 
fulfil the object which the Executive Directory ought to 
keep in view—that of driving the Austrians out of Italy, 
and bringing about as speedily as possible a glorious and 
durable peace ; instead of terminating, it would be prolong- 
ing the war, since the Austrians, remaining intact, would 
have no reason for putting an end to it; and, England 
having it in her power at any time to transmit subsidies to 
the Piedmontese army, things would continue upon nearly 
the same footing that they were at the conclusion of the 
last campaign. 

The continuous and sole attack of Piedmont presents, 
moreover, greater obstacles from the number of sieges which 
it would be necessary to undertake at the very opening of 
the campaign; and it has behoved the Directory to fix its 
views particularly upon a system of offensive warfare, princi- 
pall rected against the Austrian forces in Italy, and so 
combined as to afford to the French army not only the pos- 
sibility of securing itself, by the defeat of the Piedmontese 
at the very commencement of the military operations, 
4 oT any enterprise on their part during the remainder 
of the campaign ; but at the same time that of bringing the 
court of Turin into a compulsory alliance with France; and 
lastly, the means of accelerating the conclusion of an advan- 
tageous peace for us by the total overthrow of the Austrians 
in Italy. 


The first military operations which this system commands 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 5 


are comprised within a narrow circle, and require few de- 
velopments. The Directory must confine itself to the indi- 
cation of them ; the details of execution will belong to the 
general-in-chief, in whom it places its confidence. They 
will be submitted to the Directory, whenever circumstances 
admit of that being done, and in extraordinary cases, when 
its opinion will become absolutely necessary for determining 
military movements of higher importance which have not 
been foreseen. Everything commands us to strive by all 
the means in our power to make the enemy cross the Po, 
and to direct our most strenuous efforts towards the Mi- 
lanese. It appears that this essential operation cannot take 

lace until the French army has first gained possession of 

va. 

The Directory leaves the general-in-chief at liberty to 
commence the operations by the attack of the enemy at that 
point ; and, whether he gains a complete victory over them, 
or they retire towards Turin, the Directory authorizes him 
to follow them, to fight them again, and.even to bombard 
that capital, if circumstances render it necessary. 

After he has made himself master of Ceva, and drawn the 
left of the army of Italy towards Coni, in order to threaten and 
overawe the garrison of that place, the general-in-chief' will 
provide as speedily as possible for the wants of the army by 
means of the resources which he will find in Piedmont ; he 
will then direct his forces towards the Milanese, and princi- 
pally against the Austrians ; he will drive back the enemy 

eyond the Po, turn his attention to the means of crossing 
that river, and endeavour to secure the fortresses of Asti 
and Valenza. 

The general-in-chief must not lose sight of this, that it is 
the Austrians whom it is most important to cripple, and 
that one of the measures capable of bringing about peace in 
Italy is to intimidate them by advancing as far as possible 
on the right and towards orto, the wretched state of 
which induces the Directory to believe that it will be easily 
taken. 

This essential movement of the troops towards our right 
—which the general-in-chief will probably not be able to 
make till he has reduced Ceva, and gained a signal victory 
over the Piedmontese—will place us in a situation to awe 
the Genoese republic, and to facilitate to the agent whom 

€ government keeps at Genoa negociations which may be 


6 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


advantageous to us, and even a loan, which private persons 
of that city might be able to make us. 

More wealthy than their government, it must be expected 
that they will not consent to supply us till the latter gives 
them security for our punctuality in fulfilling the conditions 
of this loan, which the favourable circumstances of the war 
may authorize us to demand. The entry of the republican 
army into Piedmont must be considered as merely a pre- 
liminary disposition, which enables us to attack the Austrian 
forees with greater advantage’; it must pause there as little 
as possible, and then push on briskly to fight the latter, 
whom the defeat of the Piedmontese cannot but intimidate, 
and render easier to conquer. 

While the movements which the right of the French will 
have to make towards Alexandria and Tortona are going 
forward, it will be indispensable, in order to secure the fur- 
ther operations, that it should gain possession of Gavi, whe- 
ther the Genoese consent with a good grace to give it up to 
us during the war, or we are obliged to compel them to do 
so by threatening demonstrations of the force destined to be 
em loge for extorting their compliance. 

he Directory, persuaded that the general-in-chief, in the 
execution of this particular measure, will exercise all the 
prudence which circumstances and our political situation in 
regard to the Genoese republic enjoin, leaves entirely to him 
the conduct of this delicate affair, with the necessity, the dif- 
ficulties, and the advantage of which his presence on the 
spot will make him acquainted. 
By throwing the prineipal force of the republican army in 
an on the right and in the direction of the Milanese, we 
shall gain several important advantages: we shall oblige 
Piedmont, already shaken, to range herself on our side; and 
‘the first victory that we shall obtain over the Austrians 
will be a certain pledge of the total ruin of their forces in 
that quarter. e shall intimidate all Italy, and dissolve 
the coalition of all those petty powers in favour of the Aus- 
trian cause. 

The course which the Directory has pointed out to the 
general-in-chief must be considered as the principal, and, as 
it were, the only one to be pursued; it is a fixed basis to 
which all the secondary movements that circumstances and 
events may induce it to order must be referred. It is, in 
short, the object towards which everything must tend, and 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 7 


any operation that would positively deviate from it must be 
absolutely rejected. 

The Directory is quite aware that these great operations 

cannot be attempted by the right or the centre of the army 
of Italy, without being supported and prepared by the rest 
of that brave army ; neither can they be, unless the general- 
in-chief has first assured himself that one part of the army 
will not be cut off and separated from the other, and thus 
exposed toa total defeat. He will, therefore, pay scrupulous 
attention to the left, and by his good dispositions put it out 
of the power of the Piedmontese troops at Coni to injure or 
to attempt anything against him. 
- The Directory, therefore, must here explain its intentions 
relative to the sieges which the events of the campaign that 
is about to open may render it Enpettath to undertake. Its 
resolution is that no siege shall be undertaken, before the 
enemy capable of disturbing it shall be totally routed and 
aeotle to make any attempt ; and, at any rate, the general- 
in-chief must beware of aca his heavy artillery to any 
point whatever where it might be endangered by any slight 
suecess of the enemy. The Directory insists particularly 
on this essential precaution. 

Though it is to the interest of France to direct her prin- 
cipal efforts against the Austrians, and to induce the Pied- 
montese, by our success against the former, to contract an 
advantageous alliance for us, still the Piedmontese must 
not be spared, so long as they shall be our enemies. 

The general-in-chief will seek by all the means in his 
power to inflame the discontents in Piedmont, and to make 
them break forth against the court of Turin in a general or 
a partial manner. 

It would be superfluous to insist on the utility of a diver- 
sion of this kind, and of which the enemy have been the 
first to set us an example: it may facilitate to the army of the 
Alps, acting in concert with the left of the army of Italy, the 
rapid conquest of Piedmont, the possession of which during 
the war would ensure us advantageous conditions at the peace. 

Such are the principal bases of the plan of campaign 
which the Directory has adopted. Before it closes the pre- 
Sent. instructions, it must insist on the necessity of subsisting 
the army in and upon the hostile countries, and of supply- 
ing it with all that it needs by means of the resources which 
the localities afford. 


8 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


The general-in-chief will make a point of maintaining 
rigid discipline and sparing the inhabitants all the vexations 
and disasters which the scourge of war so frequently brings 
with it, and which order and well regulated inistrations 
are alone capable of neronmings - 

He will cause heavy contributions to be levied, half to be 
placed in the chests destined for the service of the various 
administrations, and the other half to furnish ready money 
for the pay of the army. ’ 

As ie Executive Directory reserves to itself the faculty 
of making peace, the general-in-chief will not grant any 
suspension of arms, or slacken in any manner his military 
operations. He will receive all proposals tending to pacifi- 
cation, and transmit them immediately to the Directory. 

The Directory relies on the zeal, activity, and talents of 
the general-in-chief of the army of Italy, and recommends 
to him with confidence the precise execution of the disposi- 
tions contained in the present instructions, to which the 
Directory will add when the events of the war shall render 


it se Panag 
ETOURNEUR, Oarnot, L. M. LAREVEILLERE- 
LEepaux, REWBELL. 


Bonaparte, General-in-Chief, to the Executive Directory. 
Head-quarters, Nicey8 Germinal, vear 4 [March 28, 1796]. 


I have been several days in the bosom of the army, the 
command of which I assumed yesterday. 

I must give you an account of three essential things :— 
1, of the departments of Vaucluse, Bouches du Rhone, the 
Var, andthe Lower Alps; 2, of the state of the army, of 
what I have done and what I hope to do; 3, of our political 
position in regard to Genoa. 

The four departments of the arrondissement of the army 
have not paid either forced loan or contributions in corn, 
nor supplied the forage required by the law of the 7th Ven- 
demiaire, nor begun to furnish the third horse. These ad- 
ministrations are extremely slow in their proceedings; I have 
written to them, I have seen them, and ees led to hope for 
more activity in matters so essential to the army. 

The administrative situation of the army is deplorable, 
but not desperate. The army will henceforth eat good 


| 
) 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 9 


bread, and will have butcher’s meat, and it has already re- 
ceived some advances on its arrears of pay. 

The magazines on the road of the ine and the Var 
are provisioned, and my cavalry, carriages, and artille 
began to move five days ago. ‘I shall march very shortly. 
One battalion has mutinied ; it refused to leave Nice, upon 
pretext that it had neither shoes nor money. I directed all 
the grenadiers to be arrested, made the battalion march off, 


‘and, when it was in the heart of the town, I sent a counter- 


order, and made it go to the rear. I intend to break up 
that corps, and to incorporate the soldiers in the other bat- 
talions ; the officers not having shown sufficient zeal. This 
battalion consists of no more than 200 men; it is known for 
its mutinous spirit. 

I have been received by this army with confidence, and 
salrepnitd ratified by the welcome of General Scherer. 

'y his siaaightSorietrd conduct, and his readiness to give 

me all the information that can be serviceable to me, he has 
6 ep a claim to my gratitude. His health really appears 
to be somewhat impaired. With great fluency of speech he 
unites an acquaintance with moral and military subjects 
which might render him useful in some important post. 
_ Our position in regard to Genoa is extremely critical. 
Things have been ill managed; we have done either too 
much or not enough; but fortunately no harm will result 
from it. 

The government of Genoa has more ability and energy 
than is imagined: there are but two courses to be pursued 
with it—either to take Genoa by a coup de main, but that is 
contrary to your intentions and to the law of nations; or to 
live in close amity, and not strive to extract their money 
from them, which is the only thing they care about. 

BONAPARTE. 


To the Chief of the Staff: 
Head-quarters, Nice, 9 Germinal, year 4 [March 29, 1796]. 
The third battalion of the 29th demi-brigade has been 
guilty of disobedience ; it has disgraced itself by its spirit 
of mutiny, by refusing to march to the active divisions; the 
officers have hokseot ill. The commandant, Captain Du- 
verney, has shown bad intentions. You will cause him to 
be arrested and sent before a council of war at Toulon, whi- 
1 General ‘Alexandre Berthier, afterwards Prince of Neufchatel. 


10 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


ther you will address the charges, which will be preferred 
by the commandant of the place. 

You will cause the grenadiers accused of being the ring- 
leaders of the mutiny to be tried by a council of war at Nice. 
Let the other grenadiers be sent off and distributed by fives 
among the battalions of the army. 

The officers and subalterns, having remained in the ranks 
without wth instead of setting an example to the men, 
are all guilty: they must be immediately dismissed and sent 
to their homes. 

The soldiers of the battalion shall be incorporated at 
Marseilles with the 83rd demi-brigade. This letter shall 
be entered in the order of the day. 

BONAPARTE. 


To the Chief of the Staff. 


Head-quarters, Nice, 9 Germinal, year 4 [March 29, 1796]. 

I wrote to you this morning relative to the third battalion 
of the 29th demi-brigade. The officers of the grenadiers of 
that corps have behaved well. I request you to make men- 
tion of this in the order of the day, to investigate the gene- 
ral conduct of all the officers and subalterns‘of that corps, to 
communicate to me the result, and to let me know what 
you think the best way to dispose of such of them as have 
not taken any part in that mutiny. 

BoNaPaRTE, 


To the Chief of the Staff. 


Head-quarters, Nice, 9 Germinal, year 4 [March 29, 1796}. 

You will order the general of the engineers to let the 
company of miners, with the requisite equipments, proceed 
to Finale. Let it start on the 13th. 

You will order it to form a workshop of 110 workmen, 
with directions for them to set out on the 183th for Finale. 
Let there be an officer of engineers at the head of these 
workmen ; let them be farniched with all requisite imple- 
ments ; and let the workmen in the different branches be 
in proportion. 

The commandant of the engineers, the director of the 
park, and all the officers of the engineers at Nice, must re- 
pair to the head-quarters. There must be left at Nice only 


~_. . 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 11 


an officer as commandant of the place, and an oflicer charged 
with the direction of the workshop at Nice. 
BONAPARTE. 


To the Chief of the Staff. 


Head-quarters, Nice, 10 Germinal, year 4 [March 30, 1796]. 
Fresh meat shall be given out five times in a decade. 
The battalions which have had salt meat to-day shall have 
fresh to-morrow ; and those which have had fresh meat one 
day shall have salt the next. 
' The administrations of the army and the workmen of the 
shops shall take meat all together. 
BONAPARTE. 


To the Chief of the Staff. 


Head-quarters, Nice, 11 Germinal, year 4 [March 31, 1796]. 
_ The general-in-chief is informed that several commissaries 
of war and officers have in their chests sums arising from 
various sales, from contributions, and from the revenues of 
conquered countries. This being contrary to the good of 
the service, to order, and to the constitution, he directs 
that these different sums be remitted without delay to the 
chest of the paymaster of the army or his superiors, in order 
that they may be disposed of by the warrants of the pay- 
master-in-chief for the good of the service, and for supplying 
the soldier with what is due to him. 
BONAPARTE. 


To the General-in-Chief of the Army of Italy. 


Savona, 9 Germinal, year 4 [March 29, 1796}. 

I have received your letter of yesterday. I heartily con- 

gratulate you on the chief command of the army of Italy 

* which has been given to you. You know that I have long 
done justice to your military talents. I shall act so as to 
deserve your confidence, as I have obtained that of all the 
generals who have hitherto commanded. 

Tam come from Voltri, whither I have been with Sali- 
cetti, the commissioner, to inspect our new positions. Hopes 
are given us of cash; all means are set to work to obtain it. 

o-morrow I shall give you an account of the positions of 


12 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


the troops of the advanced guard, and of those of the enemy. 
I shall not fail to inform you of everything that concerns 
the service. 

MASSENA,. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Oneglia, 10 Germinal, year 4 [March 30, 1796]. 

I have ins all the points and the coast about 
Oneglia, and have found that they are susceptible of a good 
defence. 

The batteries of Oneglia are in good condition ; their 
position is good ; they are serviceable but not sufficient. I 
must first observe that there are two distinct roadsteads : 
that of port Maurice, and that of Oneglia. The one affords 
shelter against the east-north-east wind, the other against 
the west and south-west. 

As these winds blow alternately, it will be requisite to 
occupy both roadsteads, and, of course, to make ourselves 
masters of them. 

The roadstead of Oneglia is defended firstly by the bat- 
teries of the fortress ; secondly, by those of Cape Oneglia, 
and by that called the battery of the road. 

That of port Maurice is defended by the battery of the road 
and by the Genoese battery of port Maurice. ‘The battery 
of Cape Oneglia is important ; it affords a good appui, but 
mounts only one 36-pounder. In my opinion, it ought to 
have four pieces of that calibre. 

The battery of the roadstead is not armed: the intention 
is to mount two 13-pounders there ; but they will be insuf- 
fieent—I even think it necessary that it should have four 
36-pounders, because that battery answers two ai sree 
for, being situated between the two roadsteads, it defends 
both. 

The Genoese battery of port Maurice is armed. It ap- 
pears to me indispensable that we should take possession of 
it, and send artillerymen to work it: it is a good point Capput, 
the loss of which would entail that of the others, consequently 
I think it would be dangerous to neglect it. 

The guns of the present batteries are provided with five 
rounds only: I think they ought to be increased to one 
hundred. 

By means of the proposed increase of guns, amounting to 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 13 


no more than seven 36-pounders, I think that a convoy of 
200 sail would find protection and safety. I am just start- 


ing for Ormea, whence I shall give you a report of my 


further observations. 
MARMONT. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


La Pietra, 10 Germinal, year 4 [March 30, 1796]. 

I have received your letter of the 8th instant, from which 
T learn that you have just assumed the command of the 
army. I congratulate myself on serving under you, know- 
ing your civism and your military talents. I will do my 
utmost to fulfil your intentions in all the orders that you 
shall give me: rely upon my zeal, my activity, and my 
devotedness to the public welfare. 

Your predecessor, General Scherer, ordered the 99th 
demi-brigade, which ought to belong to my division, to be 
transferred to General Massena for the expedition that is to 
take place. As soon as that deokbeigels is of no further 
service to the advanced guard, I request you to let it return 
to my division. 

AUGEREAU. 


To the General-in-Chief. 
Savona, Germinal 10, year 4 [March 30, 1796]. 

The snow is melting fast; our line needs reinforcement. 
The 99th demi-brigade, which belongs, according to the last 
distribution made by General Scherer, to the division of 
General Augereau, is become absolutely indispensable to 
me. Obliged, by the re-organization of the demi-brigades, 
to transfer many battalions and demi-brigades to the divi- 
sions of the line, my two advanced guard divisions have been 
much weakened, forming in all but 13,000 men, and having 
to guard from Melogno to Montelezino and Madona de la 
Savona. General Augereau, with 10,000 men, is only 
charged with the defence of the gorges of Bardinetto and 
Spinardo. 

I hope, general, that you will comply with my request, 
and permit me to keep that demi-brigade, which is at this 
moment with the advanced guard, of which it has always 
formed part. If, however, reasons that I cannot foresee 


14 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


induce you to withdraw it from me, I will beg you to give 
me another demi-brigade of nearly the same force. 
MASSENA. 


To the General-in-Chie. 


Savona, 11 Germinal, year 4 [March 31, 1796]. 


I send you a copy of a letter which I have just received 
from Salicetti, commissioner of the government. You see 
that he will not explain himself in a positive manner re- 
specting the 3,000 men at Voltri. 

I await your ulterior orders, and shall meanwhile secure 
the communication with Savona. 

The 84th demi-brigade sets out to-morrow on its return 
to Finale. The troops of General Augereau’s division, who 
are there at this moment, will return to their first position. 

MASSENA. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Savona, Germinal 12, year 4 [April 1, 1798). 


Nothing new at the advanced guard. I have received 
your letter of the 9th, and apprized them that they must 
conform to your intentions, and that on no account what- 
eyer is any one to meddle with the brigades of the artillery 
carriages, which are on the road to Finale and Vado. 

I have long been applying for the muskets and bayonets 
of which the two divisions of the advanced guard are defi- 
cient. We want at least 2,000 muskets: have the good- 
ness to order them to be sent to us. 

The snow is melting, and the communications with Pied- 
mont are beginning to be opened. The enemy is approach- 
ing our positions. I am reinforcing my line. General 
Augereau asks me for the 99th demi-brigade ; I am in abso- 
lute need of it, as I have mentioned to you. That general 
can ee with this demi-brigade, having a few days since 
received a corps of Allobroges. I hope it will be left with 
mes. 

MASSENA. 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 15 


To the General-in-Chief. 

Loano, 12 Germinal, year 4 [April 1, 1796]. 
I saw General Serrurier yesterday. He has given me all 
the particulars you desire, and I will transmit them to you. 

' The Col de Terme is an excellent post: it perfectly 
covers Ormea, and there is no taking that town till we have 
made ourselves masters of it. 

It may be turned: 1, by the gorges of Viosena; 2, by 
the heights of Arbre; 3, by the Col de l’Inferno. 

The Col de Terme, though easy of defence, is of great 
extent. General Serrurier thinks that it requires 2,400 
men and six pieces of cannon. However, when it was 
attacked last year, it was guarded by no more than 1,600 
men. 

_ The gorges of Viosena are of great importance: if they 
were to be forced, not only would the Col de Terme and 
Ormea be turned, but the enemy would drop without diffi- 
culty into the valley of the Oneglia. They cannot be duly 
guarded with fewer than 2,000 men. 

General Serrurier thinks also that 200 men would be re- 

uired for the defence of the heights of PArbre; 1,500 for 
the Col de ’'Inferno ; and 1,200 for the gorge of Garessio. 
Then his line of defence, extending from aioe to Ga- 
ressio, would be occupied by 7500 men. 

The Col de Terme is still impassable on account of the 
snow: as soon as that obstacle is removed, General Serru- 
rier will cause it to be occupied. It is clearer on our side 
than on that of the enemy; so we may be quite easy. 

I could not make observations on the different roads 
which you charged me to inspect, because they are all occu- 
pied by the enemy ; our advanced posts extending no fur- 
ther then a league from Garessio; but I have collected the 
following particulars from the country-people and from offi- 
cers who have traversed some of them. 

From the uniformity of their reports, they are no doubt 
accurate. 

1. From Ponte Nocetto to Ceva, there is an hour and a half 
of good road practicable for carriages. There are two rises. 
The descent of the second is within sight of the fort, in 
reach of cannon, but somewhat covered by chestnut-trees. 

2. From Nocetto to Calisano, two leagues and a half of 
mountain road, and scarcely passable for mules. 


16 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


3. From Garessio to the Carthusian convent, an hour 
and a half, and from the Carthusians to Mendovi, five hours 
and a half. This is a good road, but for mules only. 

4. From to Batifolo, one hour; the road is 

and passable for field artillery. 

I know not which is the Frabosa that you meant; but, as 
there are two, I have noticed both. 

5. From Frabosa to Breuves, four hours; roads for 
mules; and from Frabosa Fontana to Breuves, five hours ; 
mule roads. 

Such, general, is the information for which you have ap- 
plied to me. I am just starting for Finale and Savona. 

I forgot, in my last letter, to tell you that it is not off 
Oneglia that the enemy have taken some vessels, but off 
Alassio. But Alassio was not then armed, and this acci- 
dent bes nothing unfavourable for Oneglia, and they are 
there taking the precautions which you have pointed out 

MARMONT. 


To the General-in-Chief. 
La Pietra, 30 Germinal, year 4 [April 2, 1796]. 

You must have seen by the report of General Rusea, 
which I sent you the day before yesterday, that the enem 
was seeking to make himself master of the positions which 
we occupy at Bardinetto. 

You will see by that which I have just received, a copy 
of which I send you, that the enemy was striving to gain 
the positions: the troops which he is pushing on towards 
that point, and the reconnaissances directed to that quarter, 
bespeak some design on his part. 

darsivder to prevent his attempts and to be provisioned, 
we are at this moment on half rations and no fresh meat ; 
it being better to reserve the little that we can procure for 
the hospitals. ‘ 

According to the statement of our situation yesterday, 
we had here and at Garessio no more than 80 quintals of 
corn and flour; I have nevertheless been obliged to draw 
together all the troops, as the enemy are making move- 
ments. 

Some days ago, we lost a piece of cannon, one and a half 
pounder: it was probably sold by the artillerymen on guard : 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 17 


this affair is in the hands of a council of war. I forgot to 
report it to * a 
General Rusca has just written to me from Galissano that 
he is supporting my right. I am also writing to him, that 
I may obtain an exact account of his positions and of his 
communications with me. 
SERRURIER. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Savona, 13 Germinal, year 4 [April 2, 1796]. 

Nothin g new at the advanced guard. An express has 
just brought General Laharpe information that the enemy 
ea made some movements on the heights of Voltri: he is 
even assured that some troops have arrived at San Pietro 
d@ Arena, with a small detachment of cavalry. 

I shall immediately reinforce Voltri with 500 men. I 
shall act in consequence of further information that I may 
receive of the movements of the enemy. 

We have now 4000 men between this place and Voltri. 

MASSENA. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Savona, 14 Germinal, year 4 [April 3, 1796). 

The movements of the enemy are not what they were at 
first taken for. Yesterday 80 Austrians came on a recon- 
naissanee to San Pietrod’Arena. Descending from Campo 
di Marona, they spread alarm over the whole country, so 
that it was belioved that the whole Austro-Sardinian army 
was at the gates of Genoa. 

Having resolved, on account of the magazines of corn 
and flour which we have at Voltri and Pegoli, to reinforce 
the troops that are at Voltri, I sent off, last night, 500 
men with General Laharpe, making in all 4500 that we 
have from Savona to Voltri. 

Reeonnaissances have been made this morning along the 
whole line of the two divisions of the advanced guard, but 
only a few Barbets were met with. A most vigilant look- 
out is everywhere kept up. 

MASSENA. 


VOL. I. c 


18 . LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


To the General-in-Chief. 
; Savona, 13 Germinal, year 4 [April 3, 1796]. 

I arrived here yesterday. I have seen the port of Finale, 
_andit appeared to me tobe ill defended. The whole of its 
artillery consists of two 12-pounders and an 8; but they 
are of no consequence, and in the most inefficient state. It 
would be necessary to establish two good batteries of large 
calibre. For the rest, the port of Finale is of little interest. 
Seamen have assured me that it was impossible to lie there 
if the sea was at all rough. 

I took the road from Finale to St. Jaques; it is superb 
for mountain artillery ; but, I think, not passable for field- 
pieces: in some places it is too narrow, in others too rugged, 
and all the turnings are too short. The road from St. 
Jaques to Vado is better made, and, with slight repairs, 
might be made passable for 12-pounder field-pieces. 

he Austrian carriages which were at Finale are now at 
Loano: they can be employed only for the works of an 
arsenal and a great fort: twelve or fifteen, in particular, 
might serve for the forage of the horse artillery ; they are 
like those which are used for that purpose in the North. 

The Austrians have made movements towards Genoa ; 
they have come to the number of 4000 men to the Bochetta, 
and sent 100 men as far as San Pietrod’Arena. I suppose 
this movement to be the result of those which we have made 
in advance of Voltri, and that they meant to show the Ge- 
noese by it that they were there. Salicetti was apprehen- 
sive that, they designed to carry off our magazines from 
Voltri, and has determined to send a few battalions to sup- 
owe the 3000 men who are there: he has gone thither 

imself this morning with General: Laharpe. Massena is 
very quiet: he thinks that nothing serious can occur there. 
Marmont. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Savona, 15 Germinal, year 4 [April 4, 1796]. 
All is very quiet towards Voltri :. our men are labouring 
to-day at the evacuation of the magazines, When. this 
operation is finished, I will send back the troops to their 
former positions, and repair to Albenga, to have the sweet 
pleasure (dows plaisir) of embracing you. 
MASSENA. 


we > - = 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 19 


Order of the General-in-Chief. 

4 : Head-quarters, Oneglia, 15 Germinal, year 4 [April 4, 1796). 

_ The general-in-chief orders a contribution of 400 sacks, 

the assessment to be made in the valley of Oneglia, and a 

contribution of 200 in the eé-derant marquisate of Dolce- 

a charges General Casalta with the levy of the 
contribution, orders such villages as shall not have 

obeyed the requisition within twenty-four hours to be fined 

100 frances in cash for each sack not furnished. 

Ba; BONAPARTE. 


To the General Chief of the Staff. 


: Head-quarters, Albenga, 16 Germinal, year 4 [April 5, 1796). 
You will be pleased to assemble a military commission 
for the purpose of tryin Moulin, the emigrant, taken at 
Ormea, and sent to Nice = order of General Serrurier. 
BONAPARTE. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Savona, 16 Germinal, year 4 [April 5, 1796). 

I have returned from Voltri. The flourish of the enemy in 
eoming to San Pietro d’Arena has ended in nothing: he 
has even retired from Camporosso. 

Between Novi, the Bochetta, Voltagio, and Ovado, there 
are about 3000 men ; they have some: pieces of cannon at the 
Bochetta, and they are entrenching themselves there : they 
haye 50 men at Campofredo: this is, on the left, their most 
advanced post tow: Voltri. 

' There are 5000 men at Dego, 500 of whom they are de- 
taching to Ponzone: these are to send 200 to the camp of 
Giana di Castagna, two leagues from Sacello, and 100 to the 


mountain of Simaferro. According to all my reports, the: 


enemy isnot in such force as the Genoese think fit to re- 
present; and I have no doubt that, if we open the campaign 
shortly, it will be in a.very victorious manner. 

I received ean your letter of the 11th instant ; your 
promises are extremely consolatory, and I am impatient to 
see the execution of them. The fortitude of the troops 
under their sufferings can be compared only with their bra- 
very. We are in need of many articles of equipment. I 
have myself made a strict scrutiny to ascertain the extent 
c2 


- Ato 


20 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


of our wants of that kind ; and it is very essential that you 
should get supplies from Nice before we take the field. We 
are likewise in want of arms, and especially of cartouch- 
boxes and swords. The commissaire ordonnateur gives us 
hopes of shoes, which we are in the utmost need of. 
ou will perhaps think, general, that I am asking for a 
reat deal; but I am as solicitous to obtain for my brothers 
im arms what is necessary for them, as I am to make them 
clever at their business and to lead them to victory. 

I have already told you, general, and I repeat that the 
establishment at Voltri is extremely burdensome to us. It 
is not military, and it obliges us to occupy a line far too 
extensive, and which is liable to expose us to reverses. Sa- 
vona and Vado have mills which can make amends for 
those of Voltri. The only objection in favour of the latter 
place is that it ensures the arrival of cattle. 

LAHARPE. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Ormea, 17 Germinal, year 4 [April 6, 1796]. 

I have received your letters of the 10th, 11th, and L5th 
instant. I have made known to the soldiers of my division, 
through the order of the day, the means which you are 
about to employ to procure necessaries for them. 

If the supplies of provisions for these divisions are to be 
sent direct from Loano to Garessio, 200 mules would be 
sufficient ; but if from Oneglia, they would fall short. 

In order to be able to observe Batifolo, I must neces- 
sarily be master of the height of Preconda ; I have ordered 
General Guyeux to set at work the peasants and the ea 
to open the wiptnaee roads for us. If I were obliged to 
proceed to Batifolo, 1 should not be in sufficient force ; I 
should consequently be compromised, since my left would 
have to guard Carlino and Visona, and precisely at that 
time we must observe the Col de Terme, which, I think, 
the enemy would be very glad to have; but, if I can make 
myself master of the Preconda and the Col de Casolto, that 
will be all the same to me: I even believe that in this case 
they will not risk the attempt. 

Citizen Barthelemy, chief of the 10th demi-brigade, re- 
solved, without orders, to endeavour to dislodge the enemy 
from a post which they have at St. Jaques-Viola. He had 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 21 


probably made no disposition and taken no military pre- 
caution. He was driven back to his cantonments, and 
himself wounded and made prisoner. It has not yet been 
ascertained how many men this foolish affair has cost us. 
It took place in the afternoon of the 15th. Part of the 


_ soldiers returned laden with booty. If an example is not 
_ made, things will go on ill; many soldiers would fain rob 


only and not fight. 
shall not venture to the Carthusian convent at Casolto, 
without having possession of the heights. 


SERRURIER. 


» To General Augereau. 
ah Souvelti, 18 Germinal, year 4 [April 7, 1796]. 
The enemy is seeking to make himself master of the 
positions which we occupy: he expects 2000 men at Bag- 
nasco, and, according to several reports, he has sone 
received a reinforcement. 

I must inform yon that I shall be in the greatest danger 
if my, right is not guarded by the division of Finale; for I 
may be cut off from Galissano and taken in rear on the 
on I should then have no retreat but upon the troops 

General Serrurier. 

I am obliged, for my own security, to leave two batta- 
lions at Galissano and one at Bardinetto: this force I shall 
need to guard the positions of Solta, Rovigni, Souvelti, Ser- 
boulera, and Maramasa, on account of the great extent of 
the ground. The redoubt of Maramasa is not occupied by 
us: the enemy came thither this morning on a reconnais- 
sance, but was driven out by the carabineers. 

. I have absolute need of my brigade for occupying the 
four above mentioned positions ; so make haste, and order 
the troops at Tuirano to come and occupy Bardinetto and 
Galissano. 

1 am under apprehension about to-night: those oa 


therefore, — to be this evening at Bardinetto and Galis- 


sano, and to bring with them two days’ provisions. 
«I have few cartridges at Bardinetto: some ought to be 
sent, as well as brandy, the troops being in bivouac, without 


covering and without shoes, and the cold very sharp. 


We can have at Bardinetto 3000 rations of bread per 
day, ovens and mills, including Galissano. 


22 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


I have this instant learned that the enemy has many 
troops at Berno. ~  Rusoa, 


The General-in-Chief to the Executive Directory. 


Head-quarters, Albenga, 17 Germinal, year 4 [April 6, 1796]. 

I have removed the head-quarters to Albenga. The 
movement which I found commenced against Genoa has 
drawn the enemy from his winter-quarters ; he has crossed 
the Po and pushed forward advanced posts to Dego, follow- 
ing the Bormida and the Bochetta, leaving Gavi in his rear. 
Beaulieu has published a manifesto, which I send you, and 
which I will answer the day after the battle... I have been 
extremely vexed and annoyed by this movement upon 
Genoa, the more unseasonable as it has obliged that republic 
to assume an hostile attitude, and awakened the enem 
whom I should have caught napping: our loss in men will 
be so much the greater. 

The King of Sardinia, on his part, is in the greatest 
bustle : he has made a requisition of young men of the age of 
15 years and upwards. 

ike found at Oneglia marbles which are worth some 
money. I have ordered them to be valued and put up for 
sale in the Riviera of Genoa: these may produce the sum 
of thirty or forty thousand livres. 

The tre of Flachat, which has the contract for corn, 
and that of Collot for meat, behave well; they supply us 
with very good corn, and the troops are beginning to have 
fresh meat. 

The army is in a state of frightful destitution. I have 
still great obstacles to surmount, but they are surmountable. 
Want has authorized indiscipline, and without discipline 
there is no victory. I hope that this will speedily be set to 
rights; the aspect of things is already changing: in a few 
days we shall be engaged with the enemy. 

The day before yesterday I directed a reconnaissance to be 
made towards Cairo: the advanced posts of the enemy were 
driven back, and we took some prisoners. 

The Piedmontese army is about 50,000 strong in infantry 
and 5000 in cavalry : I have but about 45,000 disposable in 
all. A great many troops have been kept back on my rear 
and beyond the Rhone. 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. ° 23 


GChantet,; paymaster-in-chief, is dead at Genoa: this is a 
real loss for the army ; he was active and enterprising. The 
army has dropped a tear to his memory. 

_ BONAPARTE. 


To the Executive Directory. 


‘a? -Head-quarters, Albenga, 9 Germinal, year 4 [April 8, 1796]. 

no -y ou will find enclosed the letter written to. me by. General 
Colli, who commands the army of the King of Sardinia, and 
my answer to him: I hope that it will be conformable to 
your intentions. The treasury frequently sends us bills of 
eeeeoetict are protested ; as one for 162,800 livres on 


just been; and this increases our embarrass- 


|< 


ments. 
- T have found this army not only. destitute of : everything, 
but without discipline, and in a state of perpetual insubordi- 
nation. « The discontent was such, that evil-disposed persons 
took advantage of it: a company, called the Dauphin’s, was 
formed, and counter-revolutionary songs were sung. I have 
directed’ two officers, charged with having shouted Vive le 
roi! to be tried by a council of war. _ I conjecture that the 
mission of citizen Moulin, as a flag of truce, was connected 
with plots of this kind, the clue to which I am assiduously 
seeking. Be assured that peace and order will be re-esta- 
blished ; ; everything is in a fair way for it here. I have 
just caused the important position of to be occupied. 
Before you read this letter we shall have had a battle. 
The treasury has not kept its word; instead of 500,000 
livres, it has sent but 300,000; and we have heard nothing 
of a sum of 600,000 which was promised us; but in spite 
of all this we are going on. 


BONAPARTE. 


To the General-in- Chief. 


. Savona, 18 Germinal, year 4 [April 7, 1796}: 
o “The enemy yesterday attacked one of the posts of Voltri, 
the mountain called Campo del Mello. Our troops, after 
expending all their cartridges, fell back on a second post. 
On the arrival of the reinforcement sent by General Cervoni, 
the enemy retired, and the post was retaken. The firing 
lasted above two hours. w. had only four men w vounded. 


24 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


Citizen Picot has reported to me, as he says he has also 
done to you, the arrival of 3000 Austrians at Sacello. 
General Laharpe starts at three to-morrow morning, to place 
a post of 100 men at Stella and at Mozammaran, which is 
on the road descending to Arbrisolla: he will then inspect 
the whole line as far as Voltri. If it is your intention, 

eneral, to leave any longer the 4,500 men that there are 
rom Savona to Voltri, it will be necessary to send forward 
to us some other troops, as well for that division as for the 
division of Finale. The débouchés of Piedmont are all 
open: we must therefore take care of ourselves. 

I went this morning to reconnoitre Montenotte very mi- 
nutely, and even pushed on three quarters of a league beyond 
it. 1 convinced myself that.we ought not to oceupy that 

_post ; it would scatter our troops too much ; it is too wooded, 

and offers no point of defence for its too great extent: to 
clear it would require the labour of a hundred men at least 
for above a month, in felling trees—an impracticable thing. 
We shall confine ourselves then, if you approve it, to sup- 
porting our right at St. George, half musket-shot from 

ontenotte, the centre in the plain of Revel and La Gallina, 
and the left at St. Bartholomew; and our second line will 
be at Montelegino. The line is good, and the only one that 
can be taken at the moment, with the number of troops that 
we have. 

Cadibona and Baracon shall be reinforced to-morrow. 

MASSENA. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Savona, 18 Germinal, year 4 [April 7, 1796]. 
We are assured by advices from Genoa that the enemy 
is preparing to attack us at St. Jacques. Though I do not 
give absolute credit to them, still I must beg you to send 
me troops to reinforce the second division, if it consists with 
our operations to leave the troops at Voltri for some time 
Gece You know as well as myself the importance of the 
st of St. Jacques, and the necessity there is for reinforcing 

it sufficiently to enable it to resist a superior force. 
MASSENA. 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES- 25 


To the General-in-Chief. 


‘ Savona, 18 Germinal, year 4 [April 7, 1796). 
General Cervoni wrote to me yesterday, at three in the 
afternoon, that the enemy was attacking his posts on the 
mountain. The affair could not have produced any result, 
as I have no intelligence of it. 

If it is your intention to retain Voltri, materials for en- 
camping are indispensable, that we may establish ourselves 
in a more military manner, by occupying the heights, where 
it is impossible to remain in bivouac: otherwise, we shall 
be obliged to make troops ascend them every day, which 
will fatigue them much. 

I think it necessary that we should occupy Montenotte 
as speedily as possible. This position has the advantage of 
annoying the enemy by the facility which it affords of pro- 
ceeding either upon Dego or Batello. If the enemy were 
to occupy it, our advanced posts of La Madona would be 
continually disturbed, and we should be commanded. 

The salt meat causes many disorders: it is time for this 
unwholesome food to be discontinued. We are in urgent 
need of shoes. We are in want of arms. Notwithstanding 
all these wants, the troops are well disposed, and I doubt 
not for a moment that you will make a brilliant campaign. 
I will contribute to it with all my might. 

MASSENA. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Savona, 19 Germinal, year 4 [April 8, 1796]. 

I forward to you a letter which I have just received from 
General Laharpe. I have desired him not to suffer himself 
to be reduced to the last extremity before he makes his re- 
treat, and to abandon the positions occupied by his troops, 
if he thinks that he cannot hold them without danger. 

I shall immediately reinforce the post of Stella with 150 
men, and I am giving orders to the commandant of La Ma- 
dona to make a movement upon Sassello, by Montenotte, 
in order to alarm the force which the enemy appears to be 
collecting towards Sassello. 

I know not what are your intentions in regard to leaving 
troops any longer at Voltri. I cannot help remarking to 


26 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


you that our line is too extensive to be guarded by so few 
men. Give me your orders, and in a positive manner. 
I am forwarding the cartridges for which General Laharpe 
applies. 
MASSENA. 


To the General-in-Chie. 


Ormea, 19 Germinal, year 4 [April 8, 1796]. 

The general of brigade Guieux, commanding the advanced 
guard of the division entrusted to me, informs me that the 
enemy appear desirous to possess themselves of Casolto. 
This point is of the utmost importance to cover my right; I 
have in consequence recommended to that general to protect 
it with all his means, but without endangering himself. I 
recommend to him to place a post at Casale in an advan- 
tageous position. In the allotment of the divisions, Casolto 
was destined for the division of General Augereau. I have 
not a force sufficiently strong to risk prolonging myself to- 
wards the right. I think that the plan of the enemy must 
be to. make the first cut at me, to oblige me to abandon the 
environs of Preconda, which they must covet, in order to 
delay or to suspend our operations: my plan, therefore, is 
to reinforce my right as much as I can. 

Corn arrives very slowly: I have difficulty to provision 
Garessio, whither I must nevertheless march the greater 
part of my troops: by the statement of to-day there are in 
that place but seven quintals of flour; this makes me un- 
easy. There is meat for a few days for the hospitals—that 
is all. There are to-day but eight quintals of hay in the 
magazine of Ormea; so that horses as well as men are re- 
duced to half allowance. 

SERRURIER. 


To General Massena. 


Voltri, 19 Germinal, year 4 [April 8, 1796]. 
The firing has ceased ; the enemy is retiring ; the troops 
are worn out; we have no cartridges left. af; the enemy 
attacks this evening, or by daybreak to morrow, I shall be 
obliged, in case none arrive, to retreat without resistance. 
For the sake of the common weal 


tite mele 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 27 


" s.-Your letter for Giacomoni is gone by sea. Suchet is the 
bearer of it. 


soldier ill-fed, and without shoes, cannot resist new fatigues 
if he is attacked. All are under arms, and all will be so 
for the night.. Under this circumstance, I shall not return 
to Savona, but I recommend to you the gorge which runs 
down to Albisola: if not watched, we might all be culpable. 
I think the troops at Stella too weak. 

' Llearn this moment that the enemy is again making a 
movement: he appears to be assembling for a fresh attack. 
We are just out of cartridges: if an attack is made, our 
resistance cannot be long. 

fa LAHARPE. 


To General Massena. 


: Voltri, 20 Germinal, year 4 [April 9, 1796]. 
The night has been quiet. The enemy has not yet made 
his rng which causes me to presume that he does 
not design to disturb us to-day. 
Last night, I received a communication from the minister ; 
he promises me shoes : it will be the coming of the Messiah. 
Most of the troops, absolutely barefoot, could no longer 
ascend the mountain: they are all there, nevertheless, with 
the exception of six companies which are here. 
_ The troops murmur bitterly; I smoothed them down, 
and I hope things will go on well. Though several fought 
ill yesterday, saying that they would fight as they were 
pat , be not uneasy. It anything new occurs, you shall 
ve immediate notice of it. 
I have received 60,000 cartridges. It would not be amiss 
to make them up 100,000. 
LAHARPE. 


General Mesnard to Massena, General of Division. 


: Cadibona, 20 Germinal, year 4 [April 9, 1796]. 
_ Lhave just been informed, and you may take it as quite 
certain, that the enemy has for these three days past been 
despatching about 10,000 men towards Sacello; and 1200 
Pandours are leaving Dego to-day, to join those 10,000 
men. General Roecavina commands this armed force. His 


~ It is impossible to delude one’s self any longer. The 


28 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


intention is to cut off the retreat of our troops to Voltri, or 
to make them prisoners. 

- There has been a firing of small arms towards Melogno, 
but I have not been able to learn the result. 

It is the intention of the enemy to cut off the right and 
the left of the army ; and the troops of Piedmont, with the 
auxiliaries in-her pay, are to make an effort towards the Col 
de Tende: they reckon also upon foreing the two important 
posts of Melogno and St. Jacques, and upon leaving the en- 
virons of Cairo with few troops, in the hope of enticing us 

“into that valley. MESNARD. 


The Minister of the French Republic at Venice to the General- 
in-Chief. 
Venice, 20 Germinal, year 4 [April 9, 1796]. 

With the letter which you were pleased to write to me 

on the 7th instant, I received that of the minister for foreign 
affairs, which accompanied it. Be assured that I will not 
neglect any means in my power to procure the information 
which you desire, and which must contribute to the success 
of your operations. 
Ehate from time to time acquainted the minister of the 
Republic at Genoa with all that was passing within my ob- 
servation. The result is that, since the defeat of General 
Devins, there have entered Lombardy, by the Venetian ter- 
ritory, from 17,000 to 18,000 men, 2000 of which are light 
cavalry, and 60 pieces of cannon of different calibres ; that 
in this number are comprised two regiments of emigrants in 
the pay of England, which crossed the States of the Pope 
to embark at Civita Vecchia; and that 900 men, Neapolitan 
cavalry, which have likewise passed through the March of 
Ancona, have just arrived at Milan. The general rendez- 
vous is at Pavia. We are assured also that there is, be- 
tween Inspruck and Trent, in the Tyrol, a reserve of 20,000 
men, 6000 of them regular troops, and 14,000 militia. 

The Austrian troops, according to the report of the 
Milanese themselves, are in bad condition, excepting the 
cavalry. They consist chiefly of elderly men, boys of fifteen 
or sixteen, Polish recruits raised in Galicia, who march by 
compulsion, and desert in platoons: those, whom I have 
seen arriving here, have assured me that all their country- 
men will endeavour to do the same when they shall C 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 29 


ordered against the French. They have even suggested to 
me this stratagem, which had also occurred to myself, to 

lace at the head of our columns Poles dressed in the Polish 
Sahin, and who would be immediately recognized as such.. 
You have some at Savona, mere others, Major Stratz- 
kowski, whom you might employ in this manner with success. 
_ As for the spirit of the inhabitants, especially of the 
Milanese, they are tired of their archduke, whom they de- 
spise; they are desirous of a change of government, and they 
expect it from the arrival of the French among them ; but it is 
not to be supposed that they will make the least movement in 
their favour till the moment they feel certain that the latter 
will be able to secure them for ever from the return of the 
Austrian domination. It will, therefore, be necessary, on 
coming among them, to inspire them with confidence by 
rigid discipline, by scrupulous respect for private property 
and for their religion and manners. They are afraid of us 
now, because the priests and our enemies have always mis- 
represented us to them: they will learn by and by to esteem 
us, and you will dictate to them such laws as you shall think 
proper to ensure the triumph and the glory of the Republic. 

LALLEMANT. 


To the General-in-Chief. 
Verachio, 22 Germinal, year 4 [April 11, 1796]. 

I arrived yesterday evening at Voltri ; but my stay there 
was not long. The enemy, 4000 strong and with four pieces 
of cannon, appeared along our front about three in the after- 
noon. The greater part of his troops came by Campo Vado, 
and their orm with 200 horse, along the sea-coast. 
Our troops have fought well; but, scattered in many diffe- 
rent points and guarding an extensive and an easy country, 
on account of its numerous gorges, they were forced at se- 
veral points ; and at night the enemy found himself master 
of all the heights of Voltri. Very fortunately he had at- 
tacked late, for, had there been by ts hours more daylight, 
our situation might have been very disastrous. General 
Cervoni, therefore, wisely resolved to retreat. 

Every thing has been evacuated—the magazines of all 
sorts—and we have sustained no loss. 

We are at Verachio, where there are very good positions 
to take ; among others that of the mountain of Lafourche. 


a 


30 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


The left of the new line would be at Stella, where we have 
one battalion. 

I have not been able, as you perceive, to inspect the po- 
sitions which you specified. If — order the movement of 
retreat, I shall return immediately to Savona: if you order 
a newline to be taken, I will visit it and then rejoin you. 

MARMONT. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Between Cairo and Bochetta, 23 Germinal, year 4 [April 12, 1796] 

I arrived at six o'clock upon the heights on the right, 
between Cairo.and Bochetta : my advanced guard covers this 
village. I have not yet any intelligence of General Mesnard, 
who has with him the 8th demi-brigade of light infantry. I 
believe he oceupies the bridge and heights of Carcaro. 

The enemy occupies the heights facing us which cover 
Cairo: he is said to have six battalions of grenadiers and 
1200 Croats. 

It is said that at Dego there are the battalions of Bel- 
jioso and Caprara and two Piedmontese battalions. 

FT inform you that all the forces I have here amount to no 


more than 1200 men. 
MASSENA. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Montenotte, 23 Germinal, year 4 [April 12, 1796]. 

We have just driven the enemy from the positions which 
he occupied at Montenotte. His loss is very considerable ; 
an officer, who is a prisoner, estimates it at 400 men; ours 
is but about a score wounded and five or six killed. 

I am withdrawing my troops from the positions of Mon- 
tenotte. I have sent a superior officer with 100 men to 
ascertain where General Laharpe is. If his operation is not 
yet finished, I will march to his. assistance, and we will 
proceed together to Carcaro and Sacello, as you direct. in 
the letter which my aide-de-camp has just brought me. 

My troops have received no bread: I know not whether 
any has been found at Vado. 

I owe the warmest thanks to the brave fellows whom I 


command. 
MASSENA. 


anette i 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 31 


The Executive Directory to the General-in-Chief of the Army 
ns of Italy. 
Paris, 23 Germinal, year 4 [April 12, 1796]. 
‘The Executive Directory sends you, citizen-general, an 
extract from a memorial which has just been presented to 
it, and from which, it conceives, you may derive some ad- 
- vantage. 
The Directory is far from intending to propose to you the 
silly plan of exposing 10,000 men to a march of forty-five 
leagues in an enemy’s country, leaving behind them an 
army and fortresses, and destitute of the means of carryin 
with them necessaries for their subsistence ; but it has been 
thought that it might be possible to attain the proposed end 
by confiding the execution of the plan to a corps of partisans 
commanded by a daring and enterprising leader. It begs 
you to make the attempt, if you agree in its opinion, and if 
‘you know a man in the army capable of executing it. 
LETOURNEUR. 


. 


Extract annexed to the preceding. 


Genoa cannot be more than forty-five leagues distant from 
Loretto: might it not be possible to seize the Casa Santa 
and the immense treasures which superstition has been 
amassing there for fifteen centuries? They are estimated 
at ten millions sterling. Ten thousand men, secretly de- 
spatched, cleverly conducted, would accomplish such an 
undertaking with the greatest facility. There is one diffi- 
culty—the road is not direct, or it will be necessary to cross 
the Appenines. 

_ Nevertheless, with daring, not in the execution, which 
requires little or none, but in the plan, you will effect a 
most admirable financial operation, and which would do no 
harm but to a few monks. 

Ten thousand men are sufficient for this enterprise. 
Their unknown march will ensure their success. In case of 
need, the army will second them. 


To the General in-Chief. 


i 

| 

: Millesimo, 25 Germinal, year 4 [April 14, 1796]. 

1. Agreeably to your orders, I sent off this morning the 
brigade of General Victor. That of General Joubert is at 


— ae 


82 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


its destination. Thus I have only the 39th demi-brigade 
left, and with that I must furnish a garrison for Cossaria, 
and the force requisite for the service of Carcaro, so that I 
have but 1000 or 1200 men disposable. With these, you 
will admit, it is scarcely possible to occupy positions and to 
form an attack. I am going, nevertheless, to make a di- 
version, to harass the enemy incessantly, and, in order to 
do it effectively, to concert with General Joubert, who has 
just informed me that the Piedmontese have retired to Mon- 
tesemo. 
AUGEREAU. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Millesimo, 25 Germinal, year 4 [April 14, 1796]. 
I inform you that I intend to attack Montesemo to- 
morrow morning. To this end I shall make General Be- 
d’s brigade file along the heights of Rocavignano ; 
eneral Joubert’s shall start from Biestro, and proceed to 
the same point ; and lastly, General Rusca’s, master of St. 
Giovanne de Murialto, will turn the enemy by his left and 
cut off his retreat upon Ceva. TI shall give you an account 

of the result of this expedition. 
AUGEREAU. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Cossaria, 25 Germinal, year 4 [April 14, 179€]. 

The troops which defended the castle of Cossaria have at 
length capitulated, at the moment when I was preparing to 
cannonade them in the republican fashion. Adjutant-Ge- 
neral Verdier will deliver the capitulation to you. 

It were to be wished that this capitulation had taken 
place before the attack, and then we should not have to 
paste the brave generals Banel and Quenin and many other 
gallant officers and soldiers who have perished nor fe the 
walls of that castle. 

I will march off the division for the attack which you 
have just ordered. 

AUGEREAU. 


To the General-in-Chi¢. 
On the heights of the Castle of Cairo, 25 Germinal, year 4 
[April 14, 1796). 

- The enemy, to the number of 1500 or 2000 men, is this 
_ moment arriving on the heights facing the position which I 
occupy. I shall be able to resist and to attack him as soon 
as the battalion which I sent this morning for the second 
time to General Augereau comes back. 

Lhave this moment received two orders from General 
Massena to march to La Bochetta with the two battalions 
of the 84th demi-brigade. I am letting him know that, 
having received contrary orders from you, and being on the 
? point of having the enemy upon my hands, I cannot abandon 
4g my position. 
a : DoMMARTIN. 


To the General-in-Chief. 
- Cairo, 26 Germinal, year 4 [April 15, 1796). 

Brilliant actions ought to be known. I have two to 
mention to you which deserve your attention. 

In.the glorious fight of yesterday, I received orders to 
throw myself with my battalion on the front of the enemy : 

this order I executed with impetuosity. Adjutant-General 
Palezzini and citizen Guiabega, captain in the first demi- 
brigade of light infantry, which was with me, were the first 
to dash into the enemy’s entrenchments. The first was 
aimed at by two Austrians who missed him: he disarmed 
and took them prisoners. He advanced and disarmed four 
officers, who defended themselves sword in hand. 
This adjutant-general, dismissed at the time of the changes 
made by Aubry, and provisionally placed in activity on the 
application of General Scherer, has no letters of service ; he 
deserves, by the trait which I have just related, and by the 
intrepidity which he has displayed in the affair of Voltri, 
in the attack of Montenotte, and on several other occasions, 
that you, general, should solicit the grant of his commis- 
sion. 

The second, keeping ahead of the column, amidst a shower 
of balls, threw himself into the redoubt, and engaged with 
the sword two officers and a sergeant ; the latter he killed, 
and disarmed and took prisoners the two others. This 

VOL. I. dD 


* 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 33. 


‘a a . 
ee + ee a Se 


34 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


officer, distinguished for his talents and his valour, who has 

been a captain for three months, deserves to be promoted to 

the rank of chief of battalion on the field of battle. 
CERVONI. 


To the General-in- Chief. 


Meridano, 26 Germinal, year 4 [April 15, 1796]. 

I learn, through the medium of the order of the day, that 
shoes are to be delivered to the divisions of General Massena 
and Laharpe. Nothing is said about mine, which is in ex- 
treme want of them. I beg you to send me the shoes I am 
in need of as speedily as possible. 

The convoys of provisions destined for my division reach 
me with difficulty, because there is allowed an escort of two 
men only, who are unacquainted with the roads and lose 
their way. 

AUGEREAU. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


La Bochetta, 26-Germinal, year 4 [April 15, 1796]. - 

Notwithstanding your promises, general, the troops are 
without bread ; they are sinking under fatigue and inani- 
tion. Send us something—at least, some bread and a little 
brandy ; for I am fearful of being a prophet of disaster ; but, 
if we are attacked to-morrow, the troops will fight ill, for 
want of physical strength. 

LAHARPE. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Camp of Dego, 27 Germinal, year 4 [April 16, 1796]. 
The fight of yesterday was Sp al very fatiguing, but 
meng ware for the arms of the Republic. 
fore daylight, the enemy, who had received numerous 
reinforcements, attacked all the posts of Dego, of which we 
had made ourselyes masters the say before. The resistance 
was most obstinate: our troops, notwithstanding their ex- 
treme valour, were obliged, after a combat of five hours, to 
give way and to abandon all the positions which they oc- 
cupied : they made their retreat along tlie line which we 
had taken on the first day. 


| 
| 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 35 


I made dispositions for a new attack, and meanwhile oc- 
eupied the enemy by a t number of tirailleurs. The 
reinforcement for which I applied to you having arrived, 
the attack became general. The fire was terrible on both 
sides: never was fattle more obstinate. At length the 
enemy, charged in all quarters, was obliged to yield to 
republican valour, and to abandon, in his turn, all the re- 
doubts of which he had made himself master. His rout 
was complete. In his flight he was charged with impetu- 


osity by the cavalry ; all who refused to surrender were cut 


down. His loss is very considerable, in killed and wounded 
as well as prisoners. The number of these last exceeds 3000. 
Ours is small in comparison. We have to regret the death 
of General Causse, Adjutant Poyré, and several other gal- 


lant officers. The chiefs of brigade Rondeau and Dupuis 


are wounded, the first in the leg, the other in the arm. 

The Hireea raise is due to the troops: they have every- 
where displayed heroic courage. The general of brigade 
Beaumont, commanding the cavalry, your aide-de-camp 
Murat, and adjutant-general Vignolles, sub-chief of the 
staff, featloiilarly distinguished themselves by being the first 
to attack the enemy and with vigour. 

The success of this engagement is owing to the intrepi- 
Pr of the troops and the reinforcement which you sent me. 

will communicate to you, general, the brilliant deeds 

which do honour to that fight and to our republicans, and 
immortalize those who are dead: their memory ought to be 
recorded in the annals of history. 


MASSENA. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Heights of Ceva, 28 Germinal, year 4 [April 17, 1796). 

1 have this instant received your different orders, but 
cannot them in execution, being master of the enemy’s 
lines. I shall send immediately to occupy the Téte Noire 
and other positions which overlook the fort : if, neverthe- 
less, you persist in the changes which you prescribe, I re- 
quest you to let me know it. 

AUGEREAU. 


36 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


To the General-in-Chief. 
Bagnasco, 26 Germinal, year 4 [April 17, 1796]. 

There are no provisions in the magazines of Ormea and 
Garessio: we are living from hand to mouth. Itis the same 
in regard to forage. I have been told that a small quantity 
of oats has arrived, but with orders that none should be 
delivered. 

My right column arrived at Nocetta too late to form the 
attack of it, which took place this morning; we carried at 
once the redoubt of Terra Bianca. I am certain of these 
facts, though I have not yet received the report of General 
Pelletier, who directs that party. 

I wrote to you yesterday, to give you an account of our 
establishment at Batifolo, where we have taken prisoners 
51 men and five officers, one of them a lieutenant-colonel, 
Count d’Ison. I have to commend general of brigade Guieux, 
as he does highly the chief of battalion Dallons. 

I have just received intelligence from general of brigade 
Pelletier, whose affair is as 1 have told you above: he has 
taken five or six prisoners. I have sent General Miollis 
with 1000 or 1200 men towards Pampara, as much to cover 
me on that side as to annoy the enemy. The snow renders 
the roads extremely toilsome. 

SERRURIER. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Mioglia, 28 Germinal, year 4 [April 17, 1796]. 
The boundless licentiousness to which the troops give 
themselves up, and which cannot be remedied, because we 
have not a right to order a scoundrel to be shot, is hurrying 
us into ruin, dishonouring us, and preparing for us the most 
cruel reverses. As my character for firmness will not per- 
mit me to witness such things, much less to tolerate them, 
there is but one course for me to take, that of retiring. In 
consequence, general, I beg you to accept my resignation, 
and to send an officer to take the command entrusted to 
me; for I would rather dig the ground for a livelihood 
than be at the head of men who are worse than were the 

Vandals of old. 
LAHARPE. 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 37 


To the General-in-Chief. 


¢ Savona, 29 Germinal, year 4 [April 18, 1799]. 

In consequence, general, of your order of the 28th, I have 
halted at Savona. I have communicated your intentions 
to the commandant of the artillery and to the commissaries 
of war at Savona and Vado. You may depend upon your 
orders being punctually executed, as well in regard to the 


artillery as to the provisions. The field-artillery shall be 


landed to-day, and to-morrow it shall be all sent off. 

The commissaries of war have given orders that there 
shall be nothing in their magazines but what is necessary 
for daily consumption. To-morrow, a detachment of 100 
horse shall go to Voltri, agreeably to the order of the chief 
of the staff to the commandant of Savona. Weare assured 
that this country is entirely evacuated by the enemy. 

The English squadron has been the whole day off Savona. 
I have recommended the most active vigilance to the forts 
of Vado and to the vessels in that harbour. 

CERVONI. 


To the General-in-Chief. 
Castellino, 30 Germinal, year 4 [April 19, 1796]. 

I set out, agreeably to your orders, at the precise hour 
this morning for Castellino, where I arrived without striking 
a stroke, not having met with the enemy till I was beyond 
the Tanaro, where he was encamped and awaiting me in 
order of battle. As General Serrurier had not yet made 
his appearance, I determined to make myself master of all 
the heights which border the river by extending myself a 

t deal on the right, in order to turn him by his left, 

and to be enabled to cut off his retreat at the rst move- 
ment that he should make. 
_ General Serrurier having appeared and commenced his 
attack, I have sent down a great number of tirailleurs to 
occupy the enemy and to make a diversion. If a favour- 
able moment presents itself, I will cross the river, which it 
is very difficult to do, since the enemy has broken down the 
bridge, and the opposite bank is lined with artillery. 

As soon as I appeared, the enemy broke up the camp 
which is in the plain and that which is on the heights that 
cover St. Michael. AUGEREAU. 


— 


38 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Ceva, 30 Germinal, year 4 [April 19, 1796]. 

We were masters of St. Michael, of the castle, and of 
the heights. The enemy had blown up part of his ammu- 
nition; his cannon, abandoned in the rout of the centre, 
had been overturned by some of the chasseurs whom I had 
with me, and who had crossed the Tanaro; in short, we 
were on the point of the most complete victory. Part of 
Serrurier’s division unfortunately fell to plundering in the 
village of St. Michael, in spite of all the efforts of that 
officer to restrain them. The enemy took advantage of 
this stupidity to return to the charge, and in an instant the 
conquerors fost everything. The general fell back upon 
the heights in front of St. Michael, whither I went to re- 
join him, with some companies that I had taken from the 
troops under the command of General Fiorella. He had a 
mind to retire into his first positions ; I have strongly dis- 
suaded him from it, and he will await your orders. There 
is nothing desperate. Let General Augereau closely press 
the centre of the enemy; let his attack commence even 
before that of General Serrurier, that concert may be neces- 
sarily established between them, a concert indispensable for 
success: let all our cavalry assemble, pour down into 
the valley, and fall upon the enemy in his retreat, and I 
think I may be answerable to you for certain success. The 
enemy has but little artillery, and his countenance, through 
the whole action, has been not so much that of an adversary 
bent on maintaining his ground as of one who contemplates 
retreat, merely taking the time necessary for the evacuation 
of his magazines. It is essential above all things that you 
should give speedy orders to General Serrurier, and invite 
him to take his revenge. i 

Your brother will hand you this letter, written in haste. 
I should have rejoined you, but my horse is knocked up, 
and I am very little better myself. Return hither ; I think 
your presence would be more useful here than at Salicetto. 

DEsPINOIs. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Dego, 30 Germinal, year 4 [April 19, 1796]. 
According to the reports that reach me, the enemy has 
evacuated the fortress of Voltri and the Bochetta, and is 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 39 


collecting in the environs of Acqui. At Spigno, there is 
only a piquet of fifty hussars. He appears disturbed this 
morning: whether this arises from movements made on 
your part, I cannot tell. It is two months since the troops 
received any pay, as I am told by an officer with a flag of 
truce that ht despatches. 

We received last night bread and spirits, so that we have 
been enabled to give out a whole ration for to-day. 

In collecting the muskets and cartouch-boxes, we found 


some more unfortunate wounded Austrians. More than 


500 have been conveyed to Cairo, but they are all lost men, 
mortification having already taken place in most of them. 
LAHARPE. 


To the General-in-Chief. 
Heights of St. Michael, 1 Floreal, year 4 [April 20, 1796]. 

1 am ready, for my part, general, to attack to-day, but 
the circumstance exhibits no appearance of a probability 
that would be favourable to us. 

Several corps have been without bread for these three days : 
the soldiers abused this pretext to abandon themselves to 
the most horrible pillage. The corps have somewhat ral- 
lied, but there are still wanting a considerable number of 
men, who have gone off to get provisions in all possible 
ways. Iam ill seconded by the officers, who pillage too : 
they were drunk yesterday, like the others. 

For the attack of the village, I should need at least two 
8-pounders to answer the heavy pieces which the enemy 
has placed for the defence of the bridge which he has cut 
down. I should want an engineer of more ability than the 
one I have, to rebuild that bridge under the fire of my 
cannon. 

The means for the reconstruction of the bridge being pre- 
pared—for the river cannot be forded without great danger 
—those means, I say, being prepared, it would be neces- 
sary to defer that attack till to-morrow, and not to com- 
_ it too early, because I have great movements to 
make. 

To obtain success, it is necessary that General Augereau 
should attack with a force sufficient to enable him to pene- 
trate; should he not sueceed, and I enter St. Michael, I 
run the risk of being taken there with my troops, because 


40 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


the enemy will correct the blunders which they committed 
yesterday. 

If bread does not reach us, the soldiers will not march. 
We are still in want of a great many muskets; there were 
nearly 2000 deficient before the affair. 

SERRURIER, 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Savona, 1 Floreal, year 4 [April 20, 1796}. 
The detachment of 100 horse chasseurs sent on a recon- 
noissance to Voltri has returned this morning. The com- 
manding officer informs me that this place is evacuated by 
the enemy, who has effected his retreat by the Bochetta. 
Nothing new. ’ CERYVONI. 


To the General-in-Chi¢. 


Castellino, 1 Floreal, year 4 [April 20, 1796]. 

I send you herewith two letters, one from general of 
brigade Rusca, and the other from a Piedmontese, who in- 
forms him that a corps of enemy’s troops has passed the 
Tanaro in face of him. I have just inspected that ground, 
and have remarked that this is really the place by which 
we may be turned. If I am attacked, I shall make a 
proper resistance ; but, in case of necessity, I shall fall back 
upon the entrenched camp, unless you give me contrary 
orders. 

Numerous patroles, which I shall immediately send out, 
will learn what truth there is in this statement; and the 
scouts whom I shall despatch early this morning will pre- 
vent any surprise in that quarter. 

AUGEREAU. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Cairo, 1 Floreal, year 1 (April 20, 1796}. 

I have come hither, general, to ascertain the state of our 
provisions ; there is the same penury everywhere. Unless 
we receive bread to-night, we shall be without an ounce 
to-morrow, and, should it even arrive, there would not be 
sufficient to give a quarter of a ration to the three brigades 
and to the cavalry. 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES, 41 


All the agents, store-keepers, and others, in all the ad- 
ministrations, are making requisitions at random: the 

ts of these parts are absolutely ruined: the soldiers 
are destitute and their leaders disconsolate: rogues only 
are enriching themselves. There is not a moment to be 
lost, general, if you would save the army, if you would not 
have us be considered in Piedmont as men worse than the 
Goths and Vandals. Punish the knaves severely ; reduce 
the number of those public bloodsuckers ; whom one never 
sees exerting themselves for the benefit of the army, but is 
sure to find wherever they can profit by disorder. 

Since the 23rd of last month, the 69th has received but 
two rations and a half; and the others have suffered in 
like manner. It is not possible to repress the men in this 
miserable state: your army is about to be worn down b 
disease, and, whenever we march, by the Barbets:' for it 
cannot be doubted that the inhabitants, driven to despair, 
will arm and slaughter every French straggler. Above all, 
general, it is urgent that you should put a stop to that host 
of illegal requisitions ; or, if they must continue, it would 
be better to assemble the inhabitants, shoot them, and 
then finish plundering, for it comes to the same point ; they 
must be starved to death. 

Bread ! bread! and again bread ! 
LAHARPE. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Camp of Dego, J Floreal, year 4 [April 20, 1796]. 
Indiscipline has reached the highest pitch. I am using 
all ible means to maintain order, but they are of no 
avail. There is no kind of excess which the soldiers do not 
indulge in, and all that I can do is useless. I therefore 
request you, general, to be pleased to accept my resigna- 
tion; for I cannot serve with soldiers, who know neither 
subordination, nor obedience, nor law, and who are every 

moment threatening their officers and their commanders. 

CHAMBARLHAC, 
Chief of the 70th demi-brigade. 


1 Piedmontese guerillas. 


42 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


To the General-in-Chi¢. 
Dego, 1 Floreal, year 4 [April 20, 1796]. ' 

Indiscipline and insubordination are at their height: the 
excesses perpetrated by the soldiers cannot be checked. For 
several days past, I have been employing all the means in 
my power to bring them back to obedience and subordi- 
nation ; all my efforts Ogi” ee unavailing, and find- 
ing myself wholly unable to reduce them to order, I request 
you, general, to accept my resignation. 

I observe to you, general, that two chiefs of battalions 
without appointments are with the demi-brigade, and one 
of these citizens might readily supply my place, since their 
military talents are supe.ior to mine. 

MAUvGRAS. 


To the General-in-Chief. 
Monte Barcaro, 3 Floreal, year 4 [April 22, 1796]. 

It is two o'clock and nothing has arrived; the soldiers 
are more busily engaged than ever in theft and plunder: 
seg have heat murdered by our men, and soldiers have 

een killed by the peasants. Words cannot adequately 
describe the horrors that are committed. The camps are 
almost deserted, the soldiers roaming over the country 
more like ferocious beasts than men; those who do not join 
in the atrocities patrolling the while, with superior officers 
at their head; it is to no purpose to drive them from one 
place ; they only run to murder at another. The officers 
are in despair. 

The soldiers are culpable, but those who reduce them to 
the alternative of plundering or starving are much more 
guilty. In the name of humanity, in the name of liberty, 
which wretches are assassinating, rescue us from this situ- 
ation! Send us wherewithal to prolong our miserable 
existence without committing crimes. ho would ever 
have thought that the brave fellows of the army of Italy, 
after making so many sacrifices, would have no other re- 
ward but the cruel alternative of being famished to death 
or turning robbers! The contributions which, judiciously 
levied, would have enabled us to live, are become imprac- 
ticable ; the soldier destroying in a moment what we could 
have lived upon for a week, without ruining the inhabitant. 


n 
a 
j 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 43 


Can there then exist a Providence, since its avenging bolts 
do not crush all the villains who are at the head of the ad- 
ministration ! 
vals LAHARPE. 


To the General-in-Chief. 
afte Castellino, 4 Floreal, year 4 [April 23, 1796}. 
' This morning, at seven o’clock precisely, I received your 
order to set off at that hour, which it was impossible for me 
to do. I shall, however, make the utmost efforts to set 
my columns in motion without delay. 
' The force of General Beyrand will proceed direct for 
Dogliani, by way of Marsaglia. The column of General 
Rusea will take the high road and escort the artillery. 

I have just written to General Victor to set out imme- 
diately on receiving the orders of the staff, and to rejoin 
me at omen As soon as I have arrived and taken 
positions, I will report to you. 

AUGEREAU. 


To the General-in- Chief. 


Monte Barcaro, 4 Floreal, year 4 [April 23, 1796). 

I have received your two letters, my dear general: your 
promises are very cheering—may they be fulfilled ! 

General Mesnard has just sent back the company of gre- 
nadiers of the second battalion of the 99th demi-brigade. 
It was directed to protect property, and by its language 
encouraged the plunder of it: it shall be broken and sent 
to the rear of the division. One man is before a council of 
war, and I hope that he will be shot te-day. The officers 
have determined to second me to-day. Let us have bread, 
and, by dint of exertions, I will answer for restoring dis- 
cipline. 

LAHARPE. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Dogliani, 4 Floreal, year 4 [April 23, 1796]. 
It is seven o’clock, and I have just arrived here with the 
39th demi-brigade: [am expecting the brigades of generals 
Rusea and Victor, as well as the artillery. I entered 


44 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


amidst a concourse of people, who came to offer the scanty 
resources which this Mite e country affords. I accepted 
nothing but wine. 

The enemy passed through this place eight days ago, on 
the 28th ult., in his retreat, to the number of 4000 men : 
he came from Mutassano, and first marched to Marsoglio, 
whence, after several movements, he proceeded to Mondovi. 
When Mondovi was taken, he retired upon Cherasco, where 
he is at present. He has cut off all the communications 
on the Tanaro, which were nothing but bridges of boats. 

To-morrow at daybreak I shall start myself, to make a 
strict reconnoissance towards Novella, and I shall establish 
myself there, if the country presents any advantageous 
positions. I will report to you on the subject, and give 
you all the information that I can pick up. 

AUGEREAU. 


To the General-in-Chigf. 


Brealongo, 5 Floreal, year 4 [April 24, 1796] 

I have been informed that the enemy were at Coni, to 
the number of 4000 men, and that they had totally evacu- 
ated Fossano. I have sent a peasant to the latter place 
to make sure of the matter; otherwise I could not gua- 
rantee the truth of these two statements. Supposing that 
of Coni to be true, the position which I at present occupy 
would not appear to me to be a very good one; I should 
actually be exposing my left flank to him. 

I bivouacked last night with my troops on the position 
which you pointed out in your last order of yesterday. 
Not having received orders to march this morning as I 
expected, i have placed myself personally in this village. 

SERRURIER. 


To the General-in-Chief. 
In advance of Brealongo, 5 Floreal, year 4 [April 24, 1796]. 

All night my patroles were unable to discover the ad- 
vanced posts of General Massena. It was not till near 
daybreak that they discovered three posts, which were all 
asleep. They report to me that they found nobody in 
Carru, and that they pushed on to your head-quarters, 
which I do not know the name of. 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 45 


We have bivouacked, as your last order directs, on the 
left bank of the Gezzio. The artillery is not yet arrived. 
It appears certain that all is quiet, and that the enemy is at 
a great distance from this place. I shall, nevertheless, 
send out fresh patroles to Rocca and Morozzo. 
SERRURIER, 


To the General-in-Chi¢f. 


Paris, 6 Floreal, year 4 [April 25, 1796). 

Accept my congratulations on the brilliant actions of 
Montenotte and Millesimo: at this moment, perhaps, you 
have still more important ones to report tous. All France, 
all Europe, have their eyes fixed on you. Your triumphs 
are those of liberty ; and assuredly you will not only half 
perform the glorious task which you have imposed upon 
yourself. 

The Executive Directory will give orders for officers of 
artillery and engineers to be sent as speedily as possible 
to the army of Italy, and likewise one or two companies of 
light artillery. It replies by the present courier to your 
official letters. CARNOT. 


The Executive Directory to General Bonaparte, Commander- 
in-Chief of the Army of Italy. 

Paris, 4 Floreal, year 4 [April 23, 1796]. 
The Directory has received with the highest satisfaction, 
citizen-general, the news of the victory gained in Italy over 
the Austrians. In appreciating advantages so brilliant at 
the opening of a campaign which the aversion to peace on 
the part of the enemies of the Republic has forced us to un- 
dertake, it is satisfactory to it to see the choice which it 
has made of you to conduct the army of Italy to victory 
justified by the laurels which you have just gathered. 
Receive to-day, general, the tribute of the national gra- 
titude ; deserve it more and more; and prove to Europe 
that Beaulieu, in changing the field of. battle, has not 
changed enemies ; that, beaten in the north, he will be con- 
stantly beaten by the brave army of Italy ; and that, with 
such defenders, liberty will triumph over the impotent 

efforts of the enemies of the Republic. 
LETOURNEUR. 


46 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


The Executive Directory to General Bonaparte. 
Paris, 4 Floreal, year 4 [April 23, 1796]. 

The Executive Directory has received, citizen-general, 
your letter of the 17th Germinal, as well as a copy of that 
written to you by General Colli, and of your answer, rela- 
tive to the apprehension of Moulin. The insult offered to 
the national dignity by this hostile general, in sending to 
you an emigrant with a flag of truce, justifies the resolution 
which you have taken to detain him, and the Directory 
approves it; but you must only keep him in a place of 
safety, and not bring him to trial, in consideration of the 
character with which he is invested. 

You know, pm vag e the high importance attached 
by the Directory to the campaign in Italy, and it is con- 
vinced that, on this theatre of war most especially, it is 
essential to commence with important successes. 

You have fulfilled its hopes in the brilliant victory of 
Montenotte ; and it sees with an interest equal to its con- 
fidence in you those which you express respecting your 
further operations. 


LETOURNEUR. 


The Executive Directory to General Bonaparte. 


Paris, 6 Floreal, year 4 [April 25, 1796]. 
The Executive Directory has received, citizen-general, by 
a second courier, the news of the victory of Millesimo. 
The glorious testimonies of the national gratitude which 
the legislative body has just given to the brave army of 
Italy fur this success and that of Montenotte, which 


paved the way to it, dispense the Directory from expatia- _ 


ting further in the praises which it has merited: it confines 
itself to congratulating the general, to whose talents and 
activity these victories are principally owing, on the dis- 
positions which he has: ca and the success which has 
crowned them. It desires him to communicate to the 
French generals who have so happily seconded him, and to 
the brave men who have conquered under their command, 
the testimony of its satisfaction and that of all the true 
friends of liberty. 

A republican government knows how to gratify those 
who render important services to their country. It is its 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 47 


duty to encourage the man whom patriotic sentiments and 
the intrepidity inherent in the French soldier stimulate to 
actions which reflect honour on their country. 

The Directory informs you that it cheerfully complies 
with the application which you have made for the rank of 


_ general of brigade in behalf of citizen Rampon, chief of the 


21st demi-brigade. It has sent him a letter expressing its 
satisfaction, which you will find herewith inclosed, as well 
as his commission, which the Directory begs you to deliver 
to him. 

The Directory has thought fit, in like manner, to confirm 
the nomination which you have made of citizen Lasnes to 
the rank of chief of brigade of the 39th demi-brigade 
instead of the officer who commanded it and fell on the field 
of honour. 

One more effort, citizen-general, and nothing will be able 
to stop the triumphant march of the army which you com- 
mand. COeva has no doubt been attacked at the moment 
when the Directory is writing to you, and the valour of the 
French troops will have carried the entrenched camp of 
the Piedmontese near that fortress. A vast career is 
opening before you; the Directory has measured its full 
extent: the instructions which it has given you, the deve- 
lopments which it adds to them by the present, and which 
circumstances command it to address to you, your military 
talents, as well as the valour of the troops that are under 
you, will enable you to pass arene it with glory and in 
a manner worthy of the Republic for which you are 

hting. 

Meh structions which the Directory transmitted to you, 


_ at the moment when you apprised it that you had assumed 


the command of the army of Italy, have already laid down the 
bases to which the Directory refers. To-day it will give a 
rapid sketch of the conduct which you have to pursue in the 
different circumstances in which it is natural to suppose that 
military events may place you. 

The first hypothesis which it is fair to form is that which 
is more Neale connected with the hopes held out to the 
Directory by the army of Italy and the talents and zeal of 
the general who commands it. Everything induces a belief 
that, after having obtained success at Ceva, after you have 
gained possession of that fort, universal terror will be 
diffused over all Piedmont; that the court of Turin will 


48 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


be obliged to abandon Coni, Mondovi, and its other for- 
tresses to their own strength ; to collect its troops to cover 
Turin ; and to strive, by efforts which your activity and the 
military dispositions made by you will find means to 
thwart, further to oppose the march which part of the 
French army will direct towards that capital. Perhaps 
even the King of Sardinia, astounded at your success, 
alarmed at the movements which may take place in Turin 
itself, will at last renounce the coalition, into which he has 
been drawn to his misfortune. And it is not improbable 
that, in the present circumstance, he will seek with ardour 
a peace which he has rejected with obstinacy, and to the 
obtaining of which French generosity alone can permit him 
to revert. 

The Executive Directory has reserved to itself exclu- 
sively the faculty conferred on it by the constitution of 
negotiating peace ; but it thinks that it may be useful to 
communicate to you, citizen-general, some of the bases on 
which it will insist for its establishment. 

An alliance offensive and defensive with the King of 
Sardinia is, without doubt, what would be most advantage- 
ous to the court of Turin. It would secure to the latter 
not only Sardinia, where the disturbances appear to be fed 
solely by the hope of being seconded by us: it would pro- 
cure for the Sardinian troops, by an attack combined with 
the movements of the French troops towards Tortona, 
Alexandria, and Valenza, the important invasion of the 
Milanese. This alliance, in short, would guarantee to us 
the entire and for us advantageous expulsion of the house 
of Austria out of Italy ; but the want of money in Pied- 
mont, the little confidence which the court of Turin enjoys, 
and the exhaustion of the country after several campaigns, 
forbid the idea of the possibility of an alliance so desirable, 
and which would suddenly turn the forces of Piedmont 
against our implacable enemies the Austrians. It would 
perhaps, at most, be possible to require that part of the 
troops of the court of Turin should join the republican 
troops, while the rest of the troops of the King of Sardinia 
should be prudently reduced to a state that would give us 
pat to fear during the remainder of this war, in case 
even of a reverse on our part, and if the advantages gained 
by the Austrians should force the Piedmontese again to 
join them. If, however, the court of Turin, induced by 


wl 
\ 
al 
a 
4 
« 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 49 


the hope of being enabled to send its troops into the Mila- 
nese (the ession of which France would guarantee to 
it) were suddenly to turn its forces against the soldiers of 
Austria, it would then become necessary to have some im- 
portant fortresses as a pledge of its fidelity to us. Tor- 
tona or Alexandria, Coni, Suza, and the fort of Exiles, 
might answer for the fidelity of the King of Sardinia in 
observing the alliance which would be concluded with him 
by the Executive Directory. The reasons deduced above, 
citizen-general, leading us to think that the court of Turin, 
at the moment when it is compelled to demand peace, will 
find itself utterly incapable of continuing the war, have 
arrested the attention of the Directory. Tiss are some of 
the bases that it will adopt for the establishment of that 
, if it is foreed to renounce the hope of an alliance 
offensive and defensive, advantageous to both States. 

1. The general disarming of Piedmont ; 

2. The reduction of the Piedmontese troops to such a 
state as would leave us nothing to apprehend during the 
course of the present war ; 

3. The transport to the island of Sardinia of the greater 
part and of the best corps which shall be retained ; 

4. The occupation of the citadels and fortresses of Alex- 
andria or Tortona, those of Ceva and Coni, and lastly those 
of Exiles and Suza, with a stipulation for the demolition 
of the fortifications of the last three, either at the general 
peace, or at a particular peace with the court of Turin ; 

5. Lastly, the supply of all sorts of commodities in kind 
which the troops of the Republic shall have need of during 
the present war, and that of the means of transport, as 
well as the establishment in Piedmont of military hospi- 
tals and workshops necessary for the army of Italy. 

The second hypothesis entertained by the Directory is 
that in which the King of Sardinia, either from obstinac 
or from continuing to reckon upon foreign subsidies, shall 
persist in continuing the war. Vour first instructions fur- 
nish you with a plan of conduct in this state of things ; 


. and then it will become essential to strive more especially 


to excite insurrection in Piedmont, to second the desire 

which is there manifesting itself for the establishment of a 

republican government, and to draw from that country all 

the resources which the army of Italy shall have need. of ; 

but it would be imprudent to advance too far into Piedmont 
VOL, I: E 


50 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


and to direct attention to it exclusively: this would be 
iving the Austrians the means of repairing their losses and 
opes of some success. 

t will then be requisite—and you could, in a manner, 
prepare beforehand for this movement, citizen-general—it 
will be requisite to act upon your right, to drive the Aus- 
trians beyond the Po, and to turn your most strenuous 
efforts in the direction of the Milanese. Genoa, after the 
rout of the Austrian army, will cease to refuse the succours 
that are indispensable to us. The firmness and energy of 
the French envoys to that republic, and their conduct, 
prudent, Pin and worthy in everything of that 
which employs them, will bring back the Genoese to the 
sentiments from which they ought never to have swerved. 
They will nu longer refuse to let you occupy Gavi, in the 
same manner and on the same conditions as at the time of 
the taking of Vado; and, if they should so misunderstand 
their interests as to oppose our successes which ensure their 
existence, force would soon make us masters of that for- 
tress. For the rest, the Directory relies upon your 
‘prudence, and it is convinced that your conduct in these 
delicate transactions, which the distance prevents us from 
determining in a more precise manner, will be in every 

ect prudent and judicious. 

uch are the developments which your successes have 
determined the Directory to add to the instructions which 
it had given you. It doubts not for a moment that you 
will follow up the victories which the army has just won. 
It knows that it is not you, citizen-general, whom it will 
ever have to reproach with the disgraceful repose of Capua. 

LETOURNEUR. 


The Executive Directory to General Bonaparte. 


Paris, 6 Floreal, year 4 [April 25, 1796]. 

The Directory had signed the despatches which it ad- 
dresses to you to-day by the return of your first courier, 
when your letter of the 27th Germinal arrived. Honour 
to the army of Italy and to the chief who commands it! 
You have had the skill to retrieve what a fatal security at 
Dego had well nigh wrested from us. Honour to the brave 
General Causse, who fell in the field of glory! Honour 
to all the French who defend and uphold the Republic ! 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 51 


- Be particularly upon your guard against the movements 
of rey rwewer§ Maes the scnbaer of Devins soon go 
back to Vienna, like him, to mourn over fresh losses! No 
repose till our enemies are totally dispersed. 

_ The Directory will write to you very shortly, and will 
be solicitous to reward the republicans who have distin- 
guished themselves, Send it the typographical plans of 
the battles of Montenotte and Millesimo and the affair 
of Dego, with an accurate description of the movements. 
The Directory strongly insists on these plans, necessary 
to the history of the triumphs of the Republic, being made 
and sent to it punctually and without delay. 

. Annexed are some’ interesting papers. Orders. shall 
be given to the army of the Alps to second you; but, 
unfortunately, it is in a state of frightful destitution and 
not strong. LETOURNEUR. 


The Executive Directory to General Bonaparte. 


Paris, 9 Floreal, year 4 [April 28, 1796}. 

By a courier who set out on the morning of the 7th, the 
Directory acknowledged the receipt of the letters, informing 
it of the success of the army of Italy at Dego. It has learned 
with equal satisfaction the advantages gained near Coraglia 
and Mondovi, and the news of the taking of that place. 

These victories are owing, citizen-general, to your judi- 
cious dispositions and activity : they confirm the Directory 
in the opinion which it entertains of your prudence and your 
military talents. But, while praising the valour and intrepi- 
dity of the army which you command, it bitterly regrets to see 
the laurels which it has gathered stained by the disorders 
and the pillage to which they have given themselves up. 

This disastrous state of things, and the excesses which 
tarnish the glory of the defenders of the Republic, have 
probably been by this time repressed by the severe order 
which you have given, and which is fully justified by the 
a cireumstances in which you have found yourself. 
. The Directory hopes that the ulterior conduct of the 
army will soon allow you to recall it, and speedily to revoke 
the extraordinary power which you have been obliged to 
confer on the generals of division who second you. A 
commencement of Vendée in La Lozére, the Ardéche, the 
frontiers of the Gard, &c. has prevented the Directory 

E2 


52 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


from ordering Chateauneuf-Randon to retain no longer the 
two demi-brigades mentioned in your letter dated from 
Cairo on the 27th of Germinal last, and which will be sent 
to you by and by. 

t is with extreme pain that the Directory, convinced of 
the urgent necessity of the case, has authorized the retain- 
ing of those corps under the command of General Chateau- 
neuf-Randon. It will give orders for sending off imme- 
diately to the army of Italy a reinforcement of several 
thousand men, which, unluckily, will not arrive so speedily 
as the Directory wishes, but which will not on that account 
be the less useful. Rely upon it, General, that the Direc- 
tory will not lose sight for a single moment of the brave 
army which you command; and the authority which the 
Directory has conferred on citizens Salicetti and Garreau 
to.require movements of ies 7 upon the appliontige of the 

enerals-in-chief, or of one of them, cannot fail to produce 
lee in the operations of the two armies. 

The ec sends you herewith a copy of the de- 
spatch which it ee to General Kellermann on the 
9th instant, in which you will remark that it has adopted 
the principal bases of the plan presented by the general of 
division Berthier, which had probably been communicated 
to you, and which determines, for the right of the army of 
the Alps, a close connexion with the left of that of Italy, 
and movements absolutely dependent upon it. You will 
see by the same letter how strongly the Directory has re- 
commended union between the two armies and the gene- 
rals who command them. The Directory considers it as 
superfluous to enlarge with you on the necessity of that 
concord: it knows that it needs not recommend to you to 
pay your colleague the attentions which his long services 
and military talents demand, and without which there 
might arise such disharmony as would compromise the 
success of our arms, 

The courier who left on the 7th Floreal will have 
brought you details respecting the officers of engineers and 
artillery who have received orders to join the army of Italy. 
The Directory does not lose sight of this interesting object. 

The confidence which the Directory has in your energy 
and prudence silences the fears which might be raised by 
the statement of the hostile forces opposed to you. Your 
successes have brought about a highly interesting event, 
and one to which the Directory attached the greatest im- 


« 


gh cal 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 53 


portance—the separation of the Piedmontese and Austrian 
armies ; but our advantages cannot be truly consolidated 
without extreme promptitude in the operations which you 
shall command. Act, therefore, with the rapidity of light- 
ning, and successively against the Austrian and the Pied- 
moutese : beware, above all, of throwing yourself with too 
much precipitation upon your left. How advantageous 
soéver might be an immediate junction with the right of 
the army of the Alps, it is to be feared that Beaulieu would 
suddenly take advantage of the removal of great me of 
your forces towards Saluzzo. As you very justly observe, 
the campaign is not yet decided. Beaulieu is the more to 
be feared, as he is obstinate, daring, and enterprising ; his 
attack at Dego after a defeat is a proof of this, and we 
must take it as a warning: beat the Austrians again, and 
you will thenceforward ‘be master of the campaign ; and 
you will have nothing more to fight but the heat and dis- 
ease, which must be kept off by the precautions which the 
climate enjoins. Those scourges have always annihilated 
our successes where you are: they must be provided against ; 
and, unpleasant as may be the details which must be fol- 
lowed up for this purpose, the Directory deems it a duty to 
eall your attention beforehand to the necessity of keeping 
an eye upon them. 

Compliment, on the part of the Directory, the general of 
division Augereau, ani the generals of brigade Beyrand 
and Joubert, on their conduct in the attack of the redoubts 
defending the approach to the entrenched camp of Ceva; 
the general of division, Serrurier, on that which he dis- 
Played at the attack of St. Michael and the passage of the 

orsaglia ; the general of division Massena, and the gene- 
rals of brigade Guieux, Fiorella, and Dammartin, on their 
behaviour in the engagements of the 3rd and 4th Floreal ; 
lastly, the chief of brigade, Murat, your aide-de-camp, who, 
has, in like manner, distinguished himself. 

As for yourself, hope every thing from the genius of the 
Republic, from the valour of the soldiers, from the union 
of the chiefs, and the confidence which is placed in you: 
the Directory expects everything from the general who 
commands the intrepid army of italy, and from the holi- 
ness of the cause for which the French are fighting, and 
which they will never abandon. CARNOT. 


54 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


Bonaparte, General-in-Chief, to the Executive Directory. 

; Head-quarters, Cherasco, 9 Floreal, year 4 [April 28, 1796]. 

Enclosed you will find, citizens directors— 

1. Copy of the letter written to me by General Colli ; 

2. Copy of my answer; 

8. Copy of his second letter ; 

4. The conditions of the suspension of arms concluded 
last night between the Ceisesactent cepebak Latour, com- 
manding the Piedmontese army, and myself. 

Ceva, Coni, and Alexandria, are in the hands of your 
army, as well as all the posts in Piedmont beyond the 
Stura and the Tanaro. 

If you will not come to an accommodation with the King 
of Sardinia, I will keep those places and march upon 
Turin ; my siege equipage is going off to Coni, and to pro- 
ceed thence to Cherasco. 

Meanwhile, I shall march to-morrow to meet Beaulieu ; 
I shall oblige him to repass the Po; I shall cross it imme- 
diately afterwards, make myself master of all Lombardy, 
and in less than a month I hope to be on the mountains of 
Tyrol, to find the army of the Rhine, and in concert with 
it to carry the war into Bavaria. This plan is worthy of 
you, of the army, and of the destinies of France. 

If you will not grant peace to the King of Sardinia, let 
me know beforehand, that, if I am still in Lombardy, I 
may fall back and take measures. 

As for the conditions of peace with Sardinia, you can 
dictate what you please, since I have the principal fortresses 
in my power. 

Order 15,000 men of the army of the a to be placed 
at my disposal and to join me: that will make me an army 
of 45,000 men, part of which it might be possible to send 
to Rome. If you continue to give me your confidence and 
approve these projects, I am certain of success: Italy is 

ours. 
‘ You must not reckon upon a revolution in Piedmont ; it 
will come, but it is requisite that the minds of those people 
should be ripe for the purpose. 

I have justified your confidence and the advantageous 
opinion which you have conceived of me ; I shall constantly 
strive to give you proofs of my zeal, and of the desire I feet 
to deserve your esteem and that of the country. 


) 


—s 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 55 


Send me, 1, twelve companies of light artillery—I have 
but one; 2, cavalry, and a commissary-general, able, dis- 
tinguished, and a man of genius. 1 have but pigmies, who 
starve me amidst abundance, for I am in the richest country 
in the world. 

BONAPARTE. 


To the General Commanding in Chief the French Army 
in Italy. 
Head-quarters of the Piedmontese army, 
y April 26, 1796 [7 Floreal, year 4]. 
Having learned that His Majesty the King of Sardinia 
is about to send plenipotentiaries to Genoa to treat there for 
peace under the mediation of the court of Spain, I think, 
gen that the interest of humanity would require -that 
ostilities be suspended on both sides during the time that 
the negociations ok 
paprypoe to you, therefore, an armistice, either unli- 
mited or for a fixed term, at your option, with a view to 
spare the useless effusion of human blood. 
CoLLt. 


The General in Chief of the Army of Italy to General Colli, 

Commanding in Chief the Army of the King of Sardinia. 

Head-quarters, Carru, 5 Floreal, year 4 [April 24, 1796]. 

The Executive Directory, sir, has reserved to itself the 
right of treating for peace. The plenipotentiaries of the 
king, your master, must therefore repair to Paris, or wait 
at Genoa for the plenipotentiaries whom the French govern- 
ment may send thither. 

The military and moral position of the two armies ren- 
ders any pure and simple suspension impossible, Though 
1 am particularly convinced that the government will grant 
honourable conditions of peace to your king, yet I cannot 
suspend my march upon mere presumptions : there is, how- 
ever, a way to attam your object, conformably with the 
true interests of your court, and which would spare an effu- 
sion of blood useless, and thenceforth contrary to reason 
and the laws of war; that is, to place in my hands two of 
the three fortresses of Coni, Alexandria, and Tortona, at 
your option: we might then wait without hostilities the 


56 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


end of the negociations that should be opened. This pro- 
posal is very moderate: the mutual interests which ought 
to exist between Piedmont and the French Republic make 
me anxiously desire to see the calamities of all kinds which 
threaten your country averted from it. 
Bonaparte. 


To the General-in-Chief of the French Army in Italy. 
Head-quarters of the Piedmontese army, 
April 26, 1796 [7 Floreal, year 4]. 

I have communicated to the court of Sardinia, general, 
the letter which you have written me, in answer to that 
which I a weo® | to you, to notify the mission of a pleni- 
potentiary on the part of the king to Genoa, for the — 
of making overtures of peace, and to invite you, while 
awaiting their result, to spare the effusion of human blood 
by a suspension of arms. 

I am authorized by his majesty to tell you now that the 
French minister at Genoa, to whom the plenipotentiary of 
the king addressed himself for the said overtures of peace, 
has dodared to him that neither he, nor any person at 
Genoa, has authority to enter into such negociations, but 
that he must address himself to the Executive Directory in 
Paris, which alone has the right to do so. 

Whereupon the plenipotentiary said that he should 
direct his farther a re to that quarter for the object 
in view. Till however we can, in this way, which is liable 
to some delay, arrive at the hoped-for conclusion of the 
salutary work of peace between the two States, the king, 
wishing to spare both sides the calamities of all kinds in- 
cident to hostilities, has not hesitated to give his consent 
that the pete suspension of arms, which you have 
shown yourself disposed to accept on certain conditions, 
shall take place and be concluded without delay. 

In consequence, his majesty orders me to declare to you 
that he consents to put into your power two of his for- 
tresses, namely Coni and Tortona, as you have demanded, 
during the continuance of the negociations about to be 
opened, and according to the mode that shall be agreed 
upon: in consequence of which all hostility shall cease 
from the present time till the end of the said negociations ; 
and in case that, owing to the difliculties that might arise 


¥ 
: 
‘ 


baba: 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 57 


from the then situation of the allied army, the fortress of 
‘Tortona could not be given up, as above mentioned, his 


Majesty is determined to offer instead of it the fortress of 
Demont ; that, excepting the delivery of these two places, 
things shall remain in statw quo as far as relates to the 
country occupied by the respective armies, without their 
having a right to pass the boundary line fixed for them 
respectively ; and the whole in the manner that shall be 
more specifically arranged between us. 5 
OLLI. 


To General Latour. 


Head-quarters, Cherasco, 7 Floreal; year 7 [April 26, 17961. 

I have received, sir, the order of the king, addressed to 
the commandant of Coni, which you have taken the trouble 
to transmit to me. I shall be here to morrow to wait for 
the order for one of the fortresses of Tortona and Alex- 
andria. You know, sir, that the distance between this and 
either of those places renders it necessary that the order of 
the king should be despatched to-morrow, if it is to arrive 
by the 16th Floreal, [April 30th.] One division of my 
army is already in this quarter. I am assured to-day that 
Beaulieu is evacuating your territory. I am delighted, &. 

BoNAPARTE. 


To General Latour. 


Head-quarters, Cherasco, 8 Floreal, year 4 [April 27, 1796]. 

This instant, sir, I have received, with your letter, the 
two orders of the king for Ceva and Tortona. 

At this moment there is but a small detachment at Fos- 
sano, which shall withdraw immediately. On the day after 
to-morrow, there will not be an individual at Bra, and I 
shall have the honour to = Sapoms you of it. 

Beyond the Stura, I shali keep only a corps de garde for 
the bridge of Cherasco. I have applied to the general com- 
manding at Coni for an account of the state of the maga- 
zine of Notre Dame de TOulina. As soon as I get his 
answer, I shall have the honour to write to you. 

My aide-de-camp is setting out for Paris. You have had 
the kindness to undertake to obtain him a passport, and to 
direct that he shall be furnished with post-horses. 


58 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES: 


I shall want 1000 draught horses. I should like to buy 
some in Piedmont. I shall be obliged to you to accept what 
will be proposed on the subject by citizen Thevenin, agent 
in chief of military transports. i 

Your aide-de-camp will deliver to you a note from the 
officers prisoners of war. The moment you let me know 
which you desire to have, I will order them to be sent either 
to Coni or Cherasco; you will do me a service by sending 
ours to Tortona or Cherasco. 

BonaParTE. 


To the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 


Carmagnola, April 28, 1796 [9 Floreal, year 4]. 

I hasten to address to you, my dear general, the order of 
the king to the governor of Coni to deliver that place to 
you. I hope that the celerity which I have used in this 
affair will be a proof of my veracity in all the engagements 
which I have contracted bs the convention which we have 
concluded. 

I have, moreover, to intimate to you that, in the course 
of to-morrow at latest, the governor of Ceva will receive 
the official order to deliver the fort to the officer whom you 
shall appoint. 

I eagerly seize this occasion of repeating to you, my dear 
general, that I have every reason to flatter myself that our 
convention is an approach to a speedy and advantageous 
peace to both empires. 

Be pleased to accept my homage and the assurance of the 
highest consideration. Denirous. 

PS. I have just informed myself of the present state of 
the magazines of this town, and ascertained that there are 
left about fifty sacks of wheat and other grain: as I pro- 
mised to send you them if you require it, I offer to fulfil 
my promise immediately, ons wait to learn your intentions. 


To the General-in-Chief. 
Carmagnola, April 29, 1796 [10 Floreal, year 4]. 
My anxiety, my dear general, in scrupulously fulfilling 
all the articles of the convention which I have had the 
honour to conclude with you, affording a new proof of my 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 59 


veracity, 1 will eut short assurances, to submit to you a 
highly interesting circumstance, and on which its execution 
depends : the few moments that I had the pleasure of pass- 
ing with you did not permit me then to advert to it. It is 
the article relative to the delivery of Coni, in which it is 
stipulated that the stores of provisions for the garrison of 
that place should be exclusively delivered to a and that 
the magazines of La Madona de l’Oulina, which, at the time 
of the occupation of Mondovi by the French, had been re- 
moved to Coni, should remain at the disposal of the king. 
_ As thoroughly convinced of your probity as of your 
“ merits, I lay before you with confidence this fact, my dear 
. general, entreating you to attend to this just demand.—I 
mean, to be pleased, either were | or in writing, to apprize 
the general commanding in Coni that, the said magazines of 
provisions never having formed part of those judged neces- 
ae for that place, we shall be at liberty to remove them 
ith such precautions as you will please to agree upon with 
; my aide-de-camp, the Chevalier de Fabri, who will have 
the honour to deliver to you this letter. 

That annexed, for the Governor of Tortona, decides the 
delivery that will be made to you of that place conformably 
with the articles stipulated on that head, which determine 
also the line of demarcation: I transmit to you, at the same 
time, the orders of the king to the governor of Ceva. 

With the assurance of all my confidence in a general who 
inspires it so much as you do, be pleased to accept that of 
the sentiments which accompany the esteem and the con- 
sideration with which I have the honour to be, 

DELATOUR. 


To the General-in-Chigf. 


Crevenzano, 10 Floreal, year 4 [April 29, 1796]. 

News of the enemy has this instant reached me: there are 
none left either in Santo-Stephano di Belbo or-Canelli; all 
have retired towards Valenza, with the exception of six or 
seven thousand frightened men, who are incessantly inquiring 
whether the French are coming. All are seattered by the 
positions which they oceupy to cover themselves: there are 
no more assembled in a body than 2000 at Tezzo, with six 
pieces of cannon and two howitzers, and from six to seven 
thousand Austrian and Neapolitan cavalry between Tezzo 
and Acqui, with four or six pieces of cannon. In Acqui 


60 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


there are only some militia, who are working hard at eva- 
cuating the magazines: we must endeavour to make an 
advantage by it. 

The division is cleaning itsarms. Ifthe cartridges arrive 
to-day, though without bread, I shall march without hesi- 
tation. The soldier asks for nothing better than to get out 
of the state of misery in which he is. 

I shall separate the division into two columns. The 
69th and 70th, at the head of which I shall be, will pro- 
ceed by Santo-Stephano and Canelli, to take the enemy in 
the rear; the 99th will march by Corteniglia, Bure, and . 
Monastero, to attack in front ; this attack will be but a feint © 
till I attack seriously: then it will be serious too. The 
column of Canelli will have three-pounders, and that of 
Corteniglia fours, the roads being better. 

I consider the taking of Acqui and the retreat or defeat 
of the Austrians as highly essential to our campaign ; for 
then our Piedmontese friends would take courage, seeing 
themselves rid of the Austrians, and our Piedmontese ene- 
mies be cast down, seeing themselves abandoned by them. 

Adieu, general: cartridges, if possible, shoes and bread, 
and my first letter shall idea you that the first division is 
behaving as well as the others ; I give you notice, however, 
that, if cartridges do not arrive to-day, I shall be obliged to 
wait twenty-four hours ; which would be a great misfortune 
and occasion us considerable loss. 

LAHARPE. 


To the General-in-Chief. 
Crevenzano, 10 Floreal, year 4 [April 29, 1796]. 

One ration of bread has arrived in the space of four days. 
The bivouacs are hard. This position is good: it connects 
me with Alba, and brings me nearer to it: but if it were 
not so good as Nielle, I should be forced to come to it, for 
the sake of having some slight succours for the support of 
the soldiers. The smallness of the ovens and the Beiteiae 
of the mills render it impossible for us to provide a suf- 
ficiency for our subsistence, let us be as industrious as we 
will. Have pity on us, general—I ask for nothing but 
biscuit, cartridges, and shoes. I am expecting news of the 
Austrians every instant ; I tremble for fear they are eva- 
euating. If that is the case, I shall endeavour at least to 


| 
: 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 61 


pursue them, were it only to prevent, if I can, the destruc- 
tion of their magazines. 

I thank you, my dear general, for having recalled General 
Charton. That general does not think as we do, and has 
seandalized my staff by the language which he has used. 
I could not have mer ate in him, and the 10th intended 
to send you a memorial on the subject. 

é LAHARPE. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Boves, 9 Floreal, year 4 [April 28, 1796]. ° 

The detachment which I sent off yesterday, agreeably to 
your orders, having fallen in by the way with several Pied- 
montese posts, was not able to continue its route, being too. 
inferior in number to hazard a battle. In consequence, 
the captain commanding that detachment, and bearer at the 
same time of your letter, came to report that circumstance 
to me, which obliged me to place a sufficient number of 
troops at his disposal. Your deat must be delivered by 
this time. 

I have ordered the speedy formation at all the passes of 
a company of national guards, for the apprehension of all 
malefaectors, as well French as Piedmontese. I think this 
measure will obtain your approbation. 

The enemy has abandoned the suburb of Santo Dalmazzo, 
and retired into Coni. I have but this moment learned 
these particulars, and I shall set out in an hour on a recon- 
noissance towards the fort. If there is any thing new I will 
so aay you of it. 

he Piedmontese, on retiring into Coni. authorized the 
inhabitants of the suburb of Santo Dalmazzo to plunder the 
magazines which could not be evacuated. Being instantly 
informed of this fact, I sent orders to the commune to take 
out of the hands of individuals whatever they might have 
carried off. 
FIORELLA. 


To the Executive Directory. 


Head-quarters, Cherasco, 10 Floreal, year 4 [April 29, 1796). 
The city of Coni has just been oceupied by our troops : 
here was in it a garrison of 5000 men. 


62 ' LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


I cannot doubt that you will approve my conduct, since 
it is one wing of an army that agrees to a suspension of 
arms to give me time to beat the other; it is a king who 
puts himself absolutely into my ene by giving me three 
of his strongest fortresses and the richest half of his do- 
minions. 

You may dictate, like a master, peace to the King of 
Sardinia. I beg of you not to forget the little island of St, 
Pierre, which will be more useful to us by and by than 
Corsica and Sardinia put together. 

If you grant him the portion of the Milanese which I am 
about to conquer, it must be upon condition that he shall 
send 15,000 men to second us, and to guard that countr 
after we have made ourselves masters of it. Meanwhile, y 
shall cross the Adige with your army, and enter German 
by the Tyrol. In this hypothesis, we must hold in deposit 
til the general peace the places and country that we now 
occupy; to these it must be added that, on the day that 
15,000 Piedmontese cross the Po, the city of Valenza shall 
be delivered up to us. 

My columns are in march; Beaulieuin flight : I hope to 
catch him. I will impose some millions of contributions on 
the Duke of Parma ; he shall be forced to make propositions 
of peace to you. Be not in a hurry, that I may be in time 
to make him pay the costs of the campaign, provision our 
magazines, and rehorse our wenegee at his expense. 

f you will not make peace with the King of Sardinia, if 
your intention is to dethrone him, you must amuse him for 
a few decades, and give me notice immediately ; I will get 
possession of Valenza and march upon Turin. 

I will send 12,000 men upon Rome, when I have beaten 
Beaulieu and obliged him to recross the Adige; when I 
shall be sure that you grant peace to the King of Sardinia, 
and you send me part of the army of the Alps. 

As for Genoa, I think you ought to demand of it 
15,000,000 as indemnities for frigates and vessels taken in its 

rts, and insist that those who caused the Modeste to be 

urned and called in the Austrians, shall be tried as traitors 
to the country. If you charge me with these matters, 
which you a profoundly secret, I will find means to 
do all that you can desire. 
- If I have any risks to run in Lombardy, it is on account 
of the enemy’s cavalry. I have been joined by forty horse 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 63 


artillerymen, who have seen no service and are dismounted. 
Send me then twelve companies, and do not entrust the exe- 
eution of this measure to the men of the offices (hommes des 
bureaux), for it takes them ten days to despatch an order, 
and ‘they may perhaps be silly enough to get them from 
Holland, so as not to arrive before the month of October. 
Our troops have just entered the citadel of Ceva, and I 
have this moment received the King of Sardinia’s order for 
the delivery of the city and citadel of Tortona. 
. BONAPARTE. 


To Citizen Carnot. 


Head-quarters, Cherasco, 10 Floreal, year 4 [April 29, 1796]. 

The suspension of arms concluded between the King of 
Sardinia and us permits me to communicate by Turin, that 
is to say, to save half the distance: I might then receive 
your ae re and learn your intentions relative to the direc- 
tion to be given to the army. I am master of Coni, Ceva, 
and Tortona. Iam about to cross the Po, and to enter the 
Milanese: on the way, I calculate upon fleecing the Duke 
of Parma, and making him pay dearly for his infatuation. 

My plan would be, to overtake the Austrians and to beat 
them before the arrival — answer ; that I may be ready 
: march upon Turin, Naples, or Austria, by way of the 

rol. 

Tf the King of Sardinia were to suspect, before I knew it, 
that you would not make peace, he might play me a sad 
trick. If you will not make peace with Sardinia, let that 
be communicated to him through me, that I may have it in 
my power to take my own time, and that his plenipoten- 
tiaries in Paris may know nothing about the matter. 

If you do make peace with the King of Sardinia, order 
what you would have done in regard to Genoa, Parma, and 
Rome. 

Beaulieu has still with him 26,000 men well equipped ; 
he had 38,000 at the beginning of the campaign. I march 
with 28,000. He has 5000 cavalry; I have but 3600, and 
in a bad state. 

The court of Turin and that of Vienna reckoned with 
certainty upon success in this campaign: the combined 
armies.amounted to 75,000 men: I have beaten them with 
35,000. I have need of reinforcement: the army of the 


& ——s * 


64 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


Alps might furnish me with 15,000 men. General Cha- 
teaneuf-Randon ought to send me the 3000 destined for 
this army, detained by him at Nimes. With these rein- 
forcements, Italy is yours, and I could at one and the same 
time march for Naples and Mantua, especially if I contrive 
to beat the enemy shortly. 

An officer of engineers has just arrived ; pray send me 
light artillery. I should like to have General Baraguay 
. @Hilliers, to serve in his rank in the army: he has pro- 
posed it to me himself. 
BONAPARTE. 


To Citizen Faipoult. 


Head-quarters, Acqui, 12 Floreal, year 4 [May 1, 1796]. 

You will find annexed, my dear minister, a copy of the 
suspension of arms which I have concluded with the King 
of Sardinia. Our troops have entered Coni and Ceva ; to- 
morrow they will enter Tortona. We found at Coni, 
besides the ammunition of the city, all the magazines of the 
Sardinian army. 

Beaulieu is crossing the Po, and seeking in the furthest 
extremity of Lombardy a refuge from the French army. 
He told the King of Sardinia that he would not pull off his 
boots till he was at Lyons, but he is not taking the road 
for it. 

There is not in Piedmont the first idea of a revolution, 
and France, I should think, would not choose to effect one 


at her own cost. 
BONAPARTE. 


To Citizen Fatpoult. 


Head-quarters, Acqui, 12 Floreal, year 4 [May 1], 1796]. 

Wéarrived yesterday at Acqui. Beaulieu’s flight is so 
swift that we cannot catch him. To-morrow, Lah will 
be in Tortona, where I much desire to have a conference 
with you on important matters. , 

Send mea _ note, geographical, historical, political, and 
topographical, respecting the imperial fiefs bordering upon 
Genoa, that I may derive from them all the advantage pos- 
sible. Send me a note concerning the dukes of Parma, Pla- 
centia, and Modena, the forces they have on foot, the for- 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES.- — 65 


tresses they possess, and wherein the'riches of those coun- 
tries consist. Above all, send me a note of the pictures, 
statues, cabinets, and curiosities, which are at Milan, Parma, 
Placentia, Modena, and Bologna. When we made peace 
with Spain, the Duke of Parma ought to have concurred in 
it: why did he not ? 
~ Send off immediately 6000 pair of shoes for Tortona. 
' As for citizen Giacomoni, let him go, covered with dis- 
grace and ignominy, where he likes. I have informed the 
government of his conduct, that he may never again be ad- 
mitted to serve with Frenchmen. 
BONAPARTE. 


To the General-in-Chief of the Piedmontese Army. 


Head-quarters, Bosco, 13 Floreal, year 4 [May 2, 1796]. 

I am informed, sir, that the Neapolitans have taken pos- 
session of Valenza. The interest of the king and that of 
the Republic alike require that you should speedily drive 
those troops out of Valenza. ; 

The courage which animates your army, and which 7 
have had occasion to appreciate, leaves me no doubt that you 
will speedily re-oceupy Valenza : you know, besides, that 
it is one of the clauses of the suspension which we have 
eoneluded. If you are in need of any assistance, I offer you 
that of a division of the army which I command. 

_ The general chief of the staff will have the honour to 
transmit to you to-morrow a statement of the Piedmontese 
prisoners taken by us during the campaign. I shall have 
great pleasure in sending to you as soon as possible such of 
them as you would wish to have in preference. 

BONAPARTE. 


To the Chevalier Solari, Governor of Alexandria. 


Head-quarters, Bosco, 14 Floreal, year 4 [May 3, 1796). 
_ T have received, sir, the letter, which you have taken the 
trouble to write to me; and I am much obliged to you for 
particulars which you have had the complaisance to give 
me. I congratulate you on the evacuation of your territory 
by the Austrian army. I sincerely wish to learn soon that 
e 


y have also evacuated the territory of his Majesty beyond 
the Po. 


VOL. I. F 


oo 


66 ; LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


A division of the army will very shortly arrive at 
Valenza, for the purpose of crossing the Po there; I beg of 
you to let the boats necessary for them be procured. You 
will feel that it is for the interest of the king that the 
Austrians should make a short stay in your territory. I 
shal] have need also of some contractors, to procure for us 
the means of transport. I beg of you to authorize the dif- 
ferent subjects of the king to make bargains with the army. 

I am, sir, with esteem, &c. 
BONAPARTE. 


To the General-in-Ohief. 


Acqui, 11 Floreal, year 4 [April 30, 1796}. 

The reports relative to the Austrian army state that, on 
the 15th of April (O. S.), the day on which a great part of 
that army was beaten for the second time at Deis it fell 
back in the greatest disorder upon Tezzo, one part passing 
through the valley of Bormida, and the other through that 
of Tero. On the 20th, one corps of these same troops, of 
about 2000 men, was encamped at Acqui, in the environs 
of the church of Madona Alta, where it united with a 
reinforcement from Alexandria of 2000 infantry and three 
or 4000 cavalry. On the 24th the whole corps of Acqui 
moved to Nizza with Beaulieu. 

On the 25th, that Austrian general remained at Nizza 
with his troops, and marched on the 26th for Incisse, 
whence, after refreshing his troops, he proceeded to Oviglio, 
where he established his head-quarters. The day before 
‘yesterday, the 29th, he sent to Alexandria a corps of 2000 
men, with the intention, it is said, to make himself master 
of the citadel ; but I am assured that the governor opposed 
this design in the most energetic manner. Letters from 
Alexandria and the report of an inhabitant of that city, 
who left it at six this morning, assert that there were still 
about 2000 infantry there, and that the Neapolitan ca- 
valry, about 1000 strong, had encamped beyond the Bor- 
mida, on the road leading to Tortona. The remainder of 
Beaulieu’s army was encamped at Solera, near Oviglio, with 
the exception of his cavalry, which had been encamped 
beyond the river Bormida with the Neapolitan cavalry. 

One thousand hussars of this cavalry set out this morn- 
ing for Valenza, with some pieces of artillery ; the rest of the 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 67 


artillery was left with the cavalry beyond the Bormida, in 
the territory of Alexandria, on the road leading to Tortona: 
that cavalry was expecting every moment orders for its 
departure; the artillery consisted of twenty-four pieces. 
The rest of the troops which had remained encamped at 
Tezzo, about 4,000 men, marched on the 28th to Acqui, 
under the command of General Liptay, and set out yes- 
terday afternoon, the 29th, for Oviglio, where they jomed 
the corps of Beaulieu. | 

The strength of the Austrian army is 15,000 infantry 

and from three to 4,000 cavalry, including 1,000 Neapo- 
litan cavalry. The Austrians have built a bridge over the 
Po at Valenza. 

On the 15th of April, the day of the battle of Dego, 
Beaulieu was at Dego awaiting the result. 

VIGNOLLE. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


5 Bestagno, 12 Floreal, year 4 [May 1, 1796]. 
The general of division Augereau directs me to inform 
you, general, that he set out this morning from Santo Ste- 
phano with the division which he commands, for Bestagno, 
where he is at present awaiting your orders. He directs 
me also to report that this morning, before leaving Santo 
Stephano, a corporal of the carabineers and a carabineer of 
the 6th light demi-brigade were executed agreeably to a 
military sentence for committing robbery with violence. 
VERDIER, adjutant-general. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Nizza, 12 Floreal, year 4 [May 1, 1796]. 

The troops which I command arrived last night ver 
late with rain. More than half of the division was teh 
behind, but nearly all are together again this morning: 
there is only General Joubert’s brigade which has not 


arrived. He has sent me word that General Serrurier had 


neglected to cause his posts to be relieved, which has de- 
layed him. 
The march yesterday was very long and very laborious, 
on account of the great ravines which it was ga to 
F 


68 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


‘cross. The troops are extremely fatigued, and entirely 
barefoot. 

I advanced yesterday with the regiment of dragoons 
under my command. % soon as I arrived, I sent out re- 
connaissances in all directions: they saw nothing but a few 
hussars, who were put to flight. 

_ According to the report of this morning, the Austrians 
left Alisandels yesterday evening: they crossed the Po 
over two bridges which they had got built, not venturing to 
trust themselves on that of the Piedmontese. They di- 
rected their march towards the Lumellina and the Nova- 
resa. The ca was left at Montbaresso Gannelero ; but 
the greater part of it is at Frascaro. 

- Lhave a piquet of fifty dragoons out. I should like to 
have another regiment of hussars, to be enabled to have 
reeonnaissances made in greater force. 

I have this morning sent three natives of the country to 
gain intelligence of the movement of the enemy, and shall 
ose no time in reporting it to you. 

I must ask you for shoes: the troops are in great need 
of them, 

MASSENA. 


To the General-in-Chief. 
Carmagnola, May 2, 1796, [13 Floreal, year 4]. 
Fully assured, general, that you are solicitous to fulfil 
the engagements contracted by the armistice, the conditions 
of which we have jointly fixed and stipulated, I address 
you, with all the confidence that 1 owe to your merits, to 
observe that one Bonnafons, whose misconduct I had the 
honour to lay before you in my letter of yesterday, has, 
under the designation of mayor of Alba, enjoined different 
communities on the banks of the Stura and the Tanaro, 
(formerly belonging to the province of the Langhes, but 
united to that of Turin on the day that the armistice was 
signed) to sequestrate all the feudal and domainal property, 
both moveable and immoveable, which you will find in the 
list that my aide-de-camp will have the honour to deliver 
to you. 
Assured, I say, that, so far from authorizing upon any 
retext the proceedings of the said Bonnafons, your firm 
intention is scrupulously to observe all the conditions of the 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. - 69° 


armistice, I shall merely, my dear general, apprise you of 
the fact, and beg you to order speedy reparation. 

I apprise you also that I have complied as far as possible 
with your demand relative to the Sieur Thevenin. I leave 
himself to inform you of the result of his researches. 

I leave, in like manner, to the Chevalier Fabri the duty 

_ of pro ing to you all the arrangements which appear to 
me as beneficial to both armies as adapted to circumstances, 
and I authorize him to do everything to testify to you 
more. strongly our sincerity and to receive the testimonies 


of yours. 
reserve to myself only the satisfaction of assuring 
you, &e. : 


DELATOUR. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Alexandria, May 2, 1796 [23 Floreal, year 4). 

Though I am not the commander of the army of my 
master, the King of Sardinia, but the oldest general-officer 
of that department, I have thought that I should do an 

ble and a useful thing for the interests of the king and 
of the French Republic, in opening your letter, to see if I 
could employ myself in any way that could do you plea- 
sure; and, on perusing its contents, I am glad I did so, 
since I have it in my power to inform you that not onl 
the Neapolitan troops, but the whole imperial army, with 
the exception of a very small rear-guard which followed it, 
have evacuated the city of Valenza and crossed the Po, 
having commenced their march about midnight; and that 
the commandant himself saw them file off and cross the 
Po at ten in the morning. Of this I can assure you, since 
I have the information from the commissary-general of the 
king, who was present there, and who never quitted the 
commandant-general till the moment when he himself 
erossed the Po. 

I am gratified to be able to give you this information, in 
consequence of which I shall merely present my thanks to 
you, sir, for the expressions which you have been pleased 
to use in speaking of the troops of the king, and for the 
offer which you aww made of French troops for carrying 
into effect one of the clauses of the suspension of arms 
which has just been concluded. 


an 


es 


70 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


On receiving the list of the t pete of war taken by 
the French army from that of the king, I shall transmit it 
direct to the war-office at Turin, that it may be communi- 
cated to the commander-in-chief of the said army, who 
will inform the king of it, and he will assuredly be grati- 
fied by the solicitude which you manifest to send to us as 
speedily as possible those whom they may desire to have in 
preference. 
Soxarl, governor of Alexandria. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Castellano, 13 Floreal, year 4 [May 2, 1796]. 

It is two hours since I arrived here. The cavalry has 
crossed the ferry ; but I am sadly afraid that I shall not 
be able to get the infantry over before night: the utmost 
efforts are, nevertheless, making. 

The enemy has totally evacuated Alexandria and retired 
to Valenza: the Neapolitans are there too. 

I send you a statement of the boats which there are on 
both rivers, and if I had here one of the officers of engi- 
neers, I would get a bridge constructed in less than two 
hours with the boats that are upon the river. 

We found a Piedmontese cavalry officer here on our 
arrival: I send him to you that you may extract informa- 
tion from him. 

MASSENA. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Castellano, 13 Floreal, year 4 [May 2, 1796]. 
The enemy has abandoned Alexandria, and retreated to 
Valenza. The Austrians yesterday sold the magazines of 
hay, oats, and maize, which they had in Alexandria, for 
8000 francs: they are said to be considerable. 
MASSENA. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Rivalto, 13 Floreal, year 4 [May 2, 1796]. 
It is four in the morning, and I have not yet heard from 
you. I am without cavalry, and one of my brigades has 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 71 


not been able to cross the water : it is impossible that I can 
set off yet, though the troops are assembled, at least such 
of them as have crossed the river. A corps of the enemy’s 
hussars is two leagues off, which may slacken our march. 
We have had an ounce and three quarters of bread; I 
shall direct my course to Castel Novo to try to get as much 
there ; but there I decidedly expect your orders for the 
march, being unwilling to risk the safety of the troops 
entrusted to me. 

We have still the river Orba to pass, and it seems to me 
physically impossible that we can reach Tortona to-day. 

LAHARPE. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Rivalto, 13 Floreal, year 4 [May 2, 1796]. 

I have this moment, general, received your order to send 
to Tortona a battalion, which is to remain there till fresh 
orders. General Meynier has sent his flag of truce. The 
moment the governor fixes the hour for entry, the battalion 
will be ready. 

Nothing is easier than to remain at Rivalto, nothing 
more difficult than to live there without bread. We are 
in a country which cannot furnish us with any on account 
of its smallness. 

LAHARPE. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Carmagnola, May 3, 1796 [14 Floreal, year 4]. 
The king, my master, anxious that an answer should be 
gin to an application which I have made to him on your 
ehalf to be permitted to buy horses in Piedmont, has de- 
termined to send to you, my dear general, the Marquis de 
St. Marsan, lieutenant-colonel of cavalry, an officer of his 
staff, who will have the honour to hand you this letter, and 
is charged to communicate to you the intentions of his 
Majesty respecting the said purchase, as well as the various 
precautions which he has thought it fit to take for the 
safety of his dominions. 
In consequence, I recommend to you the said Marquis 
de St. Marsan, and inform you that he is authorized to 
settle with you, my dear general, all the arrangements 


72 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. | 


which may be of reciprocal convenience, in case further in- 
formation should be necessary. 

Be pleased to let the annexed letter be delivered to 
Count de Massan, colonel of the regiment of guards; and 
be pleased also never to doubt all the sentiments, &c. 

DELATOUR. 


To the General-in-Chief. 
Alexandria, May 3, 1796 [14 Floreal, year 4]. 

In reply, sir, to the letter which your aide-de-camp has 
just delivered to me, I am sorry to be obliged to tell you 
that it is absolutely impossible to furnish you with boats to 
form a bridge across the Po, since General Baron Beaulieu, 
as soon as his army had marched, caused the bridge to be 
destroyed ; and all the boats which had been used in the 
construction of the said bridge of Valenza, and for which 
there had been employed all the boats that had been taken 
this way along the Tanaro, and those on the Po, which had 
been brought from Casale, and even to the number of 
twenty-five from Turin, to be carried off to Pavia. By his 
orders, moreover, all the small boats in the environs of Va- 
lenza, there being absolutely no others, were sunk. It is 
true that he promised an indemnification for the seizure of 
the said boats and all the materials of construction ; reserv- 
ing to me to speak to you hereafter of the article relative 
to the carriages which you have need of, and which will be 
furnished you by some contractor, whom they are seeking 
to provide for you. Permit me, general, to recommend to 
you the subjects of the king, and I beg you to exercise 
more and more your good intentions, which are well known 
to me, in order to prevent mischief being done by the 
troops both in the fields and in the houses, especially those 
in lonely situations; several complaints having already 
been preferred on this subject. 

To return to the subject: of carriages—not only have I 
explained that I was authorizing the subjects of the king 
to make contracts with the French army, but I have given 
orders for seeking out such as I thought fit to be employed 
in that way; referring you on this subject to what your. 
aide-de-camp will tell you. 

Soarl, governor of Alexandria. 


le 
Mn. 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES: 73 


To the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 


Carmagnola, May 5, 1796 [16 Floreal, year 4). 

T must tell you, general, that, notwithstanding our de- 
sire to satisfy you in all that depends upon us, and to 
facilitate to you the supply of your army, it is utterly im- 

ible for us to furnish you with the draught and cavalry 
orses which you want: I must, nevertheless, observe that 
those who are commissioned to make purchases for your 
army would succeed in procuring them; and His Majesty 
has, moreover, approved of the permission which the 
governor of Alexandria has granted to different contractors 
to conclude bargains with you for the means of transport. 

Besides, having every reason to believe that M. de 
Beaulieu is preparing to evacuate the territories of the 
king, and his Majesty even making a formal application to 
him to that purpose, as he did for the evacuation of Va- 
lenza, I hope, in consequence, that there will be no occasion 
for your demand, as you have yourself intimated in your 
explanation with M. de St. Marsan. In ease, however, 
that the army should refuse entirely to evacuate the terri- 
tories of the king, I shall march my troops towards 
Novara, Mortara, and Vigerano, to secure those towns, 
Those troops will be conveyed to Valenza in all the boats 
that can be picked up, since there now exist none belonging 
to the king; and these same boats will afterwards be at 
your disposal. 

The Marquis de St. Marsan, the bearer of this letter, is 
authorized to take ulterior determinations with you rela- 
tive to the demarcation, and I have given him my orders. 

The result is that the subjects of the king, evil-disposed 
on the frontier of the demarcation, boasting of your pro- 
tection, redouble their efforts to excite internal revolutions, 
This appears totally contrary to the law of nations, espe- 
cially in time of truce, and on this subject I renew the 
remonstrances already made to you by the Marquis de St. 
Marsan, in stedfast reliance on the civilities that are known 


to me. Victor EMMANUEL.! 


1 This was the Duke of Acosta and brother of the king, who resigned the 
crown to him in 1802, and died a Jesuit at Rome. The internal disturbances 
in 1821 induced Victor Emmanuel to abdicate in favour of his younger bro- 
ther, Charles Felix, the present King of Sardinia, 


74 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


To the General-in-Chief of the Army of Piedmont. 


Head-quarters, Tortona, 15 Floreal, year 4 [May 4, 1795]. 

In a few days, sir, I shall be master of the territories of 
the king beyond the Po; if the fortune of war continues to 
be Scuba to the army which I command, I shall oblige 
M. Beaulieu to evacuate these countries, which will be con- 

uered from the Austrian army, and belong by right to the 
Republic. Still I feel how hard it is for the king to see 
almost all his dominions overrun by our troops. 1 propose 
to you, in consequence, to unite a division of 6000 infantry 
clk 1500 horse to the army which I command, to assist in 
driving out the Austrians. I will 7 them in garrison in 
the States of the king beyond the Po. 

This is so urgent, sir, that it is necessary for me to have 
an answer as speedily as possible. The desire which I feel 
to conciliate the interests of the king with those of the 
Republic and the army, induces me, sir, to make you 
these overtures, which, no doubt, you will consider very 
reasonable. I am with consideration, &c. 

BoNAPARTE. 


To the General-in-Chief of the Army of the King of Sardinia. 


Head-quarters, Tortona, 15 Floreal, year 4 [May 4, 1796]. 

The troops of the Republic have this morning occupied 
the fort of Tortona: in consequence, dating from this day, 
there is a suspension of arms bien the two armies. I 
shall place it in the order of the day ; and I hope you will 
find the French officers disposed to give you proofs of the 
esteem which they entertain for your army. 

Tam giving orders to the end that you should occupy 
the town of Fossano and Bra. I will adapt to the line of 
demarcation all the changes that you shall deem necessary, 
adhering, however, to the spirit of the suspension which we 
have concluded. 

I have ordered 400 prisoners to be sent hither, in ex- 
change for the 400 which you have had the goodness to 
despatch to Cherasco. The chief of the staff will transmit 
to you the list of the officers of your army whom the for- 
tune of arms has made prisoners. I shall lose no time in 
sending to you those about whom you interest yourself. 

BONAPARTE, 


oe 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 75 


To the General-in-Chief of the Army of Piedmont. 


Head-quarters, Tortona, 16 Floreal, year 4 [May 5, 1796]. 

The Marquis de St. Marsan, whom I had the honour to 
see yesterday, sir, will have delivered to you several letters, 
by which you will see that all you desire relative to several 
matters concerning the suspension of arms has been exe- 
cuted. I have ordered protections to be given to all those 
who could have occasion for them. 

I am authorizing the different generals to give passports 
to the officers of your army who wish to go into the country 
oceupied by the army. I shall be too happy, in all cir- 
cumstances, to have it in my power to give you marks of 
the distinguished esteem and consideration with which I 
am, &ec. BONAPARTE. 


To the General-in-Chief of the Army of the King of Sardinia. 
Head-quarters, Tortona, 17 Floreal, year 4 [May 6, 1796]. 


In consequence of the suspension of arms which the king 
has concluded with the two armies of the Alps and Italy, 


- and the probability of peace, of which I have new assurances, 


I am marching 17,000 men from the army of the Alps to 
the army of Ttaly. Nine thousand will pass by the Col 
d@Argentitres and proceed to Coni, where they will cross 
the Stura to come and join me. Eight thousand will pass 
the St. Bernard by the valley of Aosta, and come and cross 
the Tanaro at Alexandria. BoNnaPARTE. 


To the General-in-Chief. 
Sali, 17 Floreal, year 4 [May 6, 1796]. 

I was informed yesterday that Piedmontese deserters, to 
the number of 200, have armed, and are stopping indis- 
eriminately all the French going and coming between 
Alexandria and Tortona: they yesterday killed two of our 
men at the gates of the former city, and a third on the 
Tortona road, and wounded five or six. I immediately 
sent off 200 cavalry, and nearly the same number of in- 
fantry, to give chase to them. These troops returned very 
late last night, and brought about a score of peasants, some 
of whom were found armed, and others with cartridges. 
When I have examined them I will report to you. 


76 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES.* 


I took a survey yesterday of the Tanaro and the Po, 
and saw but two boats. An officer of artillery arrived yes- 
terday, with orders to construct flying beidaess I know 
not precisely what means he employs, but I will assist him 
with all my power. ; 

The enemy occupies the left bank of the Po; but, I 
think, not in any force. My advanced guard set out this: 
morning for Girola; I have replaced it this morning by. 
other troops. MASSENA. 


To the General-in-Chief. 

Turin, May 7, 1796 [18 Floreal, year 4}. 

In reply to the letter which you have transmitted to me 
through the medium of your aide-de-camp, I begin by 
saying that, notwithstanding the burden which the passage 
of so large a body of troops will throw upon the poor in- 
habitants of the districts through which they are to pass, 
I nevertheless do myself the pleasure to consent, seconding 
the intentions of the king, that you should march the 
column which you propose by Argentidres and Coni, for 
the purpose of joining your army : I will appoint an officer 
to accompany it conformably with your desire. As for the 
column which you wish to bring by the St. Bernard, I 
must make some observations on that head: in the first 
place, that it would appear not at all conformable with the 
armistice, with the line of demarcation, and with the pacific 
intentions which you have been pleased to profess, and of 
which I am thoroughly kries to demand a passage for 
troops in so many different points; which cannot but be 
very burdensome to the States of the king. Besides, the 
valley of Aosta, through which they would have to pass, 
is a country destitute of every thing, which would have 
great difficulty to furnish provisions for these troops; the 
Canavesar also is a district equally incapable of supplying 
the wants of such a body of troops, especially as I too 
should be obliged to send troops thither to escort yours, 
because the inhabitants are very intolerant, and easily ex- 
cited to take up arms, which might occasion quarrels, and 
even serious ones, with your troops ; secondly, because both 
the Canavesar and the Versalois are intersected by a very 
great number of rivers, which, when ever so little swollen, 
are impassable, and would be liable to place your troops in 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 77 


the most awkward predicament, by enclosing them between 
two, and reducing them to famine, which would oblige them 
to have recourse to pillage, and raise the inhabitants of the 
said countries. It behoves me to set before you all these 
reflexions, and to observe moreover that, in making your 
troops take the Argentitres road, this, according to the 
natural order, would lengthen their march some days ; that, 
nevertheless, they might run the risk of a still longer delay 
in the valley of Aosta, owing to the accidents which may 
be occasioned by the swelling of the waters. I am, besides, 
fully persuaded that, if you desist from that passage, you 
will do a thing highly agreeable to the king, and which he 
will take very kindly. 
On my arrival at Turin I was told that, on the way to 
Tortona, persons in the train of your army seized chests 
belonging to the king, and gave orders in that city as ina 
conquered place. I must observe to you that, having been 
placed in your hands by way of deposit, just like Coni, 
where your troops have behaved like real friends, I flatter 
myself, knowing your honour and your love of order, that 
you will be pleased to issue orders for preventing all that is 
ikely to be injurious to his many or to his people, and 
that can possibly be avoided. The Marquis de St. Marsan 
will have already delivered to you my first letter, and fur- 
nished a better explanation of some complaints of the dis- 
orders which soldiers, and more particularly Piedmontese, 
have occasioned, by striving to excite revolutions in Pied- 
mont, with the intention, probably, of producing a rupture 
of the suspension of arms which has been concluded, and 
which, I hope, will be followed by a good and solid peace 
between the French and us. I am, sir, &c. 
Victor EMMANUEL. 


Extracts from different Notes of the Governor of Alexandria. 


) Note 1. 


The governor of Alexandria demands— 

1. That the sequestration ordered at Cherasco, on the 
7th Floreal, of the property of persons employed about the 
King of Sardinia, be not cabin into execution. 

2. That a tée de pont be not constructed on the left of 
the Stura, opposite to Cherasco. 


78 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


3. He reclaims the royal moneys confiscated at Acqui, 
Tortona, and Voghera. 


Note 2. 


The governor of Alexandria demands— 

1. That the King of Sardinia be permitted to remove a 
magazine existing at Coni, which was destined for the 
supply of the army. A commissary of his majesty was to 
have had it transported to Notre Dame de Orme, but 
General Maquart opposed it. 

2. He reclaims the forage collected long ago at the hamlet 
of St. Dalmas, that place not having been occupied by the 
French army till posterior to the armistice. 

3. He demands, on behalf of certain purveyors of the 
army, the authorization to remove from the aie of Ver- 
meguena forage which they have purchased there. 


Note 3. 


The governor of Alexandria demands that, conformably 
with verbal conventions between the general-in-chief and 
the Marquis de St. Marsan, from Alba to Nizza de la Paglia, 
the limit of the demarcation be the boundary itself of the 
provinces of Alba and Acqui; so that all the lands and 
villages dependent on the province of Asti, on the right of 
the Tcken and, for a still stronger reason, those dependent 
on the province of Alexandria which is on the left of the 
Bormida, as far as Cassina exclusively, be not subject to 
military contributions. 

He intimates that, by means of piquets and by detach- 
ments posted on the left banks of the Tanaro and the Bor- 
mida, the straggling soldiers of the French army are pre- 
vented from deviating from the routes indicated and the 
line of demarcation fixed by the armistice. 


Note 4. 


The governor of Alexandria begs the general-in-chief to 
give the necessary orders for suppressing the movements 
which are manifesting themselves at Coni and at the village 
of St. Dalmas, where there has been a tumult against the 
priests. His majesty has seen with satisfaction that tran- 
quillity, threatened by evil designing persons, has been 
restored at Alba: he has the greatest confidence in the 
good faith and integrity of the general-in-chief. 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 79 


PART II. 


FROM THE OCCUPATION OF TORTONA TO THE INVESTMENT 
OF MANTUA. 


Bonaparte, General-in-Chief, to the Executive Directory. 


_ Head-quarters, Tortona, 17 Floreal, year 4 [May 6, 1796]. 
The army of Italy yesterday took possession of Tortona, 


where we have found a very fine fortress, which has cost 


the King of Sardinia more than 15,000,000 livres. 

I have informed you, through my aid-de-camp Murat, 
that we have occupied Coni and Ceva, which we found in 
a respectable state of defence, and provisioned with every 
thing. The day after the signature of the suspension of 
arms, General Laharpe marched with his division by way 
of Bossogno to Acqui; General Augerau by Stefano; and 
General Massena 35 Nizza de la Paglia. Beaulieu evacu- 
ated this country, and took refuge in Valenza, where he 
crossed the Po with his whole army. General Massena 
arrived with his whole division at Alexandria, in time to 
secure the magazines which the Austrians, unable to carry 
off, had sold to the city. On the 13th, the German army 
recrossed the Po, cutting the boats, and burning those which 
it found on the shore. 

The Neapolitans, who in general are not enterprising, 
have taken Valenza.’ 


To the Governor of the Duchy of Parma, at Placentia. 


Head-quarters, San Giovanni, 17 Floreal, year 4 [May 6, 1796]. 

Having to confer with you, sir, on matters of the highest 
importance, you will be pleased to come immediately to 
Castel-San-Giovanni. 

It would be necessary that you should be here before two 
in the morning, as I must be on horseback by that hour. 

. ONAPARTE. 
1 This letter was left unfinished. 


80 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


To the Minister of Spain at Parma. 


Head-quarters, Placentia, 17 Floreal, year 4 [May 6, 1796]. 

I have received your letter, sir; as it is not in my heart 
nor in the intention of the French people to do harm with- 
out object, or to injure the people in any way, I consent to 
suspend all hostility against the Duke of Parma and the 
march of my troops for Parma; but the duke must to- 
— send ietcnelegtiniion to conclude the suspension. 

am marching some regiments of cavalry with one bri- 
gade to within three yee of Placentia: that need not 
give any uneasiness to the Duke of Parma from the moment 
that he accepts the conditions which we have agreed upon. 

I am delighted that this occasion enables me to prove 
to you the sentiments of esteem and consideration with 
which, &c. 

; BoNAPARTE. 


To Citizen Carnot. 


Head-quarters, Placentia, 20 Floreal, year 4 [May 9, 1796]. 

We have at length crossed the Po. The second cam- 
paign is begun. Beaulieu is disconcerted. He calculates 
very ill, and constantly falls into the snares that are laid 
for him. Perhaps he meant to give battle: for that man 
has the daring of madness and not that of genius: but the 
6000 men Who were forced yesterday to cross the Adda, 
and who were defeated, will weaken him much: another 
victory and we are masters of Italy. 

I have granted a suspension of arms to the Duke of 
Parma; the Duke of Modena is sending me plenipoten- 
tiaries. If we had an able ordonnateur, we should be as 
well off as it is possible to imagine. We are going to esta- 
blish considerable magazines of corn, with folds for 600 
bullocks in the rear. The moment we cease our movements, 
we shall new-clothe the army; it is still in a frightful 
state: but all are getting fat. The soldiers eat nothing 
but Gonesse bread, good meat and in quantity, good wine, 
&c. Discipline is becoming re-established from day to day ; 
but it is often necessary to shoot, for there are intractable 
men who cannot command themselvés. 

What we have taken from the enemy is incalculable. 
We have the effects of hospitals for 15,000 sick, several 


yr 
ale 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. | 81 


magazines of corn, flour, &c. The more men you send me, 
the more easily I shall be able to feed them. 

I am despatching to you twenty pictures by the first 

_masters, Correggio and Michael Angelo. 

I owe you particular thanks for the attentions which you 
are pleased to pay to my wife: I recommend her to you ; 
she is a sincere patriot, and I love her to distraction. 

I hope if things go on well to be able to send you adozen 
millions to Paris: that will not come amiss for the army 
of the Rhine. 

Send me 4000 dismounted cavalry ; I will endeavour to 
remount them here. 

I will not disguise from you that, since the death of 
Stengel, I have no superior officer of cavalry who is a fight- 
ing man. I should be glad if you would send me two or 
three adjutant-generals, who have been in the cavalry, who 
have fire and a firm resolution never to make scientific 
retreats. 

BONAPARTE, 


To the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 


Bruni, Floreal 18, year 4 [May 7, 1796]. 

I inform you of the arrival of the artillery at the division 
which I command. It is in the worst condition: the num- 
ber of horses is daily diminishing from the mortality. 

BEYRAND. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Maleo, 18 Floreal, year 4 [May 7, 1796]. 
Some enemies of the Republic have just reported to the 
troops under my command that the quarters of General 
Laharpe are cut off, and that he himself is killed. I have 
directed my aide-de-camp to go and verify these reports. 
If the facts are as represented, it is my intention to order 
a charge by two battalions of grenadiers and by the cavalry 
on anything capable of opposing a retreat, and so make a 
vigorous resistance in the village which J occupy, while 

awaiting your orders. 
DALLEMAGNE. 


VOL. I, G 


82 ' LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Codogno, 20 Floreal, year 4 [May 9, 1796]. 

Adjutant-general Boyer reported to you yesterday even- 
ing the death of General Laharpe.' I lose no time in ap- 
prizing you of the events of the night and of the present 
moment. 

The troops, terrified last night, were in the greatest dis- 
order in the village: unable to rally them, on account of 
the darkness, I put good officers at the head of some picked 
men, and sent them out to explore, while I proceeded my- 
self towards the point occupied by the enemy; that was 
Codogno. 

Night, which magnifies objects, had increased the dis- 
order, so that it was impossible to collect the troops and to 
do anything with them. In this circumstance, I resolved 
to keep in the village itself, and, after making useful mili- 
tary dispositions, to wait there till daylight. The rest of 
the night passed off quietly. 

Towards daybreak, my patroles discovered the enemy, 
who was making dispositions apparently with the intention 
of surrounding us. I then sent two battalions to cut them 
off, but, perceiving that maneuvre, they instantly retreated 
upon Casale, leaving behind them three pieces of cannon, 
which they had taken from us. They were pursued as far 
as possible. 

t this present moment, I have collected the whole 
corps, and am making the dispositions enjoined me by 
General Laharpe, in establishing my forces on the Casale 
road, which is the essential point to be guarded, where I 
shall await your orders. 

Nothing has happened at the advanced guard stationed 


1 Laharpe was a native of the Swiss canton of Vaud, who had left his 
country on account of the vassalage in which it was held by the aristocracy 
of Berne. In the French service, he had eminently distinguished himself 
by intelligence and intrepidity, and also, as we have seen, by his indignant 
denunciations of the horrors which the soldiers of the French army gene- 
rally were urged by necessity and a spirit of plunder to commit. Those 
men are described by their own officers as capable of any atrocity. Liptai’s di- 
vision of Beaulieu’s army, after its defeat at Fombio, fell in at night with the 
French advanced posts; and -we are told that, in the mélée which ensued, 
Laharpe was shot in the dark by his own soldiers. Is it uncharitable to 
surmise that, in revenge for his pointed condemnation of their predatory 
habits, their arms may have been wilfully turned against their gallant and 
honourable leader ? 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. ‘ 88 


at Maleo: I heard of it by the chief of brigade Lannes, 
who came to our assistance with two battalions. 

I take the enemy who attacked us to be about 3000 
strong: he must have been cut off from the army yester- 
day : for I cannot imagine that so small a foree would have 
the audacity to place itself wilfully between two bodies of 
troo 


= 
~ IT will have the guns which the enemy has thrown into 
the ditches got out. I will likewise have that body of 
isolated troops further pursued by infantry and cavalry, and, 
if I learn that its number increases, I will give you advice 
of it. 

MESNARD. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Maléo, 20 Floreal, year 4 [May 9, 1796]. 

'- The enemy still occupies the town of Pizzigitone. This 
morning at daybreak, I reeonnoitred my centre and my 
fight, and it did not appear to me that the enémy was 
making any evacuation, from the fire which he opened upon 
us and the troops that he had on the ramparts. 

_ The river Adda is broad and deep. 1 do not think that 
it can be crossed without boats, and all those which might 
be serviceable for that purpose are detaified on the other 


side. 

The chief of the staff having sent me word that General 
Augereati occupies Casale, I shall send off a detachment of 
cavalry to form my junction with him. 

Up to this day, general, I have been making vain efforts 
to check pillag F The guards which I have stationed are 
of no use: the excesses committed cannot be surpassed. 
Terrible examples are required ; but I know not whether 
I have the power to make those examples. An honest and 
humatie man suffers and feels himself dishonoured in mareh- 
ing at the head of a corps in which wretches are so nume- 
rous. Were I not at the most advanced post, I would 
bee you to send as my successor a man whose health and 

ents might enable him to obtain greater success; but I 
must forget self, when the point is: to labour for the glory 
of my country. 

DALLEMAGNE. 


a2 


84 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


To the General-in- Chief. 


Codogno, 20 Floreal, year 4 [May 9, 1796]. 

I am come this instant from visiting the positions of the 
advanced guard, in which I have made some changes. I 
have placed the 70th and the 99th demi-brigades between 
the village of Maleo, occupied by the advanced guard, and 
that of Codogno, where I have established my head- 
quarters. The horse-artillery is in advance of those two 
brigades, for the purpose of marching to the advanced 
guard, if it should be necessary. Your brother has given 
orders, in your name, to General Dallemagne, to fire upon 
the town of Pizzigitone, which he has set about executing. 
Here are but two pieces of cannon and a howitzer. I have 
ordered three large barks, which the enemy has quite close 
to the town, and which he keeps, no doubt, for evacuating 
by the Adda, if forced to it, to be sunk. The two four- 
pounders are provided with only 40 rounds each, and the 
howitzer with but thirty. Be pleased to send us imme- 
diately ammunition for those pieces, as well as cartridges 
for the infantry. According to the report of some peasants, 
the enemy has six pieces of artillery of different calibres, 
and his number in the place amounts to 6000, 

I hope, general, that, in confiding to me the right of 
‘your army, you will leave me the division which, I had 
before: I am acquainted with the generals and the troops 
-which compose it, and this is a great advantage for me. 

MASSENA. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Maleo, 21 Floreal, year 4 [May 10, 1796]. 

I shall immediately execute the orders which you com- 
municate to me, to send labourers and to cannonade Piz- 
zigitone. I keep about 900 men firing with small arms at 
the town. There will be two 8-pounders and one howitzer ; 
but I must observe to you that many shots cannot be fired 
by the latter, because we have but thirty-five rounds: the 
8-pounders are provided with only sixty rounds each, As 
there is a causeway leading to Casale by way of Caneva, I 
am sending troops thither to reconnoitre. 

By my scouts this morning, I learned that the enemy 
still had cannon at Pizzigitone: he continues to guard the 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 85 


left bank of the Adda by a number of tirailleurs, and all 
his movements are governed by those which he sees us 
make. 

MESNARD. 


The Executive Directory to the General-in-Chief of the Army 


of Italy. 

‘ Paris, 18 Floreal, year 4 [May 7, 1796). 

. The Directory has received, citizen-general, your inter- 
esting communications of the 8th, oth, and 10th Floreal, 
and the duplicate of that of the 7th, apprizing it of the 
taking of Mondovi, &c. What glorious successes! The 
general joy and hopes are immense:. another victory over 
the Austrians, and Italy is ours. 

You have rendered signal services to the country: you 
will find, citizen-general, the most gratifying reward for 
them in the esteem of all the friends of the ‘Republic and 
in that of the Directory. Again it congratulates you, and 
desires you to congratulate, in its name, the brave army, 
which, by its daring and intrepidity, successfully executes 
your happy plans. oe to all the French who, by vic- 
tories and respectable conduct, contribute to seat the Repub- 
lic on bases that cannot be shaken ! 

The Directory approves the provisional armistice which 
you have concluded with the plenipotentiaries of the King 
of Sardinia: it is advantageous in all respects, and the 
Directory cannot but praise the vigorous measures which 
you have taken in granting it, and in having the most 
essential conditions carried into immediate execution. 

It has seen with pleasure that citizen Salicetti, its com- 
missioner with the army of Italy, was consulted before the 
eonclusion of the armistice. Negociations of this kind, in 
bet eases, and when the Directory itself cannot be con- 
sulted, fall particularly within the province of the commis- 
sioners of the government with the armies. The French 
generals ought, nevertheless, to be the only direct agents 
oo, ie by the enemy’s generals: but it is proper that 
the former should not have power to conclude any transac- 
tion or negociation, under the circumstances mentioned above, 
unless according to the orders of the Directory, or the con- 
ditions which the commissioners of the government shall 
transmit to them. 


86 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES: 


At the moment that the Directory is writing, you are, 
no doubt, in the Milanese. May the lucky destinies of the 
Republic have carried thither some French columns before 
the Austrian has been able to recross the Po! may they 
place you in a situation to cut off his direct communication 
with Milan and the court of Vienna! Your letter of the 
9th expresses the intention of marching on the 10th against 
Beaulieu: you will have driven him before you. Do not 
lose sight of him for a moment: your activity and the ut- 
most celerity in your marches can alone annihilate the 
Austrian army, which must be destroyed. March! no 
fatal repose! there are yet laurels left for you to gather; 
and it will be all over with the remnants of the perfidious 
coalition, if you follow up, as you declare it to be your inten- 
tion to do, the advantages given to us by the splendid yie- 
tories of the Republican army which you command. 

The plan of campaign which you have sketched in your 
letter of the 9th is worthy of the French and of the army 
which you command and lead to victory ; but it presents 
formidable obstacles and difficulties that may be said 
to be insurmountable. Belieye, nevertheless, that the 
Directory knows how to appreciate eyery thing grand and 
profitable to the Republic that is submitted to it. Still, it 
must confine itself to a narrower circle than that which you 
propose that it should traverse, and to which it is urged by 
the imperative necessity for terminating the war with this 
campaign : it cannot but dread the disasters that might 
result from one miscarriage. It reekons upon the victories 
of the army of Italy, but what might not be the consequences 
of entering Bavaria by the mountains of the Tyrol, and 
what hope could one conceive of an honourable retreat in 
ease of reverses! How, moreover, curb, with the forces 
which you command, and the few thousand men whom the 
Directory might be able to add, so many countries sub- 
jected by our arms, and impatient to withdraw themselves 
from the vicinity and the action of war! And what would 
be our means of resistance, if the court of Turin, which we 
are forcing to make peace, should allow itself to be again 
cozened, and resume arms to cut off your communications ? 

The powers of Italy call us towards your right, citizen- 
general, and this course must rid us of the perfidious 
English, so long masters of the Mediterranean. It must 
likewise enable us to recover Corsica, and to wrest those 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 87 


French departments from the ambitious house of Bruns- 
wick-Liineburg, which has so proudly established itself in 
them: such are the sentiments of the Directory on this head. 

First, effect the conquest of the Milanese, whether it be 
destined to return to the house of Austria as a necessary 
cession for securing our peace with it, whether it may be 
expedient to give it in the sequel to the Piedmontese, either 
as a reward for the efforts which we may have induced it to 

, make for assisting us in that conquest, or as an indemnity 
for the departments of Mont Blane and the Maritime 
Alps, constitutionally incorporated with the French Repub- 
lie. Drive back the enemy to the mountains of the Tyrol, 
and put him in dread of finding himself forced there. 

Then divide the army of Italy into two: let the weaker 
half remain in the Milanese and ensure the possession of it 
by its presence ; it will be seconded there by the Piedmon- 
tese troops, if the King of Sardinia accepts the offensive and 
defensive alliance, for which we shall immediately treat with 
his agents ; and those troops will be specially shacwel with 
keeping the gorges of the Tyrol and following up any ad- 
vantages which cireumstances may afford them. Our 
interest commands us to let them act, and even to lead them 
to be daring ; but the Republican troops will remain in the 
Milanese, levy contributions, and live in that fertile country, 
the possession of which has been so valuable to the Aus- 
trians during this war. You willarrive there at the moment 
of the harvest : manage so that the army of Italy shall have 
no need of supplies from the interior. The Directo 
destines for General Kellermann the command of the F —— 
forces in the Milanese, when you have divided the army of 
Italy, augmented by that of the Alps: and its intention is 
to leave in force, in this new state of things, the decree 
whieh it enacted on the 9th Floreal, conferring on the com- 
missioners Garreau and Salicetti a right to require move- 
ments of troops, &c. These dispositions would ensure union 
between the two generals, if the love of the Republic and a 
desire to render our arms triumphant did not bind them 
still more closely. 

The second column, made as strong as possible, will in 
part proceed along the coast. After you have secured a 
free passage through Gavi, if necessary, or even occupied 
that place, it will first proceed to Leghorn, and then threaten 
Rome and Naples. 


a sd Si 


88 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES, 


The conduct to be pursued towards Leghorn and Tuscany 
is this: you must arrive there secondarily, and at a moment 
when you will be least expected. The Republic is not at 
war with the grand-duke, and it is important to keep up 
our connexion with him: his minister at Paris has not 
disguised the constraint in which the English held his 
country, and the tyranny which they exereised in the port 
of Leghorn. It is worthy of the Republic to deliver it 
from that subjection ; and it is of particular consequence 
that the national colours be respected in the ports of Tus- 
eany. Let the French troops arrive at Leghorn with that 
order which commands confidence, and which is indispen- 
sable in neutral countries. Send to inform the press 
of the necessity under which we find ourselves to enter his 
aes and to puta garrison into Leghorn. Time the 
despatch of this courier and the arrival of the Republican 
troops in that city so that the courier may enter Florence at 
the moment, or very little before, the French troops enter 
Leghorn: take possession of it with the same formalities 
as were observed in occupying Vado; make yourself master 
of the English, Neapolitan, Pastegurets and other enemies” 
ships that you find in the port; seize, in short, all that 
belongs to the different States which are at war with us, and 
even sequester whatever belongs to individuals of those 
States ; let inventories be immediately taken, and beware, 
above all, citizen-general, beware lest this wealth fall a prey 
to rapacity and peculators. The grand-duke cannot refuse 
his countenance to, rigorous measures; the Directory does 
not presume that he will be disposed to throw in the way 
obstacles which could be raised only by a perfidy that it is 
to our interest to annihilate. ou will declare to him, 
citizen-general, in the name of the Executive Directory, that 
he must immediately issue orders for every thing in his 
dominions belonging to our enemies to be forthwith put into 
our hands, and that he must guarantee the sequestration ; 
otherwise the French Republic would be obliged to treat 
Tuseany as anally of England and Austria. 

The grand-duke shall be responsible for the success and 
the accomplishment of these measures. You will, more- 
over, require in that country the supplies necessary for the 
army you command, and State bonds or bills payable after 
the general peace shall be delivered in payment of provisions 
and other commodities with which we shall have been fur- 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 89 


ba nished. The reports that you will have adroitly disseminated 
respecting the number, which you will exaggerate, of the 
French troops in Italy, will increase the terror of our ene- 
‘mies, and double in a manner your means of acting. 
_ On entering the territory of the republic of Lucca, you 
will declare to it, in the name of the Sibsouiie Directory, 
that the French Republic has no hostile intention rooaret& 
it. 

It will be convenient to defer our discussions with Genoa 
‘till after the expedition to Leghorn: let us at first be con- 
‘tent to draw from it, upon receipts given, the provisions 
and means of transport which the French army has need of, 
leaving the mode of reimbursement to be settled afterwards ; 
but the directions given respecting Leghorn may apply to 
the republic of Genoa, though it is to our interest not to 
drive it to despair, and to make sure that its neutrality will 

become as beneficial to us as it has hitherto been to our 
enemies. 

The conduct which it has recently pursued towards us is 
not calculated to make us forget the act of treachery to 
which the Modeste frigate fell a victim in times that were 
less favourable to us. The time will come, when we shall 
demand a formal reparation, and that those who caused the 
Modeste to be burned and the Austrians to be called in 
shall be tried as traitors to the country. 

The Genoese, in fact, might be thus addressed: Either 
you suffered that frigate to be taken and her crew murdered, 
out of enmity to France, or you sacrificed it through weak- 
ness. In the first case, we claim a legitimate vengeance ; 
in the second, we havea right to require of you to treat our 
enemies as you have treated ourselves. The indemnity 
granted must be sufficient: the relations of the Frenchmen 
who perished on board the Modeste must participate in it ; 
the reparation for so gross an injury must be signal, must 
‘be solemn. 

It is likewise after the expedition to Leghorn that we 
shall endeavour to raise a loan in the city of Genoa, but we 
must beware of harassing it: we will make it sensible that 
we are more generous than our enemies, who proposed to de- 
liver it up to the King of Sardinia ; we will demand, in such 
a manner as not to be refused, that every thing belonging to 
our enemies, especially the English, as well in the port and 
city of Genoa, as in the rest of the territories of that repub- 


90 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


lie, shall be immediately put into our hands ; we will insist 
on the sequestration of the property and funds of the mer- 
chants and the private persons of. the country who make 
war upon us, and the Genoese government shall answer for 
the fidelity of the sequestration ; we will continue to give, 
in exchange for what Genoa shall supply us with, bonds of 
redemption, to be treated of at the general peace; lastly, 
we shall require all emigrants, without exception, to be ex- 
pelled from the territories of Genoa and Tuscany, as you 
have no doubt caused them to be expelled from the part of 
Piedmont which you occupy, in case they have been bold 
enough to remain there. 

As for the course to be pursued in regard to the Duke of 
Parma, it is just that he should pay for his infatuation in 
not detaching himself from the coalition; his territories 
must supply us with all that we have need of and with 
money into the bargain; but our connexion with Spain 
enjoins us not to make any useless devastation there and to 
spare his country much more than the other posses- 
sions of our enemies. It is the Milanese most especially 
that we must not spare; raise there contributions in specie 
immediately, and during the first panie which the approach 
of our arms will excite; and let the eye of economy 
superintend the application of them. The canals and the 
great public establishments of this country, which we shall 
not keep up, must feel somewhat of the effect of war: but 
be prudent. 

ou will find in No. 1 an interesting note, and which 
will enable you to take some wholesome measures: omit 
nothing that can contribute to the health of the defenders of 
the Republic. 

Venice shall be treated as a neutral power, but it must 
not expect to be treated as a friendly power: it has done 
nothing to deserve our kindness. 

If Rome makes advances, the first thing to be required 
is that the Pope shall immediately order public prayers 
for the success and prosperity of the French Republic. | 
Some of his beautiful monuments, his statues, his pictures,’ _ 
his medals, his libraries, his bronzes, his Madonas of sil- 
ver, and even his bells, will indemnify us for the expense 
oecasioned by the visit that you will have paid him. In 
case the court of Naples, alarmed at your approach, should 
cause proposals to be made to France, it must be required 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES, 91 


to deliver up to us immediately the ships and everythin 
belonging to the nations at ae with a It must ae 
to us for the immediate execution of these measures; it 
must solemnly engage not to admit, during this war, any 
vessels belonging to the English or to enemies of the Re- 
public into its ports, and, above all, not to allow any to enter 
under a neutral flag. 

The army of the Alps has orders to furnish you imme- 
diately with four demi-brigades, and you will see by the 
annexed statement what dispositions have been made by 
the minister at war for marching several companies of light 
artillery to that of Italy by the shortest road. It was ne- 

to take them where they were, and the Directory 
aan with regret that some of them will be a long time 
fore they reach you. 

The minister at war has likewise ordered a fourth com- 
missaire ordonnateur, citizen Foullet, who was with the arm 
of the Alps, to join that which you command; you will 
have, Sel the citizens Lambert, Sucy, and Gisealie 
In case one of these latter or citizen Foullet should be more 
suitable for the appointment of ecommissary-general, the 
Directory authorizes citizen Salicetti to nominate such one 
of the three as you shall point out to that post. 

If the army of the coasts of the Ocean can furnish you 
with any cavalry, the Directory will order it to be sent off 
for the army of Italy, and endeavour to procure you some. 
It is going to treat for peace with Sardinia, and will make 
oops acquainted with the course of the negociations. The 

rench Republic will be generous and strive to make an 
ally, who, from interest and friendship, will always be 
attached to it. 

The Direetory awaits with impatience the news of your 
ren against the Austrian army. Strike, and strike 

CARNOT. 


The Executive Directory to the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 


Paris, 18 Floreal, year 4 [May 7, 1796}. 
The Executive Directory is persuaded, citizen-general, 
that you consider the glory of the fine arts as attached to 
that of the army which you command. To them Italy 
owes, in a great measure, its wealth and its fame; but the 


92 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


time is come when their reign must be transferred to 
France, in order to establish and embellish that of liberty. 
The National Museum must contain the most celebrated 
productions of all the arts, and you will not neglect to en- 
rich it with those which await the present conquests of the 
army of Italy, and the future ones which are yet reserved 
for it. This glorious campaign, while placing the Republic 
in a condition to cid Seg to its enemies, must also repair 
the ravages of Vandalism in its own bosom, and combine 
with the splendour of military trophies the charm of the 
beneficent and cheering arts. 

The Executive Directory, therefore, invites you, citizen- 
general, to choose one or several artists, to select and trans- 
mit to Paris the most valuable objects of this kind, and to 
~ precise orders for the enlightened execution of these 

ispositions, concerning which it wishes you to report. 
ARNOT. — 


To Citizen Carnot. 


Head-quarters, Lodi, 22 Floreal, year 4 [May 11, 1796]. 
The battle of Lodi, my dear Director, gives the Re- 
public all Lombardy. The enemy has left 2000 men in the 
castle of Milan, which I shall immediately invest. You 
may reckon, in your calculations, as if I were in Milan: I 
shall not go thither to-morrow, because I wish to pursue 
Beaulieu and to take advantage of his delirium to beat him 
again. 
en will soon be possible for me to attack Mantua. If I 
take that place, there is nothing more to prevent me from 
entering Bavaria: in two decades I may be in the heart of 
Germany. Could you not combine my movements with the 
operations of those two armies? I suppose that by this 
time they are fighting on the Rhine ; were the armistice to 
continue, the army of Italy would be crushed. If the two 
armies of the Rhine take the field,I beg of you to let me know 
their position and what you hope they will be able to do, that 


this may serve me as a guide either for entering the Tyrol 


or confining myself .to the Adige. It would be worthy of 
the Republic for the three united armies to go and sign the 
treaty of peace in the heart of Bavaria or of astonished 
Austria. As for me, if it is consistent with your plans for 
the two armies of the Rhine to move forward, I will have 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 93 


erossed Tyrol before the emperor has any serious suspicion 
of the matter. If it were possible to find a good commis- 
sary, the one who is here might be fit as second, but he has 
not spirit and brains enough for commissary nent 
ONAPARTE. 


To M. Fernandi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the 
Duke of Parma. 


Head-quarters, Lodi, 24 Floreal, year 4 [May 13, 1796}. 

I have received, sir, the ratification of the suspension of 
arms which you have accepted on the part of the Duke of 
Parma. I send to you General Cervoni, that you may 
settle with him all the details of the said suspension, 

You will give directions for delivering to him, in the 
course of to-morrow, the 500,000 franes, which, according to 
the terms of the suspension, are to be paid within five 
days: he will also receive the horses, and take the mea- 
sures necessary for the execution of the said suspension. 

I rejoice, sir, that this circumstance affords me opportu- 
nity to express the consideration, We. 

BonaPaRTE. 


To Citizen Faipoult, Minister of the Republic at Genoa. 


Head-quarters, Lodi, 24 Floreal, year 4 [May 13, 1796}. 
_Iam much obliged to you for the engravings which you 
hayesent me, and which will afford the greatest pleasure to 
thearmy. I beg you to send from me twenty-five louis to the 
young man who made them, and desire him to get the asto- 
nishing passage of the bridge of Lodi engraved. 

As the fief of Montegio is not an imperial fief, it is not 
comprised in the order which I gave for impositions on the 
said fiefs. 

We yesterday took Pizzigitone, with 300 prisoners and 
three pieces of cannon. Beaulieu is running away as fast as 
he can. Cremona belongs to the Republic. 

BONAPARTE. 


To the Executive Directory. 


Head-quarters, Lodi, 25 Floreal, year 4 [May 14, 1796). 
After the battle of Fiombio, we pursued the enemy to Pizzi- 


94 LETTERS AND. DESPATCHES. 


itone, but could not.crossthe Adda. After the battle of Lodi, 
Geedion retreated upon Pizzigitone ; we proceeded thither 
on the 22nd, but he had already retired beyond Cremona. 
We immediately invested and attacked the town of Pizzi- 
gitone, which, after a brisk cannonade, was obliged to open 
its gates: in it we took 300 prisoners and five pieces of 
brass cannon. 

Our cavalry has set out in pursuit of the enemy. The 
city of Cremona has opened its gates: all Lombardy be- 
longs to the Republic. 

It is said that the suspension of arms on the Rhine still 
continues. I should imagine that by this time you have 
turned your attention to so essential a matter. It appears 
even that the enemy have emphatically published in their 
camp that this suspension is for three months, and that in 
consequence they are about to receive large reinforcements. 

BONAPARTE. 


To Citizen Carnot. 


Head-quarters, Lodi, 26 Floreal, year 4 [May 14, 1796]. 

On the receipt of the Directory’s letter of the 18th your 
intentions were fulfilled, and the Milanese is ours. I shall 
soon march to execute your plans respecting Leghorn and 
Rome: that will all be done in a short time. 

I am writing to the Directory relative to the idea of 
dividing the army: I protest to you that in this I have 
nothing in view but the country. For the rest, you will 
always find me in the straight line. I owe to the Republic 
the sacrifice of all my ideas. If attempts are making to 
lower me in your good opinion, my answer is in my heart 
and in my conscience. 

As it is possible that this letter to the Directory may be 
misconstrued, and that you have shown me friendship, I 
have determined to address it to you, requesting you to 
make such use of it as your prudence and your attachment 
to me shall suggest. 

Kellermann will command the army as well as I, for no- 
body is more convinced than myself that the victories are 
owing to the courage and daring of the army ; but I cannot 
help thinking that to unite Reilefmann with me in Italy 
would rain everything. I should not like to serve with a 
man who deems himself the first general in Europe; and I 


a 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 95 


think, besides, that it is better to have one bad general than 
two good ones. War is like government—it is an affair 
of tact. 

I cannot be useful to you unless invested with the same 
esteem that you testified for me in Paris. Whether I am 
making war here or elsewhere is to me a matter of indiffer- 
ence : to serve the country, to deserve from posterity a page 
in our history, to give the government proofs of my attach- 
ment and iviaknimmsatieh is all my ambition. But I 
have it much at heart not to throw away in a week two 
months’ fatigues, toils, and dangers, and not to find myself 
shackled. I have begun with some glory ; I desire to con- 
tinue to be worthy of you. Believe, besides, that nothing 
shall weaken the esteem which you excite in those who 
know you. 
BONAPARTE. 


To the Executive Directory. 


Head-quarters, Lodi, 25 Floreal, year 4 [May 14, 1796]. 

I have this moment received the courier who left Paris 
on the 18th. Your hopes are realised, since, by this time, 
all Lombardy belongs to the Republic. Yesterday I de- 
spatched a division to invest the castle of Milan. Beaulieu 
is at Mantua with his army; he has flooded the whole sur- 
rounding country: he will find death there, for it is the 
most unwholesome place in Italy. 

Beaulieu still has a numerous army: he began the eam- 
paign with a superior force ; the emperor is sending him a 
reinforcement of 10,000 men, who are on their march. I 
think it highly impolitic to split the army of Italy into 
two; it is equally contrary to the interests of the Republic 
to put two different generals into it. 

he expedition to Leghorn, Rome, and Naples, is a very 
trifling matter ; it ought to be performed by divisions en 
echelons, so that one might, by a retrograde march, find one’s 
self in force against the Austrians, and threaten to enclose 
them on the slightest movement they should make. For 
this there is required not only a single general, but it is 
also necessary that there should be nothing to cramp him 
in his march and his operations. I have made the cam- 
paign without consulting any one: I should have done no 
good had I been obliged to reconcile my views with those of 


96 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


another. I have gained some advantages over superior 
forces, and in absolute want of everything, because, know- 
ing that your confidence reposed upon me, my progress was 
rapid as my thought. 

f you impose fetters of all kinds upon me ; if I must refer 
at every step to the commissioners of the government; if 
they have a right to change my movements, to take. from 
me or to send me troops, expect no more good. If you 
weaken your means by dividing your forces; if you break 
the unity of military conception in Italy ; I lets with 

ief, you will have thrown away the fairest occasion for 
imposing laws upon Italy. 

n the position of the affairs of the Republic in Italy, it is 
indispensable that you should have a general who possesses 
your entire confidence : if it were not to be myself, 1 should 
not complain, but I would strive to redouble my zeal to 
deserve your esteem in the post that you should confer 
upon me. Every one has his own method of making war. 
General Kellermann has more experience, and will do better 
than I: but, both together there, we should do nothing 
but mischief. 

I cannot render essential services to the country, unless 
invested entirely and absolutely with your coificlenne: I 
am aware that it requires great courage to write you this 
letter; how easy it would be to accuse me of pride and 
ambition !—but ten to you the expression of ily, sen- 
timents, to you, who have given me at all times testimonies 
of esteem which I must not forget. 

The different divisions of Italy are taking area of 
Lombardy. When you read this letter, we shall be upon 
our march, and your answer will probably find us near 
Leghorn. The course which you will take in this cireum- 
stance is more decisive for the operations of the campaign 
than 15,000 men sent by the emperor as a reinforcement to 


Beaulieu. 
BONAPARTE. 


To the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 


At the Bivouac of Cadelano, 22 Floreal, year 4 [May 11, 1796]. 
I have returned with 500 men to the positions which I 
occupied last night. General Beaumont, with the cavalry, 
has remained at Crema: we have picked up from 100 to 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 97 


150 stragglers, whom I will send to head-quarters. Ge- 
neral Beaumont had despatched 50 men upon the road 
from Crema to Mantua, to endeavour to overtake the equi- 
es of the enemy ; this detachment has returned without 
ving seen <oyhce . A detachment of infantry, which 
kept to the left of the former, fell in with 200 infantry, 
retreating in good order. 

The inhabitants of Crema told us that General Beaulieu 
had marched troops upon Pizzigitone, and that the rest of 
the army had taken the road to Mantua. The prisoners 
and deserters all agree in saying that the enemy has no 
corps rallied, and that the road from Lodi to Cremona was 
covered with wounded from yesterday’s fight. 
BEYRAND. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Melegnano, 22 Floreal, year 4 [May 11, 1796]. 

I have just received orders to proceed to Cassano with 
the cavalry that I have with me, to stop the troops or equi- 
P es of the enemy, which are seeking to pass that way. 
1 shall set out immediately, but I suspect that it will c 
too late, as the whole passed in the course of yesterday. 

; KILMAINE. 


4 


To the General-in-Chief. 


On the road, a league from Melegnano, 22 Floreal, year 4 [May 11, 1796). 

At ten o’elock yesterday morning, the whole of the Aus- 
trian troops had already passed Fanta Angelo: the last 
division was composed of the regiment of Belgioso, and a 
— battalion of another regiment of about 1000 horse. 

t was into this division that a detachment of cavalry of 
the advanced guard fell, and it appears to have suffered 
severely, for want of caution and for want of infantry. 

I could overtake only about forty stragglers, whom I 
have sent to Borghetto. I heard in the night that, as usual, 
you have beaten the Austrians, and that you were master 
of Lodi. 

The Austrians who were to defend the Upper Tesino, at 
Buffarola, passed yesterday through Milan, directing their 
march towards Cassano, for the purpose of crossing the 
Adda there, and joining Beaulieu. 

VOL. I. H 


98 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES: 


The castle of Milan is provisioned for 4000 men for a 
month, at least orders were given to that effect, and the 
citadel of Mantua for 12,000 men for five months. The 
flour in the magazines of Pavia was distributed among the 
inhabitants. There is still hay left. there. I await your 
orders at Melegnano. 

KILMAINE. . 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Milan, 25 Floreal, year 4 [May 14, 1796]. 

I have not thought it right to invest the castle, not 
having a sufficient force: I have, therefore, decided to make 
the troops encamp outside the city, occupying the avenues 
of the glacis. The cavalry is placed on the rampart, at a 
little distance from the gate. I have frequent patroles sent 
out. To-morrow, on the arrival of the rest of the troops of 
my division, I will surround the castle, agreeably to your 
orders; the two pieces of light artillery are pointed at the 

te. ; 
ae have been received in the city with the warmest accla- 
mations. On all sides were heard shouts of ‘‘ The Republic 
for ever! Hatred to tyrants! Liberty! liberty !” 

All reports agree in saying that the number of the enemy 
in the castle amounts to from 15 to 1800 men, and 2 to 


300 cavalry. 
MASSENA. 


General Augereau to the Municipality of Pavia. 


Pavia, 26 Floreal, year 4 [May 15, 1796]. 

The divisionary General Augereau orders the munici- 
pality of Pavia as follows :— 

1. To proceed without delay to the general disarming of 
all the inhabitants of the city of Pavia without exception. 

2. All these arms shall be deposited in a place of safety, 
and, in the course of the day, placed at the disposal of the 
commandant of the city. 

8. All inhabitants having effects taken from the 
magazines of the emperor are enjoined to give them up 
forthwith, upon pain of military execution. 

4. The municipality is required to collect all these effects 
and to make a Soclaeede of them to the commissary of war. 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 99 


5. All the workmen and sailors that are in the city are 
put in requisition, and shall be immediately assembled to 
0 build, under the direction of officers and engineers, a 

idge of boats over the Po, opposite to Cervesina. 

6. All the workmen or sailors who, on the requisition of 
the municipality, do not instantly obey shall be compelled 
to do so by force. 

7. All the cordage and other materials fit for the con- 
struction of the said bridge, which shall be found to exist 
in Pavia, shall be immediately put in requisition and col- 
lected by the municipality, which shall render an account 
to the general of what it shall have produced. 

_ 8. The ee is charged with the execution of the 
present in its fullest extent, and is responsible for the least 
negligence which may be committed. It shall cause it to 
be posted and published by sound of trumpet, and translated 
into the language of the country. 

AUGEREAU, 


To the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 


Pavia, 27 Floreal, year 4 [May 16, 1796]. 
According to information received, both from officers of 
the engineers and from inhabitants of the country, the esta- 
blishment of a bridge at Cervesina, as'you have ordered, 
eannot be carried into effect, since, in this part, the river 
Po has the least depth of water, extends above a league 
inland, and, besides, the roads leading to this bank are 
wretched in the extreme. From all that I can learn, the 
only place where a bridge could be constructed with con- 
fidence is at Mezzano de Corti, where the Austrians for- 

merly had one. I await your orders on this subject. 
AUGEREAU. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Venice, 25 Floreal, year 4 [May 14, 1796]. 

The minister of the Republic at Genoa ought to have 
forwarded to you several letters from me. I neglect no 
means for procuring all the details that may contribute to 
the success of thearmy which you command. I leave it 
to your wisdom to separate them from such as shall appear 
useless to you. 

H 2 


100 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


The government had an intention of marching consider- 
able reinforcements from Hungary for Trieste, where they 
were to embark for the Po. An embargo was, in con- 
sequence, laid upon all vessels, but more were wanted than 
there are. These troops are taking the route through the 
Tyrol; their number is said to amount to 20,000 men ; 
the barks are to carry only provisions and ammunition for 
‘Mantua; they will have on board, divided among them, 
400 men of the artillery and 1000 infantry. It would, 
perhaps, be necessary to make some detachments advance 
speedily to the frontiers of the Bolognese and the Fer- 
rarese, to intercept them ; but, if this detachment is ata 
distance from the column, it ought to be rather strong and 
to have two to four pieces of light artillery: the station 
ought to be on the bank of the Po, below the place where 
that river divides into two branches, one running up to 
Bologna, the other to Mantua. 

Mantua is destitute of provisions and ammunition. Since 
the battle which you have recently fought, and which has 
forced Beaulieu to a precipitate retreat to Crema, the 
wrecks of his army seem to be directing their course to- 
wards this last place in Lombardy, to wait there for rein- 
forcements : but this resolution, if it is executing, can only 
hasten its utter ruin : all must perish by famine. For the 
rest, general, I must beg you not to let our brave brethren 
make any long stay there: the air is pestiferous, and for 
that reason the emperor kept no garrison there. Would it 
not be more advisable to follow the Roveredo road through 
the territory of Venice, on which parties of the troops de- 
bouching from the Tyrol would be met with, that is to say, 
if the intention of bringing them up is persisted in, which I 
cannot believe ? 

A merchant of Venice has been to offer me 150 barrels 
of good powder, which is at this moment at Ancona: it 
would be an affair of about 1000 louis; and, if it suited 
you, it might be carried to Ferrara in two days, and thence 

y the Po to your first posts. 

I ardently long for the communication between the 
Venetian States and Milan to be free, that I may soon be 
able to correspond directly with you, and to receive your 
orders ; I charge an excellent French merchant to forward 
this letter to the first advanced post, where the messenger 
will await your answer. 


: 

( 
‘a 
a 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 101 


_.The Duke of Modena arrived here three days ago, with 

considerable treasures; he is avaricious. His only heir 
is a daughter, married to the Archduke of Milan: the 
more you extract from him, the more you will take from 
the house of Austria. It is from him that you must extort, 
and you will get so much the more out of his country. I 
know indirectly that he expects it: give me your instruc- 
tions, and he will perhaps come down fhe more freely. 

According to certain information which has this moment 
reached me, terror pervades the city of Mantua. Most of 
the wealthy inhabitants have fled, carrying off their money 
and their most valuable effects; it is computed that not 
above one-third of its population is left. 

The ammunition which was at Cremona and Pavia, the 
flour, the military horses, as well as 600 bullocks, which 
had been despatched on the 8th of May for Cremona, have 
been removed thither. All the provisions that could be 
found in other parts have likewise been collected. At 
Pavia, there are cannon and balls which the Austrians 
were forced to leave behind, for want of the means of con- 
veyance. ; 

n consequence of these arrangements, it is computed 
that the city contains corn, forage, wood, wine, and pro- 
visions for six months, and munitions of war for a very long 
time. The number of soldiers in the place is said to amount 
to 3000, but most of them are unfit for service. They 
have fetched the orphans and bastards from Pavia and 
Cremona and put them into uniform. 

A camp composed of about 9,300 men, both infantry and 
cavalry, had been formed at Goito, and thither were sent 
the fugitives and a small number who reached Mantua. In 
the evening of the 12th, a report was circulated in Mantua 
itself that the French had dispersed that camp. Never- 
theless, in the night between the 12th and 13th, 3,200 men 


-were to proceed thither: orders were given to that effect. 


The soldiers are very ill fed and ill paid. 

On Monday the 9th, cannon were planted at the Pradela 
gate leading to the camp. On the 12th, orders were issued 
that the gates should remain closed, and that no person 
should be allowed to go out, without permission of the com- 
mandant. The archives of Milan have been sent off for 
Trieste. 

LALLEMANT. 


102 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


The Executive Directory to the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 


Paris, 26 Floreal, year 4 [May 15, 1796]. 

Your despatch of the 17th Floreal, citizen-general, has 
reached the Executive Directory. The possession of the 
fortress of Tortona gives it a new degree of confidence in the 
success of your dispositions for the passage of the Po: it 
has enabled you to take in rear the line of defence of the 
Austrians, after having concealed from them a daring and 
ably-conceived movement, if they persist in guarding the 
banks of the river toward Valenza. 

The Directory appreciates, like yourself, the obstacles 
which forbid the entry of the Milanese; but the talents 
and valour which gain battles are also capable of sur- 
mounting obstacles of all kinds; and the triumphant army 
which you command nek Oe to consider the Milanese as a 
certain conquest, and which is necessary to the glorious 
political denouement that the Republic expects from its 
victories. 

The conduct of Tuscany towards France is not deserving 
of further forbearance; and the Directory authorizes you, 
as soon as circumstances shall appear favourable to you, 
to direct upon Leghorn a corps, the force of which you will 
determine, and by means of which you will carry into exe- 
cution the dispositions contained,in the last’ despatches of 
the Directory relative to the grand-duke. The reinforce- 
ments which you are to receive from the army of the Alps 
will very soon enable you to arrange that operation ; but 
at the same time you will be aware that your principal ob- 
ject in your present situation is to complete the overthrow 
of Beaulieu. 

The Directory reminds you, citizen-general, that the 
maintenance of discipline can alone secure to an army the 
conquests of its courage, and that its observance tends 
Ts to relax in, the intoxication of success. You are 
deeply impressed with this truth, and will never cease to 
make a rigorous application of it, which is at once required 
by the interest of the Republic and that of your personal 
glory. 

CARNOT. 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES, 103 


The Executive Directory to the General Commanding in 
Chief the Army of Italy. 
‘ Paris, 27 Floreal, year 4 [May 16, 1796]. 

Good news from the army of the coasts of the Ocean, the 
submission of the rebel i and the Chouans who obeyed 
him, and the certainty that the inhabitants of the theatre 
of war in La Vendée are submitting in good earnest to the 
laws of the Republic, had given t joy to the Directory, 
when it was augmented by the infimnntice contained in your 
letter of the 20th eurrent, concerning the passage of the Po 
and the successes at Fombio and Casale. 

The Directory is not afraid to repeat the praises which it 
has already given to the victorious army of Italy; and it 
ésteems itself happy to have to congratulate it anew, 
through your medium, in the name of the French people, 
on its intrepid and gallant conduct. It will not tarnish its 
laurels by a conduct unworthy of the brilliant actions which 
it has recently achieved, and pillage will be repressed with 
that severity which respect for property and the welfare of 
the army itself imperatively command and require. Let 
all the efforts of the generals and officers be exerted to put 
an end to this disorganizing scourge, and let Italy behold 
in her conquerors none but Republicans, friends of order, 
and worthy of the admiration of all nations ! 

It appears from the letters of the commissioner of the 
government, Salicetti, that the army of Beaulieu is retiring 
towards Mantua, and that you hope soon to be master of 
Milan. The Directory reckons upon this success, and con- 
gratulates the army of Italy beforehand upon it. . If the 
Austrians are thrown into the Mantuan, delay not a mo- 
ment to pursue them. Beaulieu is concentrating himself: 
the briskness of his retreat, the extent of ground which he 
has traversed, oblige you to scatter your troops ; it is 
necessary to annihilate as soon as possible this nucleus of 
an Austrian army, which might take advantage of this dis+ 
persion to return with the rapidity of ghia senees the 
army of Italy. Beaulieu is vanquished, but he has not, 

rhaps, renounced the offensive ; and, as he cannot exercise 
it with success but against separate divisions of your army, 
it is? requisite to ‘prevent all his enterprises, to watch his 
proceedings, and never to lose sight of him. Defer, if 
necessary, citizen-general, till after the total rout and dis- 


104 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES- 


rsion of the Austrian army all the particular petty enter-- 
Lobe which would be liable to weaken the main body of © 


the army under your command. A vast career of glory is 

et open before you, but the first step taken in it ought to 
‘ to destroy entirely the army commanded by the suc- 
cessor of Devins. ~ fe successes will soon place you in a 
situation to cut off all direct communication between it and 
Vienna. This interesting object once accomplished, its 
defeat is certain. In order to bring it about, it is necessary 
above all things to harass the enemy incessantly, and to 
reduce the Austrian soldiers to that state of fatigue which 
disorganizes the most formidable armies, and which occasions 
desertion, apathy, and frequently disobedience and rebellion. 
Beaulieu once annihilated, the house of Austria will at 
length think of peace, which the perfidious counsels of 
England have induced it to reject. It will find itself forced 
to accept such conditions as the Republic shall think fit to 


impose. 

Socios as the Directory observed to you in its despatch 
of the 18th Floreal, ought to be treated as a neutral, not as 
a friendly power. Seek, above all, without changing this 
disposition, to prevent the wrecks of the Austrian army. 
from finding a safe asylum in the territories of that repub- 
lic. If they penetrate into them without the consent of the 
Venetian government, pursue them without hesitation. 

The Directory refers you to its letter of the 18th eur- 
rent: it contains developments explanatory of our mode of 
acting towards the different powers of Italy, to which it 
deems it superfluous to add any thing under present cireum- 
stances. 

All republicans will drop a tear for Generals Laharpe 
and Stengel; the Directory has felt as it ought for their 
loss, and the laurels of their companions in arms can alone 
mingle some gratification with their sincere regrets. It 
will not fail shortly to testify to the brave men who have 
anew distinguished themselves at the passage of the Po 
how highly satisfied it is with their devotedness, their intel- 
ligence, and that valour which makes them confront all 
dangers. 

o pity for dishonest administrators, who devour the 
subsistence and dilapidate the resources of the Republican 
armies! Point them out to the Directory, citizen-general ; 
bring them to trial; you are on the spot; you are well 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES: 105 


acquainted with their infamous conduct and scandalous 

robberies ; make necessary examples of them, examples 
capable of deterring those who may be tempted to imitate 
| them in future: it is the only way to extirpate that mania 
; for rapine, which impunity and connivance have so disas-. 

: ‘trously spread over almost the whole surface of the Repub- 
lic. On these shameless vampires ought to fall the first 
and the just punishment reserved for audacious guilt. 

The army of the Alps is in need of funds: the Directory 

addresses itself to you; strive to procure it some, and to 

' revive the public credit by payments long due in the de- 

partments which it occupied: furnish it also with some 

means of transport, and remount all its services, which are 

in the greatest want of it. The Directory recommends to 

ae to concert on this subject with the general-in-chief 
ellermann. 

The Directory approves the armistice which you have 
concluded with the Duke of Parma; it accepts the present 
which that prince is pleased to make us of some fine pic- 
tures to adorn the national Museum. 

I recommend to you to visit and notice the eminent 
men of science and artists in the countries where you are ; 
and, when you are in possession of Milan, to honour and 
protect particularly Oriani,! the astronomer, so celebrated for 
the services which he is incessantly rendering to the sciences. 

The Directory will write to you forthwith, on the return 
of your aide-de-camp, citizen Murat. 


CARNOT. 


; The Executive Directory to General Bonaparte. 


Paris, 27 Floreal, year 4 [May 16, 1796]. 
The Directory loses no time in transmitting to you, 
citizen-general, a copy of the treaty of peace concluded 
between the minister for foreign affairs, authorized by the 
Directory and the plenipotentiaries sent by the court of 


1 Barnabé Oriani, a native of Garignano in the Milanese, early acquired 

high reputation as an astronomer for the great accuracy of his observations. 

In 1786, he was sent by the government to London, with a commission to 

Ramsden for a mural quadrant and other instruments, for the Milan 

Observatory. Here he contracted a friendship with Herschel, and con- 

tinued in correspondence with him while he lived. On the erection of the 

* Italian Institute, he was one of the first thirty members, and afterwards 

made by Napoleon a count and senator of the kingdom of Italy. He died at 
Milan in 1832, and left very considerable property for scientific purposes. 


106 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


Turin. There is every reason to believe that the legis- 
lative body, after examining, will ratify it, as Article 333 
of the Republican constitution prescribes. 

Thus the brave army of Ttal , Which you have so skil- 
fully led on to victory, will have reason to applaud itself 
for having brought about this glorious peace, the fruit of its 
valour, and which becomes the pledge of its future success 
against the Austrians. Continue to direct it with that 
rapidity and that perseverance which thwart and annihilate 
all the combinations of hostile powers, and force them, in 
spite of themselves, into that general peace, from which they 
so obstinately kept aloof, and of the imperative and irresist- 
ible necessity of which our victorious armies will soon make 
them sensible. CARNOT. 


To Citizen Lallemant, Minister at Venice. 


Head-quarters, Milan, 28 Floreal, year 4 [May 17, 1796]. 

I thank you infinitely, citizen minister, for the interest- 
ing battisnlacs you give me respecting the position of the 
enemy. I send you 6000 livres, to defray the expense of 
spies at Trent, Mantua, and on the whole route of Tyrol, 
and let me know the’ day on which the Trivste vessels left 
for Mantua. Spare neither money nor pains; the interest 
of the country requires it. I will repay you punctually 
all that you lay out. Send me an accurate and very 
detailed map of the Venetian States. 

There is at Milan a strong disposition to create a revo- 
lution there. If citizens Jacob on Alliod are not indispen- 
sable at Venice, send them hither; I will employ them in 
the Milanese, for the administration of that country. You 
must have received a letter from Lodi, from the commis- 
sioner of the government. Contrive to let your letters be 
frequent and instructive: it is upon you I rely for news ; 
fix a price for the couriers, so that when they arrive before 
such an hour they shall have a gratuity. 

BONAPARTE. 


To the General-in-Chief of the Army of the King of Sardinia. 
Head-quarters, Milan, Floreal 29, year 4 [May 18, 1796]. 


I have just given orders, sir, for the two vessels with salt, 
stopped at Placentia, to continue their route to Valenza. 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 107 


Perhaps you will think proper to send either a military 
or civil officer to Placentia to take care that vessels and 
other convoys belonging to the king are not intercepted by 
the army. As soon as you have acquainted me with your 
intentions on this subject, I shall be anxious to furnish that 
officer with the necessary facilities to enable him to fulfil his 
mission. He might also be directed to visit the different banks 
of the Po, to obtain restitution of any effects belonging to 
the king which we may have seized. 

The chief of the staff is despatching orders to the troops 
that will arrive at Casale to set out immediately for Milan. 
T have directed my attention to the different remonstrances 
relative to the province of Alba. I wish, sir, that you may 
be convinced of the anxiety which I feel to do something 
that would be agreeable to you. 

I request you to send me a list of the officers whom you 
desire that 1 should send you in exchange for those whom 
you have had the complaisance to release on parole. 

I am sending an officer of engineers to Valenza, to select 
a spot for the construction of a bridge there ; but, as I leave 
to the king the enjoyment of his territories on this side of 
the Po, which M. Beaulieu evacuated only on my passage 
of the Po at Placentia, I think it would be but fair that 
you should yourself give orders for the construction of the 
said bridge, which it would be useful to me to have before 
the end of eight days. 

BONAPARTE. 


To the Executive Directory. 


Head-quarters, Milan, 29 Floreal, year 4 [May 18, 1796]. 
The Duke of Parma is paying his contribution ; he has 
already paid 500,000 livres, and is providing for the rest. 
Faipoult would fain have had that prince excused from 
paying any thing; but the ambassador of Spain at Turin, 
who has come to see me, admitted that we had been very 
moderate. I dare say, however, that the Duke of Parma 
complains ; but why did he net accept the mediation of 

Spain ? 
BONAPARTE. 


108 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES.. 


To the General-in-Ohief of the Army of the King of — 


Sardinia. 


I have just been informed, sir, that the different military 
agents in the conquered countries had sequestrated the pos- 
sessions of gentlemen belonging to the court. I have given 
orders that the sequestrations be immediately taken off, 
and that no difference be made between the subjects of the 
king, whether resident in Turin or in the various towns 
subject to the Republic. 

BONAPARTE. 


To Citizen Barthelemy, Ambassador of the Republic 
at Basle. 
Head-quarters, Milan, 1 Prairial, year 4 [May 20, 1796]. 

We are masters of Lombardy. The troops of the Re- 
public, though in small number and destitute of every 
thing, have surmounted all obstacles: the enemy has re- 
tired to Mantua; to-morrow our corps of troops will be 
here. I am in haste to be off, and beg you to acquaint me 
with the movements of the imperial army in Bavaria and 
- Suabia. 

Can the emperor weaken his army on the Rhine to re- 
inforce that of Italy? What troops could he still send 
into the Tyrol? I request you, citizen minister, to com- 
municate to me all the information you possess on that 
subject, and to send out agents on all sides, that you may 
be able to let me know with precision what troops would be 
marched to Italy. 

Tam eae flattered that this circumstance has pro- 
cured me the pleasure of assuring you, &c. 

BONAPARTE, 


To the Minister of the Finances. 


Head-quarters, Milan, 2 Prairial, year 4 [May 21, 1796]. 
The army of Italy is suffering severe want: it is in the 
utmost penury and the mest deplorable destitution of the 
most essential necessaries: the number of its men is daily 
increasing, and its wants are increasing in proportion. 
The Executive Directory, which has appointed me to the 
command of that army, has decided upon a plan of offensive 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 109 


warfare, which requires prompt measures and extraordinary 
resources. 

The allowance of two sous in specie for the private sol- - 
dier, and eight livres for the officers, has not been received, 
and this has discontented and discouraged the army. I 
request you to inform yourself, and to let me know if I am 
to reckon that the treasury alone will provide, so that the 
pay may not fail. Of all expenses, this is the most sa- 
ered: the army of Italy is the only one which has gone 
without it. 

The minister at war has given orders for the service of 
Pluviose and part of that of Ventose at different times, 
according to the annexed account, the sum of....3; and 
for the service of the artillery, on the 23rd of the month, 
10,000 livres in specie, and 500,000 livres in assignats ; and 
on the 19th Ventose, 30,000 livres in cash, and 1,500,000 
livres in assignats. 

They complain at the army of having received only a 
very small portion of that sum. I beg you to cause an 
account to be delivered to you of what remains to be sent 
according to the above orders, and to let me know what you 
hope to do for effecting the entire payment. 

BONAPARTE. 


To Citizen Bonelli, Chief of Battalion. 


Head-quarters, Milan, 21 Prairial, year 4 [May 21, 1796). 
You will go to Corsica, with eighteen men of your own 
choice. Citizen Sapey is directed to procure you a passage, 
and to deliver to you supplies of powder and arms. There 
will be paid to you at your departure 24,000 livres in cash, 
which you will lay out for encouraging the patriots. Citizen 
Brassini will remain at Genoa, and transmit to you the 
supplies that you have need of: he will deliver to you 100 
muskets, 300 pair of pistols, 600 pounds of powder, and 
10,000 pounds of lead. As soon as more precise informa- 
tion arrives, further supplies will be sent, and officers’ com- 
missions for raising battalions on account of the French 

Republic. 
BONAPARTE. 


110 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


To Citizens Braccini and Paraviccini. 
Head-quarters, Milan, 2 Prairial, year 4 [May 21, 1796). 

You will remain at Genoa to correspond with the Cor- 
sican patriots, to inform me of all that is passing in that 
department, and to forward supplies to him. Citizen Balbi, 
banker of the Republic, will remit to you 15,000 livres. 
With that sum you will buy 100 muskets, 300 pair of 
pistols, 3000 gun-flints, 5000 to 6000 pounds of powder, 
and 10,000 pounds of lead, which you will deliver to ci- 
tizen Bonelli. I am giving orders that there be sent to 
you from Nice 600 fowling-pieces, which you will forward 
successively. 

The minister of the Republic at Genoa is informed of 
your mission. You will call upon him, that he may give 
you whatever you are in need of. You will receive a salary 
of 300 francs per month while your mission lasts. 

BONAPARTE, 


To Citizen Sapey. 


Head-quarters, Milan, 2 Prairial, year 4 [May 21, 1796]. 

I am sending off citizen Bonelli with 30 men and 100 
muskets, 300 pair of pistols, 6000 pounds of powder, and 
10,000 pounds of lead, to assist the patriots of Corsica. 

I have directed citizens Braccini and Paraviccini to re- 
main at Genoa, and to carry on a correspondence with the 
Corsican patriots. Your zeal being known to me, I desire 
you to procure citizen Bonelli all the means necessary for 
passing over to Corsica. I will reimburse the expense you 
are at on this account. 

BONAPARTE. 


To Citizen Faipoult. 


Head-quarters, Milan, 2 Prairial, year 4 [May 21, 1796). 

Herewith I send you an intercepted letter: you will see 
that you have spies about you. 

Peace is concluded with the King of Sardinia on very 
advantageous terms; it was signed on the 26th of this 
month. All is quiet in Paris, and the revolutionists of 
1798 are still kept in order and thwarted. 

You will find annexed a proclamation to the army. I 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES, li 


prefer that method to addressing the people. The armis- 
tice with the Duke of Parma has been approved. The 
Directory has not thought it too ignominious for that duke. 
We have laid an imposition of 20,000,000 franes on the 
Milanese. I shall choose two fine horses for you out of 
those which we shall require at Milan: they will help to 
dispel the ennui and vexations of the country where you 
are. I shall also make you a present of a sword. 
BoNAPARTE. 


To the Executive Directory. 


Head-quarters, Milan, 3 Prairial, year 4 [May 22, 1796]. 

I have just received, citizens directors, the courier who 
left Paris on the 26th. He has brought us the articles of 
the glorious peace which you have concluded with the 
King of Sardinia. I beg you to accept my congratulations 
upon it. 

The commissioner Salicetti will transmit to you a state- 
ment of the contributions that we have imposed. You may 
at this moment reckon upon six to eight millions of money, 
in gold or silver, in bullion or jewels, which are at your 
disposal in Genoa at one of the principal bankers’. ica 
can dispose of that sum, it not being needed for the wants 
of the army. If you wish it, I will remit a million to Basle 
for the army of the Rhine. 

I have sent General Kellermann 10,000 livres in cash, 
and to-morrow I shall transmit 200,000 livres to him. 

The troops are satisfied ; ye receive half their pay in 
money ; pillage is repressed, and discipline is reviving with 
abundance in this glorious army. Nine thousand men of 
the army of the Alps will arrive in ten days. I shall not 
wait for them, for the troops are already in motion to march 
for the gorges of the Tyrol. 

The Austrian army is daily receiving reinforcements ; 
but I imagine that our army of the Rhine will not permit 
the emperor to weaken himself too much in that quarter. 

You will find annexed some letters of the highest im- 
portance, among the rest one which makes mention of con- 
versations between Louis X VIII. and several of our posts 
at the army of the Rhine. The intelligence of these par- 
leys is repeated in all the letters of emigrants. I think it 
important that this should be inquired into. 


12 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


You will find annexed a statement of what we have taken 
at Pavia: it is very considerable. We have magazines at 
Tortona, Coni, Ceva, and Mondovi. The Duke of Parma 
having neither muskets, nor cannon, nor fortresses, nothing 
of this kind could be demanded of him. 

You will find annexed an address to the army. You 
will also find the suspension which I have concluded with 
the Duke of Modena: there, you will see, are 10,000,000 
more for the Republic. As he has neither fortresses nor 
muskets, it was not possible to demand any of him. 

BONAPARTE. 


PS. Among the letters of emigrants annexed, you will 
find one from a priest, who writes from Paris to Cardinal 
Zelada; though not signed, it would be easy to discover 
the writer, since he says that he supped with General 
Dumuy the evening before his departure. When once the 
minister of the police has found out this correspondent of 
monseigneur the cardinal, it will be easy for him, by causing 
him to be dogged for some days, to discover others. You 
will also find the name of a merchant of Lyons, who trans- 
mits funds to emigrants. 


To the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 


Parma, 28 Floreal, year 4 [May 17, 1796}. 

You must have received, general, my despatch by the 
extraordinary courier: I lose no time in sending back your 
courier, and replying to your letter of the 27th. 

The Lethe picture of St. Jerome, by Correggio, with 
the four best that could be found here, will be packed to- 
morrow, and sent to Tortona. As for the others, I repeat 
to you that it is indispensable, if you would make a good 
selection, that you should send me some connoisseur from 
Milan, for I might be deceived, knowing nothing of paint- 
ing, and having no one to consult. i 

am going to send an express to Mantua, and I shall 
transmit to you the report he will bring me of the position 
and number of the enemy. The general who commands 
towards Cremona would, however, have been able to do 
better service, being nearer to Mantua, and on the other 
side of the Po: you would at any rate have received his 
report more speedily. 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 113 


I am also sending a man to Reggio, though I am assured 
by persons who have come from the town this morning that 

lis quiet in that part. 

Guastalla belongs to the Duke of Parma: that town is 
neither fortified nor defended by any troops: there are but 
a few old invalids of the duke’s. 

There is a stone bridge over the Secchia, two miles from 
Reggio, on the Modena road; there are bridges over all 
the rivers that are met with on the road to Bologna. 

It is fifteen miles from this city to Reggio; from Reggio 
to the bridge over the Secchia, two ules I await your 
answer with impatience. 

CERVONI. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Lodi, 29 Floreal, year 4 [May 18, 1796]. 
It has been determined that the division of General Mas- 
sena shall furnish the horse-artillery with three 8-pounders 
and two six-inch howitzers. If you will order these five 
pieces to be delivered to-morrow at Lodi, I can assure you 
that, by the 3rd of next month, you shall have at your 
ee the horse-artillery with twelve pieces, provisioned 

with 150 rounds each, 100 of them grape. 
DoOMMARTIN, 


To the General-in-Chief. 
Parma, 30 Floreal, year 4 [May 19, 1796). 

I have this instant received, general, the reports of the 
trusty persons whom I sent to Mantua by different roads, 
and neither knowing of the mission of the other. Both 

ein assuring me that three days ago reinforcements 
of troops, coming from the Tyrol, entered Mantua: one 
represents them as amounting to 5000, the other to 
7000 men. They are labouring very hard to repair the 
fortifications of Mantua, and to establish new batteries: in 
these works, they employ not only the troops but the 
— of the country and city: there is an incessant bustle, 
and a mortal agitation prevails among the troops, as well as 
the inhabitants. General Beaulieu declares unreservedly 
that the emperor ought to make peace or to send him 
60,000 men. 

VOL. I. I 


114 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


A line has been formed for defending the dikes of the 
lakes Mincio and Garda, which supply the ditches of 
Mantua with water; it is in the defence of this line that 
nearly all the wrecks of his army are employed: he is 
constructing camps and entrenching himself everywhere 
outside: he does not reside himself in Mantua, but is for- 
tifying himself at Marcheria, and has broken down the 
bridge of the Oglio, twelve miles distant from Mantua. 

My spies assert that the Austrians have not considerable 
magazines: want is beginning to be felt, and discourage- 
- ment is at its height among them. There is not an Aus- 
trian on this side of the Po. 

In order to obtain these particulars the more speedily, 
I made these expresses travel by post: I shall do the same 
with those whom I shall send to the mouth of the Po, that 
you may be promptly apprized of whatever there may be 
new in that quarter. 

lt is sixty miles from Parmato Sarzana: there is a well- 
beaten road, but not passable for carriages ; the rivers that 
you meet with are all fordable. 

I told you in my last that it is impossible for the Duke 
of Parma, notwithstanding his good will, to furnish us with 
the oats that he has promised us. Instead of oats, I have 
authorized the inspector of forage to receive beans and 
Turkey corn, on the understanding of a just augmentation. 
When all the resources of this kind in the duchy are ex- 
hausted, I shall have what has not been furnished in kind 
levied in money. ? 

I have likewise told you that there are no studs in the 
territories of Parma: there is no good breed of horses in 
the country, consequently there are but very few horses, and 
those very bad. Yesterday, out of seven or eight hundred 
that were brought to us, we were obliged to reject nearly 
half, as being unfit for any kind of service in the army. I 
see no possibility of extracting 500 good saddle-horses from 
this duchy, and it will be very difficult for it to furnish us 
with 200 for draught: you know that in these parts the 
people use bullocks for transport. When I have despatched 
all the horses that can be supplied, and am convinced of 
the impossibility of levying more, I will render you an 
account, that you may fix the sum which I ought to de- 
mand in lieu of those not furnished. 

One hundred saddle-horses, the best of the bad, will start 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 115. 


to-morrow for Milan, under the conduct of Captain Fresnel, 
whom I have ordered to leave ten with General Serrurier. 
Among these hundred horses, there are sixteen out of the 
duke’s stables, eight of them saddle and eight coach-horses. 
The captain has orders to deliver them to none but you: 
they may serve for yourself, Salicetti, and the chief of the 
staff. Besides these, Captain Fresnel has selected some 
other good ones. The inspector of carriages will forward 
those destined for the artillery to the Adda. 

The famous St. Jerome, the Madona della Scudella, the 
Taking down from the Cross, the Martyr, forming a com- 
eepion to that picture, and St. John preaching in the 

ilderness—these five pictures are the best in the country, 
are already packed, and will go off to-night. I will have 
the others which you have pointed out to me secured, and 
forward them to Tortona as speedily as possible. 

CERVONI. 


To the General-in- Chief. 


Pizzigitone, 1 Prairial, year 4 [May 20, 1796]. 

Annexed, I forward to you two reports, one by a spy 
whom I had sent to Cremona, the other by a captain of the 
10th regiment of horse chasseurs, whom I had sent with a 
flag of truce. It is almost impossible to get well served by 
the people of the country as spies: they dare not venture 
upon ground occupied by an enemy’s army, and what they 
report is but vague. 

According to the report of the spy, the enemy is entirely 
on the other side of the Oglio; he has his advanced posts on 
the left bank of that river, and his cavalry in advance of 
the infantry : the bulk of his army is encamped in the rear 
of Mantua. He has few troops in that city, a considerable 
camp at Basega, nobody on the banks of the Oglio, aseend- 
ing towards Rhina; but there are troops at Marlaria: he 
knows not the total force of the enemy, and that of his 
different positions, 

The report of Captain Allico is as follows :— On the 
28th I pushed on to Marlaria, passing er Bossolo ; 
the enemy allowed me to approach to the bank of the 
Oglio, where I had time to reconnoitre his position. I re- 
marked three pieces of cannon, one placed at the end of a 
bridge, and sweeping that as well as the road leading to 

12 


116 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


Bossolo: the other two are placed about fifty or sixty 
fathoms to the right and left of the first : that on the right 
plays upon a dike running diagonally towards the Oglio ; 
that on the left is masked by some trees, and plays upon a 
field of wheat on the left of the road leading from Marlaria 
to Bossolo. Iremarked, moreover, that the Teides had been 
half burned ; but the piles and the framework were left. 
I think it would be easy to repair it.” 
DALLEMAGNE. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Pizzigitone, 2 Prairial, year 4 [May 21, 1796]. 

A countryman whom I despatched from Bina to ascer- 
tain the force and the position of the enemy, has returned . 
this morning. He reports that he descended the right 
bank of the Oglio to Marlaria; that the enemy has sunk 
all the ferry-boats as far as that place; that he saw nobody 
on the left bank ; and that, from the information which he 
obtained, the enemy has 6000 infantry at Marlaria and very 


few cavalry. 
DALLEMAGNE, 


To the General-in-Chief. 
Turin, May 21, 1796 (2 Prairial, year 4]. 

The boats necessary for the construction of the bridge 
are all at the appointed - I have already had advice 
that the column coming by way of Argentiéres has arrived 
in the valley of the Stura; that of the valley of Aosta will 
likewise have entered it on the 19th; but on this occasion 
I must tell you that General Kellermann announces a 
second passage through that valley, which we had not 
agreed upon, and which would be extremely prejudicial to 
the country through which this second column would pass. 
My brother, who commands at the valley of Aosta, has 
written on this subject to General Kellermann, to apprize 
him that this would not be conformable with the conven- 
tions; so that I flatter myself there will still be time to 
give orders that this second column shall pursue the route 
of Argentitres instead of that of the St. Bernard. 

I have thought to write you this, that you may be in- 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 117 


formed of all our proceedings, having the greatest confidence 
in your manner of acting towards me, and the strongest 
desire to do everything that can be agreeable to you. 

I have also resolved to address myself directly to you, to 
beg of you to give orders that the peasants in the countr 
occupied by the French armies may be allowed the possi- 
bility of tilling their lands and sowing for a second crop ; 
which, I think, will be as beneficial for the French army as 
even for the country where produce is more abundant. As 
it is just about the time when they ought to begin, 1 have 
been anxious to press the subject upon you ; and with great 
pleasure I seize this occasion to testify the distinguished 
sentiments which I have for you, monsieur le general. 

VicTtoR EMMANUEL. 


The Executive Directory to General Bonaparte, Commander- 

in-Chief of the Army of Italy. 

; Paris, 26 Floreal, year 4 [May 18, 1796]. 

The Directory has received, citizen-general, your letter 
dated Lodi, the 22nd instant. You know how to follow up 
victory, and this rapid and uninterrupted series of suc- 
cesses promises France the conquest of nearly all Italy, and 
the immense resources possessed by that great and rich 
peninsula, 

- Immortal glory to the victors of Lodi! Honour to the 
eneral-in-chief, who prepared for the daring attack on the 
ridge of that town, by going through the ranks of the 

French warriors, and exposing himself to the most mur- 

derous fire of the enemy, and disposing everything for 

victory! Honour to the intrepid Berthier, who rushed on 
at the head of that fierce and formidable republican column 
which overturned and overthrew the enemy! Honour to 
ones Massena, Cervoni, Dallemagne, to the chiefs of 

rigade Saluce, Dupas, and Sugni, to adjutant-major Toiret, 
of the third battalion of the grenadiers! Glory to the gal- 
lant second battalion of the carabineers, to those victorious 
grenadiers who decided the issue of that battle! Glory to 
the brave division commanded by General Augereau and to 
its leader! Glory to the commissioner of the government 

Salicetti ! 

- Ye have conquered, French Republicans, ye have saved 

your country, ye are consolidating the Republic, ye are an- 


118 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


nihilating that monstrous coalition, which would have swal- 
lowed us up; ye are making peace by inflicting redoubled 
blows on those senseless Austrians, who, with an obstinacy 
which is fatal to them, have hitherto refused to accept it. 
The Directory becomes with pleasure the organ of all the 
friends of the Republic, and it is never tired of giving you 
the praises which are due to your courage and to the daring 


_ intrepidity which characterizes you. 


Yes, general, you know how to follow up victory: what 
signifies it on what day you will be in Milan, since that city 
belongs to the Republic, and you have caused the castle to 
be invested! Your plan is the only one to pursue: Beau- 
lieu must be followed up till he is annihilated, till you have 
so dispersed him that he finds it utterly impossible to un- 
dertake anything, or even to show himself during this eam- 
paign. Continue then to pursue him, wherever he may be, 
with that perseverance which you have hitherto displayed, 
and desist not till the Austrian army is utterly destroyed. 

The despatches which the Directory has addressed to you 
on the 18th, 26th, and 27th Floreal, contain the bases of 
the movements which will be left for you to make, after the 
entire overthrow of Beaulieu and the conquest of the 
Milanese. As soon as that important operation is finished, 
and the conditions of the peace concluded with Sardinia have 
been ratified by the Legislative Body and the Court of 
Turin, you will divide the troops under your command into 
two parts. You will command those which are to 
secure the whole of Italy, and General Kellermann, 
coo oan by the commissioner of the government Salicetti, 
will command that of the Milanese by the name of the army 
of the Alps, and will despatch, if the forces which you leave 
him permit, some divisions and parties to the gorges of the 
Tyrol, &e. 

One part of the numerous troops at present composing 
the army of the Alps, augmented by the reinforcements 
which the situation of Lyons shall permit us to draw from 
that city, will be able to advance into Piedmont, and contri- 
bute to the execution of the treaty of peace, by occupying 
the places which are to be delivered up to us, in conformity 
with Art. 12; and in Mont Blanc, the Upper and Lower 
Alps, and Faussigni, there must be left only the forces in- 
dispensable for maintaining tranquillity, which evil disposed 
persons might attempt to disturb. 


7 "a? 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 119 


For these essential operations you will concert with the 
commissioner of the government Salicetti and the general- 
in-chief Kellermann, with whom you will fix the demarca- 
tions between the two armies and the arrondissements 
assigned to the service of each of them. 

The Directory has reserved for you the conduct of the 
columns that are to go to Leghorn to chastise the English, 
because it considers that operation as of superior import- 
ance ; because the fate of the island of Corsica depends upon 
it, in some measure ; because it will make London tremble, 
and give a mortal blow to the English, the sole supporters 
and conductors of the coalition, which seems at length 
ready to crumble to pieces. It attaches to the immediate 
execution of this plan a much greater interest than to the 
dangerous expedition into the Tyrol ; in executing it, you 
will make-the tiara of the self-styled head of the universal 
Church totter, and you will impose on the King of Naples 
conditions of peace, as advantageous to France as they will 
be disastrous to the perfidious English and their allies. 

The march which you propose towards Tyrol is grand, no 
doubt, but it is environed with obstacles difficult to surmount. 
The Directory has partly developed the dangers of it in its 
despatch of the 18th of Floreal, to which it refers ; be- 
sides, it considers that enterprise as absolutely dependent 
on your future successes in Italy. The way in which it 
might be advisable to prepare for it would be this: For 
your march upon Leghorn and the States of the Church, 
you will take with you no more troops than are indispen- 
sably necessary to ensure your success at Leghorn, Rome, 
and Naples; the rest, as we have observed, will be trans- 
ferred to the general-in-chief Kellermann, who will closely 
pursue the wrecks of the Austrians into the mountains of 
the Tyrol, and push strong parties into Germany as far as 
he can, as well to levy ae ree as to disturb the com- 
munications of the Austrian armies on the Rhine. If the 
army which you will command needs reinforcements, the 
shall. be immediately drawn from that under General Kel- 
lermann, upon the requisition made for that purpose by the 
commissioners of the government. You will leave, con- 
jointly with that general, in the Milanese, and to secure 
your communications with France, no more troops than 
are strictly indispensable for the fulfilment of that object ; 
and General Kellermann will dispose militarily in the moun- 


120 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


tains of the Tyrol the greater part of those under his 
orders, so as to screen them from the heats of the plain, 
and the diseases which they cannot fail to occasion. 

Your marches towards the south of Italy ought to be 
sharp and rapid: the immense resources which they will 
afford you will be forwarded without delay to France. 
Leave nothing in Italy that our political situation permits 
us to carry off, and that may be useful to us. If this plan 
is executed as the Directory hopes, it will then be the more 
possible to resume towards autumn the enterprise of pene- 
trating into the heart of Germany, inasmuch as our armies 
of the Rhine will by that time have been able to strike 
vigorous blows. That of Italy has not only shown them 
the way to victory; it has facilitated it to them. The 
Austrian, qaraset at your successes, has probably already 
given orders for drawing from his armies on the Rhine nu- 
merous reinforcements to oppose your progress ; and hence 
arises the necessity for giving to General Kellermann the 
greatest possible force, that he may find himself at all 
times in the situation of the offensive in the quarter of the 
Tyrol. 

"They are not yet fighting on the Rhine. “ The army of 
the Sambre and Meuse is forming its magazines with diflfi- 
culty. It has not, like the brave army of Italy, a fertile 
ane before it, and it is obliged to secure for itself before- 

and the means of subsistence in the sterile country of 
Berg and in northern Wetteravia. That of the Rhine 
and Moselle is in extreme destitution: its cavalry is an 
absolute cipher for want of horses: it is also in want of 
money for its services. It is, moreover, beset and under- 
mined by abuses and peculations of every kind. The foot 
carabineers of the army of Italy have by their valour fur- 
nished the means for remounting the horse carabineers of 
that of the Rhine and Moselle ; if you can send horses to 
them and to the other cavalry troops of that army, hesitate 
not to do so, and concert with the General-in-Chief Moreau 
to arrange for their reception: and the same in regard to 
the means of transport and the distress for cash in which it 
finds itself. 

The moment when the enemy shall draw forces from his 
armies on the Rhine to oppose them to ours in Italy, is that 
which the Directory would choose for breaking the armistice 
in the north: it is employing all its means to accomplish 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 121 


this, but fears that the campaign cannot be opened before 
the: harvest, which will su x 2 the French troops with the 
means of subsistence that they are in want of. 

If your general officers of cavalry fail to do their duty, 
bring them to trial without mercy, turn them out, send 
them to the rear, purge that arm and make it worthy of the 
army of Italy. The Directory has just given orders for 

neral-officers of cavalry, of high reputation, general of 

ivision Sahuguet and general of brigade Beaurevoir, to 
start by post to join it. You will soon furnish the latter 
with occasion to earn the rank of general of division, to 
am his distinguished services already give him some 
claim. 
» If your commissaries of war are not good, get some 
gee by the commissioner of government Salicetti. 
he Director¥ knows that you will not put into office any 
but men of probity, intelligence, and activity. 

The Republic of Venice will perhaps be able to furnish 
us with money: you may even raise a loan at Verona, 
where the pretended Louis X VIII. resided, The Directory 
suggests this idea for your consideration, and commits the 
execution of it to the commissioner of the government 
Salicetti and yourself. 

It is writing fresh letters of congratulation to the brave 
men of the army of Italy: it is waiting for the plans of 
your battles and of your marches ; you cannot be in want 
of draughtsmen in ttaly. What are your young officers 
of engineers about, eh ? 

The Directory will immediately grant promotion to the 
officers for whom you solicit it; and it will give new 
tokens of satisfaction to those who have distinguished 
themselves. 

It applauds the perfect harmony which prevails between 
you, Gascral Kellermann, the commissioner of government 
Salicetti, and the general of division chief of the staff Ber- 
thier. It will sincerely rejoice to hear of the entire defeat 
of the army of Beaulieu and the taking of Milan. 

CARNOT. 


The Executive Directory to the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 


Paris, 2 Prairial, year 4 [May 21, 1796]. 
The Directory has received, citizen-general, your letter 


122 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


of the 25th Floreal, apprising it of the taking of Pizzigi- 
tone and the pussession of Cremona and all Lombardy : it 
congratulates afresh the army of Italy and him who com- 
mands it. It has made a glorious preparation for the 
festival of victory which the entire Republic will celebrate 
on the 10th of Prairial. 

The Directory deems it superfluous to repeat to-day what 
it has said to you in its last despatches, concerning the 
necessity of watching all the movements of Beaulieu and 
not losing sight of him for a single moment. If you are 
apprehensive that he will receive reinforcements, attack 
him before they join him, and neglect nothing to prevent 
that junction. The enemy must not be allowed time to 
recruit himself; we must not weaken ourselves in his pre- 
sence, and, above all, not furnish him, by a disastrous fritter- 
ing away of our force, with the means of beating us in 
detail and recovering the ground that he has lost. 

The separation of the army of Italy into two parts must 
not take place till Beaulieu is absolutely incapable of un- 
dertaking anything. Your first object therefore, general, 
is to destroy his army and to disperse it entirely: it would 
take advantage of the moments of rest which you should 
grant it to recover from the terror which the arms of the 
Republic have struck into it, and it would soon try to 
become daring. 

Defer the expedition to Leghorn, Rome, and Naples, till 
what you conceive to be a favourable moment ; but Tet it be 
rapid, and let its complete success, especially against the 
English, permit Sie speedy return to make head against 
the troops which the court of Vienna might be able to 
send, 

You appear desirous, citizen-general, to continue to 
conduct the whole series of the military operations of the 
present campaign in Italy. The Directory has maturely 
considered of this proposition, and the confidence which wt 
has in your talents and your republican zeal have decided 
this question in favour of the affirmative. The General-in- 
Chief Kellermann will remain at Chambery, and merely 
attend to the occupation of the places that are to be given 
up to us by the treaty of peace. The army of Italy will 
continue to keep garrison in those which it entered in virtue 
of the armistice, as well as in Valenza or Alexandria, 
which that treaty grants us provisionally. 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 123 


The expedition to Leghorn is the first thing to be under- 
taken after the defeat of Beaulieu: the Directory has 
explained the reasons in its late despatches ; it leaves to you 
the choice of the time and of the means of execution, and 
it will learn, with warm satisfaction, the news of this triumph 
over the perfidious English. 

The rest of the military operations towards Germany and 
in the Mantuan are absolutely dependent on your success 
against Beaulieu. The Directory is sensible how difficult it 
would be to direct them from Paris ; on this point, there- 
fore, it leaves you the greatest latitude, recommending to 
you extreme prudence. Its decided intention, however, is 
that the army should not proceed beyond the Tyrol till 
after the expedition to the south of Italy. 

Carnot. 


The Executive Directory to the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 


Paris, 3 Prairial, year 4 [May 22, 1796]. 
The Directory sends you, citizen-general, twelve swords 
destined for the officers who have distinguished themselves 
in the passage of the Po and the battle of Lodi, as well 
as in the actions which took place previously. You will 
find the names of the officers annexed. The Directory 
requests you to deliver publicly these testimonies of the 

satisfaction that it has felt at their conduct. 
CaRNOT. 


To the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 


Head-quarters, Crema, 5 Prairial, year 4 [May 24, 1796]. 

On my arrival at Crema, I set out immediately for Son- 
cino, where I found the advanced guard. I then proceeded 
to the Oglio, where there is no bridge, nor even a boat, the 
little one which was there having been sunk. This river is 
very inconsiderable at this season ; it is about twenty 
fathoms wide at most, and is fordable in several places, 
especially at the passage of Soncino, where the water reaches 
no higher than a man’s knees in the deepest parts. I 
ordered General Kilmaine to get a small bridge upon 
trestles constructed in the night, that the infantry might 
on the morrow d valid I sent him twenty louis 

or the construction of this bridge, not having received the 


124 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


twenty-five which # ie had directed General Dallemagne to 
give him: he told me that Augereau and Serrurier had 
arrived in their new positions. I have given orders to 
generals Massena, Augereau, Serrurier, and Kilmaine, to 
execute the movement which you have directed, in order 
that the divisions of the army may take.a position at 
Brescia. 

The scouts have been as far as two ae in advance of 
Soncino, and not met with the enemy. All accounts agree 
in stating that he has his advanced posts between the 
Mincio and the Chiesa, at Castiglione delle Stiviere, with 
about 1200 horse. The body of the army is encamped, 
it is said, behind the Mincio. 

On my return, I met with an adjutant of the staff, who 
brought me your orders in pencil to march off in the night 
for Milan two regiments of horse, two battalions of the 
21st, a battalion of grenadiers, and four pieces of light 
artillery, which I hope will reach you before daylight. 

I did think that on account of these movements the 
march of the divisions for Brescia ought to be suspended : 
but, having closely examined your pencil-notes, and found 
nothing to that effect, I have made no change in your dispo- 
sitions, and the troops will execute the general movement 
which you have ordered on Brescia. If this was an over- 
sight on your part, be pleased to send me a courier, and I 
will stop the troops upon march. Till the receipt of your 
orders, the troops, I apprize you, will execute the move- 
ment that you have directed. 

I am much grieved at the disturbances which have taken 
place at Pavia, but I hope that you will do strict justice, 
and that the example will serve to prevent any other insur- 
rection, and to intimidate the nobles and the priests. 

A. BERTHIER.' 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Pavia, 5 Floreal, year 4 [April 24, 1796]. 
I, the undersigned, divisionary general of the armies of 
the French Republic, certify that, being yesterday on my 
be to Pavia and thence to head-quarters, whither I had 
orders to repair, and having with me an aide-de-camp, citizen 


1 General Alexandre Berthier, then chief of the staff of the army, after- 
wards prince of Neufchatel. 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 125 


Dutaillis, aide-de-camp of General Berthier, a chief of 
battalion, and another officer, we remarked the terrified 
looks of the persons we met coming from Pavia: we heard 
the aecabhall ring, and several musket-shots fired, and a 
peasant told us that the enemy was in the city; that, not 
believing this news, but not suspecting that there was any 
disturbance, we continued to advance towards the city, 
where we were persuaded that the division of General Au- 

ereau still was; that, on reaching the gates, we were not a 

ittle surprised not to find there either posts or sentinels, 
and to see consternation upon every countenance; that, on 
arriving in the Place of the municipality, we there found a 
great number of men armed with muskets, pistols, swords, 
&c., and many country-people, with arms and tools of all 
kinds ; that a considerable party of volunteers on the steps 
of the Town-house called out to us, that the people had dis- 
armed all the posts and wanted to kill them ; that, thinking 
to overawe this assemblage, I advanced on horseback ; that 
those who had retired on our arrival again making their ap- 
pearance and aiming at us on all sides, with frightful 


- shouts, I thought it advisable to alight; that, no sooner 


had the other officers and myself set foot on the ground, 
than the people seized all our horses; that we found the 
commandant of the place, who assured us that the concourse 
was immense; that I ordered him to go to the castle, to 
send out strong patroles, and to try all means for restoring 
order ; that, having endeavoured to execute this order, he 
found it impossible ; that, meanwhile, the people, with loud 
shouts, furiously demanded the disarming of the garrison, 
marten to respect it and to disperse as soon as it had de- 
ivered up its arms; that for two hours I refused to accede 
to this proposal; that, at length; the furious populace 
broke into the Town-house, entered the room where I was, 
and dragged me from it; that the municipal officers who 
were about me covered me with their bodies ; that, unable 
to prevent my being dragged to the Place, they kept by 
me, and exerted all their efforts to restrain the people, some 
of whom rushed upon me, while others took aim at me, and’ 
at length, thanks to their interference, I came off with a 
wound from a bayonet between the shoulders, which, though 
it well nigh prostrated me, did not enter far; that, led by 
the people from street to street, these municipal officers never 
left me for a moment; that, during this time, their col- 


ees 


126 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


leagues placed in safety the guard which had been disarmed, 
and the officers who had come with me, and provided for 
their wants ; that others strove to pacify the people, and 
had recourse for that purpose to persuasion, which was the 
only means they had, since they had not a single armed 
man at their disposal ; that, not having succeeded in making 
the people listen to reason, they did contrive by great exer- 
tions to save us all from their fury; that to their anxious 
care we are indebted for our lives; that in every respect 
their conduct has been that of good magistrates, sf 
men, in whom crime excites abhorrence, and who, from the 
impulse of their hearts, have done every thing in the world 
to render us service, and exposed themselves to the danger 
of perishing with us. 

n faith of which, I have delivered to them these presents. 

Haquin. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Head-quarters, Crema, 6 Prairial, year 4 [May 25, 1796]. 

I have just received, general, your letter of the 6th 
Prairial, and am glad to see that tranquillity is restored in 
Milan. The example which you have made on the way to 
Pavia will intimidate the evil-disposed. Pavia appears even 
to deserve extremely rigorous measures. ‘The army ex- 
pects from your energy and your wisdom the dispositions 
necessary to make us respected, but it wishes for you with 
sie eT 

think, for my own part, that it is very necessary for 
you to my tre to the army, which is near the enemy. All 
that part between Cremona and the position now occupied 
by General Serrurier uncovers our right, but, as the enemy 
is on the defensive, we ought not to presume that he is 
seeking to attack us. I have, therefore, given General 
Serrurier all the instructions necessary to keep him from 
compromising himself. 

Hereto I annex an extract of the dispositions that I have 
ordered: you will there see that the army is collected into 
a space of eight or nine miles, from left to right, but this 
ona can be but momentary, and your presence is abso- 
utely necessary to determine our march upon the enemy. 
I have found the head-quarters, remaining at Crema, too 
far in the rear of Brescia; I am moving them to Soncino, 


| 
1 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 127 


where we expect you this evening. I shall go forward my- 
self, and take care to apprize you of all the news I receive 
of the enemy. 
I have left the paymaster and the park of artillery at 
Crema till your arrival. 
AL. BERTHIER. 


Extracts of the Orders given for the Execution of the Move- 
ment directed by the General-in-Chief. 


Crema, 6 Prairial, year 4 [May 25, 1796]. 

Orders were given yesterday to General Kilmaine to set 
out very early this morning with all the troops of the ad- 
vanced guard from the position which he occupied at 
Soncino, for the purpose of taking a new one at Brescia, 
where he will arrive to-day; that general is informed of 
the movements prescribed to generals Massena, Augereau, 
and Serrurier. 

General Massena received orders yesterday to set out 
very early in the morning of to-day, the 6th Prairial, from 
the position which he way FF at Ofelingo, with all the 
troops under his command, for the purpose of taking to-day 
a new one at Casale, about four miles in rear of Brescia, on 
the road to Soncino: he is informed of the movements 
which the advanced guard and generals Kilmaine, Augereau, 
and Serrurier have orders to make ; he will cross the Oglio 
at Soncino. 

General Augereau received orders yesterday to set out 
very early in the morning of to-day, with all the troops 
under his command, from the position which he occupied at 
Fontanella, and to proceed to Paitella, four miles in rear of 
Brescia, on the road to Bergamo : it is believed that he can 

ss through Castrenala. If he cannot cross the Oglio at 

ontanella, his orders direct him to come and cross at 
Soncino: he is informed of the movements which the ad- 
vanced guard and the divisions of generals Massena and 
Serrurier are to make. 

Orders were yesterday despatched to General Serrurier 
to set out very early this morning from the position which 
he occupied at Butana, with all the troops under his com- 
mand, and to take a new position in rear of the Molla, 
having Bagnolo in advance of him, and Cuisanella in rear 
of his left. If he can cross the Oglio at Bordanula, he will 


$n 


128 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


follow the road to Padernello and Della; and, if he cannot 
cross it at that place, he will come and cross at Soncino, and 
thence proceed to the position specified above: he is in- 
formed of the movements prescribed to generals Kilmaine, 
Massena, and Augereau. 

Two battalions of the 21st demi-brigade set out yesterday 
evening for Milan, as did also the 20th regiment of dragoons, 
and the 24th regiment of horse-chasseurs. 

The head-quarters break up this evening for Soncino. 

AL. BERTHIER. 


To the General-in-Ohie. 


Head-quarters, Soncino, 7 Prairial, year 4 [May 26, 1796}. 

Since the arrival of your aide-de-camp, Lemarois, I have 
heard nothing whatever from you, and it is now twenty-four 
hours since he left you. e are all extremely uneasy at 
this silence, and the more so because your presence appears 
to me indispensable here on all accounts, both military and 
administrative. 

At ten o’clock last night, I had not received intelligence of 
the arrival of the troops at the position which they are to occupy 
on the Brescia. A letter has this moment reached me from 
citizen Faultrier, who is staying at Crema till further orders, 
who writes that a citizen from Lodi, an inhabitant of that 
town, had informed him that there existed at Lodi an 
assemblage of five or six thousand peasants against the 
French, but that, this man not having given his name, 
and he himself thinking that he had no right to order him 
to be arrested in a neutral country, the report might be 
considered as extremely vague, especially since no other 
advice of it had reached Crema. But, sensible of the im- 
portance of ascertaining the truth, at eleven o'clock at 
night, I despatched Adjutant-General Boyer, with his 
assistants, with orders to repair first to Crema and then to 
Lodi, to make the most minute inquiries into the state of 
things ; and, in case the insurrection should prove true, to 
acquaint me with it, and himself cross the Adda, either 
above or below Lodi, to rejoin you and communicate to you 
all he had learned. 

At five this morning, I received a letter from Adjutant- 
General Boyer, dated Crema, in which he informs me that 
they have there no intelligence of any movement at Lodi; 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 129 


but that he is pursuing his course to that town, to fulfil 
completely the instructions which I have given him. It is 
now nine in the morning, and I have no news as yet from 
Lodi, which makes me presume that all is quiet. 

At six this morning I received a letter from General 

Kilmaine, who acquaints me that at eight yesterday evening 
he reached Brescia, where his troops arrived extremely fa- 
tigued, as well by the heat as by the length of the march, 
and owing to the new shoes which his men had received. 
The only intelligence that he could obtain respecting the 
enemy is, that there is a considerable a of cavalry at 
Castiglione: he informs me that he shall have a recon- 
naissance made this morning, and that he hopes to receive 
more certain tidings. Generals Massena and Augereau 
likewise send me word that they have arrived in the posi- 
tions specified to them, four miles in the rear of Brescia ; 
the first on the road from that town to Soncino ; the second 
on the road from that same town to Bergamo. 
. Respecting General Serrurier, who ought to be on the 
right of Massena, I have no sort of intelligence. The latter 
informs me that he thought yesterday evening that he 
beard cannon on his right; but I should imagine that if 
General Serrurier had been aware that the enemy was so 
near, he would have apprized us of it at head-quarters. I 
sent off to him yesterday an adjutant, from whom I have 
no tidings, and who was to return hither after he had seen 
General Massena. I am going to despatch a second, to . 
endeavour to learn what is become of him. Being likely to 
receive, from one moment to another, either orders fom 
you or news from the divisions, I have thought it right 
not to leave the oe crepe 

I repeat, general, that I think your presence here ex- 
tremely important. For the rest, citizen Lemarois, your 
aide-de-camp, will supply all that is deficient in this letter. 

AL. BERTHIER, 

PS. I open my letter, general, to inform you, that the 
adjutant i tan I sent to ascertain the position of General 
Serrurier has this moment arrived: he reports that this 

neral has taken a position at Guizanella, in rear of Mello, 
our or five miles on the right of General Massena: he has 
not received any direct news of the enemy. On leaving 
Cremona, he received a flag of truce, bringing a packet for 
me, relative to the exchange of prisoners. 

VOL. I. K 


130 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


_ The Oglio having risen a foot, which renders it less ford- 
able, I have salad a bridge fit for the passage of infantry 
to. be immediately constructed. Your four divisions, in- 

‘eluding the advanced guard, form at present 27,700 men 
under arms, infantry and cavalry, concentrated in rear. of 
Brescia, in a space of ten or twelve miles. 
el AL. BERTHIER. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Pavia, 9 Prairial, year 4 [May 28, 1796]. 

Order, tranquillity, and even confidence, begin to be 
restored in Pavia and its environs. 

Five hundred and fifty men of the garrison of Tortona 
have arrived here. They had at their head Adjutant- 
General Gillyvieux. Aat was alone here, I have kept him 
with me. These troops have not brought the two pieces of 
cannon which you ordered to be sent hither from Porta 
I have written to the commandant of artillery at Lodi, 
requesting him to complete promptly what is deficient here 
for the service of the two pieces of cannon which you have 
left me, and also to send me immediately two caissons of 
eartridges, the troops having none but what are in their 
cartouche-boxes ; to send me, moreover, two 8-pounders 
and their caissons ; and, lastly, all the supplies necessary 
for the service of four pieces of cannon and a garrison of 
2000 men, for a month. I beg you, general, to a" pleased 
to order this application to be complied with ; that is to say, 
if you approve it. I have desired, in the most express 
manner, the commissary of war to supply the fort, without 
the slightest delay, with provisions and all other necessaries 
for a garrison of 2000 men for a month. 

Nothing has come hither but the third battalion of the 
84th demi-brigade, which has gone again for Milan. 1 
haye left. me here the 14th demi-brigade, the 51st, the 
46th, 210 horse, 30 artillerymen, and the old garrison of 
Pavia, forming as yet but a small corps: the disarming of 
the city has produced more fowling-pieces than muskets, 
and then these are in great part Austrian. The people 
have disarmed with a good grace, and I believe too with 
geet faith. A great number of villages have already laid 

own their arms, and they are successively arriving. I 
have circulated throughout the whole. province a proclama- 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 131 


tion, which will no doubt produce the desired effect. French 
arms must be expected to come in’ from the villages, for it 
was their inhabitants who disarmed our troops. As soon 
as those belonging to the old garrison are armed, I shall 
send them, according to your orders, to their respective 


corps. 

Citizen Ponge, commandant of engineers, is engaged in 
constructing bridges over the Gravelonne and the Po: he 
represented to me that he was alone here, that he had need 
of some one to assist him, and earnestly intreated me to 
keep here citizen Bouchu, captain of artillery, attached to 
the equipage of bridges, till the bridges are finished. I 
have thought it right to accede to this request, and ordered 
Captain Bouchu to remain temporarily with citizen Ponge 
till your decision. 

'» The new municipality, chosen by the commissioner of the 
overnment, could not be installed till yesterday afternoon. 
he course of affairs requiring the old one to be left in its 

functions till this moment, it was not put under arrest 

before to-day. Of the eleven members who composed it, 
three left the city before the arrival of the French, the 
eight others are arrested. 

The commissioner of the government and myself have 
thought it right to demand of the new municipality, com- 
posed of patriots, accurate and positive information con- 
eerning the members of the old, to submit this to you, and 


- to wait for a further order, in addition to that which you 


have given me relative to the members of the old munici- 
pality. Be it what it will, it shall be executed on the re- 
eeipt of it: but, general, permit me to implore your cle- 
mency and kindness for men of whom such disadvantageous 
accounts are presented to you ; for aged, feeble men, with- 
out energy, who, unaccustomed to popular commotions, lost 
their presence of mind amidst the fight disorder that 
prevailed here; for men whom I saw addressing the people, 
using ‘towards them’ the only means in their power, per- 
suasion ; for men, in short; who saved the lives, and ren- 
dered all possible assistance to the officers 1 had with me, 
and to more than 150 disarmed volunteers, whom by their 
prudent. measures they rescued from the fury of the people, 
as well as myself. The pillage has ruined tes all. I ean 
assure you, general, that it is not death and terror that 
require to be suspended over Pavia; all within it is fright- 
K 2 


132 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES, 


ful consternation: the lesson which the inhabitants have 
received is awful: all that we have left us to do is to con- 
ciliate them, to gain their confidence ; and by humanity and 
mildness alone shall we succeed. : 

1 invoke with confidence those estimable qualities of your 
heart: follow its impulse, general, and your name will still 
be dear to a people which knows that it has deserved the 
treatment you have inflicted on it. I await your orders 
with inexpressible anxiety. 

The commissioner of the government has transmitted to 
me to-day a list of the persons to be seized as hostages: 
they shall be apprehended to-day, and I shall await your 
orders for sending them to Tortona: none have yet come 
to me from Milan. The commissioner of the government 
finding me violently attacked by fever, and incapable of 
attending to every thing, has required General Serviez to 
remain here. Be pleased, general, to leave me that excel- 
lent officer: I cannot do without him while I am ill. 

Haquin. 


To the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 


Loano, 10 Prairial, year 4 [May 29, 1796]. 
Last night, between twelve and one o’clock, two English 
frigates and a brig appeared off the road of Vado, with the 
intention of securing the flotilla lying in that road. They 
despatched nine boats with troops, and were already within 
half musket-shot, when they were discovered. The com- 
mandant of the troops in the place ordered the drums to 
beat to arms, and in less than seven minutes the artillery- 
men and the infantry were at their posts. Meanwhile the 
Infante brig kept up a brisk fire both of grape and chain- 
shot upon the enemy. The English retired precipitately, 
setting up loud cries, which causes us to presume that they 
have lost a great number of men: three of their boats must 
have been sunk, for we have seen but six this morning.! 
All the troops deserve praise, and particularly the cap- 
tain and crew of the Infante. 
SAURET. 
1 The inferences of the French general relative to our tars and their boats 


may have appeared most conclusive to himself; but an English reader must 
consider them as far more patriotic than logical. 


ils 


_— 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 133 


To the General-in-Chief. 

, Turin, May 29, 1796 [10 Prairial, year 4). 
Having been required by General Kellermann to grant a 
sage Eirough ‘he valley of Suza to a demi-brigade of 

rench troops, and not feeling myself authorized to give an 
answer, it being our intention to allow troops to march only 
through the valley of Aosta and that of Stura, I have 
taken the commands of the king on the subject, who, con- 
sidering the distance which these troops have already tra- 
velled to come towards Lanslebourg, and from his desire 
to satisfy you, has ordered me to prepare every thing for 
their march through the valley of diss; for this time only, 
flattering himself that, out of reciprocity, you will be pleased 
to inform General Kellermann that in future the ordinary 
directions through the valley of Aosta and Stura will be 
given to any se proceeding through Piedmont to Lom- 
bardy. As to the artillery, however, the road of Mont 
Genevre being the most commodious, there is no difficulty 
to prevent you from continuing to prefer it. I doubt not, 
knowing the consideration which you have always had for 
me, that you will believe the accuracy of my representa- 
tion ; and I assure you that I shall never cease, on my 
part, to do on other occasions whatever I can, without pre- 
Judice to his Majesty, for your satisfaction. 

Victor EMMANUEL. 


To the General-in-Chief. 
Tortona, 10 Prairial, year 4 [May 29, 1796). 

Your orders did not reach me till I was at Alba. I am 
a day behind-hand in my march. I shall arrive at Placen- 
tia ou the 13th. The route that we are pursuing is very 
dangerous for stragglers: I have found several who had 
been murdered ; but it is the convoys of ammunition that 
run the greatest risk. Owing to the weakness of the gar- 
risons, these escorts are but small, so that this ammunition 
is liable to fall into the hands of the gangs of banditti, 
and to increase their means. 

The rebels of Arquata having taken 123 volunteers, and 
made prize of a sum of 100,000 frances, General Meinier, 
agreeably to the advice of a council of war, desired me to 
let him have 1600 men of the column under the command 


134 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


of General Vallette for a nocturnal expedition. I thought 


. it right to comply with this requisition of urgency, and am 


proceeding to my destination with 3000 men, and the sur- 
plus of General Vallette’s column. If you have to employ 
us immediately, we will do our best to prevent your missing 
the 1600 men, who are likely to be absent for a few days. 

V AvBols. 


To the General-in-Chief. 

Castel Novo, 11 Prairial, year 4 [May 30, 1796}... 

The enemy has evacuated Castel Novo, and is in full 
retreat. J am taking the cavalry of the advanced guard, 
and four pieces of light artillery, to pursue him. The in- 
fantry of the advanced guard has orders to follow, with the 
rest of the light artillery. This evening I shall have the 
honour to give you an account of my luck. I cannot send 
you a circumstantial detail of the affair of Borghetto, being 
too much pressed ; but, meanwhile, I cannot refrain from 
assuring you that the chief of brigade Leclere, of the 10th 
regiment of chasseurs, has particularly distinguished him- 
self. It was he who, at the head of some chasseurs, decided 
the rout of the enemy by one of the most vigorous charges 
that I have ever seen. General.Gardanne was the first 
who passed the river at the head of some grenadiers, upsto 
the shoulders in water. General Murat made a superb 
charge at the head of the 10th regiment of hussars. It was 
he who decided the second rout of the enemy. 
KILMAINE, 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Turin, June 1, 1796 [13 Prairial, year 4]. 

I inform you that peasants of the province of Alba, irri- 
tated by the vexations of one Bonnafous and his adherents, 
and by the violence which he has sought to do to their prin- 
ciples, have ventured to seize him in the territory of the 
French demarcation, without having received the least order 
or the least Sa on the part of the government ; and 
they have brought him to Turin. 

The king, my brother, considering his apprehension as 
illegal, sinee Castion, the place where he was arrested, has 
not yet reverted under his authority, has ordered him to be 


a. 2 a, 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 135 


taken back to the limits of the demarcation and set at 
liberty. 
He doubts not that, in reciprocity for this proceeding, 
and to avert also the disagreeable circumstances that may 
arise from. the vexations experienced by the peasants of 
some provinces of the demarcation from the underhand 
dealings of Bonnafous and adherents, you will be pleased to 
issue strict orders for putting an end to them; and the 
wee hopes at the same time that this affair will have no 
unpleasant consequences for the inhabitants of the village 
of Castion. 
Victor EMMANUEL. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Pavia, 12 Prairial, year 4 [May 31, 1796]. 

Quiet and tranquillity are perfectly restored in Pavia ; 
great harmony prevails here between the troops and the 
inhabitants. The latter, most of whom are reduced to 
poverty, attribute the cause of their misfortune to the 
country people: the latter may have been instigated ; but 
it is certain, and I can attest from having seen it, that it 
was they in fact who occasioned the disorder and kept up 
the insurrection in Pavia. Be this as it may, the inha- 
bitants of both city and country are so terrified at the con- 
sequences of their conduct, that it will be long before they 
think of beginning again. The disarming of the city is 
finished, and I have no doubt that it has been done in good 
faith. That of the country must likewise have been effected. 
The villages have made their submission; the arms of a 
great number of communes have already arrived here ; it is 
only the most distant that have not yet been able to bring 
them to Pavia; but the business will be completed to-day 
or to-morrow. I await your orders to declare that the just 
severity which you have been obliged to exercise is about to 
give place to pardon and clemency. ' 

Yesterday, two 6-pounders, with artillerymen and the 
ammunition necessary for their service, arrived here: they 
are in battery in the fort. Infantry cartridges have not been 
sent; yet I am in want of them, and I have just written to 
General Meinier, to beg him to send me some without delay. 
As to the provisioning of the fort.and the garrison with 
ammunition, I request you to order the director of the 


136 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


park of artillery of the army to supply it. There are two 
6-pounders, and a five inchand a half howitzer : the garrison 
will consist of 2000 men. The provisioning with articles of 
consumption will be completely finished to-day. The com- 
mandant of engineers has assured me that the bridge over 
the Gravelonne will be finished to-day, and that over the 
Po in a very few days. 
HaqQuin. 


To the General-in-Chief. 
Castiglione di Mantouano, 14 Prairial, year 4 [June 2, 1796]. 

I have just made a reconnaissance to the very walls of 
Mantua. I stopped there for a good quarter of an hour, 
without perceiving any movement on the part of the enemy : 
I met nothing by the way but a patrole of four horse, which 
took to flight at sight of my tirailleurs. I think it urgent 
to remove my advanced guard to Boucouli, where the road 
branches off to Roverbello; but I cannot make this move- 
ment without cavalry : I beg you to order some to be placed 
at my disposal. 

AUGEREAU, 


To M. le Duc d@ Aoste. 


Head-quarters, Roverbello, 15 Prairial, year 4 (June 3, 1796]. 

I have received your courier, sir. The conduct of the 
king, on occasion of M. Bonnafier,' is worthy of him. 

I shall take measures in order that, during the short time 
the police of Alba will belong to the army, no disturbance 
may be committed; but I hope that we shall accelerate as 
much as possible the moment of the execution of the treaty, 
that we may witness the consolidation of that peace which 
is Beieeturth to unite the two powers. 

I have ordered the commandant of the fortress of Alba to 
release several private individuals, subjects of the king, who 
had been arrested, by what kind of reprisals I cannot ex- 
actly say. 

I flatter myself Nb are persuaded that I shall not forget 
anything that can be agreeable to you, earn me your esteem, 
and convince you of the sentiments of consideration, &c. 

BONAPARTE. 


1 Evidently the person called in preceding letters Bonnafons and Bonnafous. 


tw 


ae ere oe a 


= 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 137 


To the General-in-Chief. 
Venice, 15 Prairial, year 4 [June 3, 1796]. 

Receive my congratulations on your glorious entry into 
the Venetian territory. I calculate, if I am as well as at 
present, to bring you them in person on Monday. 

I learn this moment that the archduke, lately governor 
of Lombardy, who, according to report, had fled from Venice, 
not thinking himself in safety there, has just set out with 
all his treasures. Part of his equipages are at Mestre, and 
are about to proceed to Carinthia by way of Treviso. He 
takes that road himself. The rest are put on board lighters 
to be conveyed on the canals to the port of Caurlo: these 
barks will ascend the Limene to the port of Gruaro, which 
is the place of rendezvous. It will take four days at least 
before this convoy can start for Gorrizia. From Bassano 
to this rendezvous of Gruaro there is about twenty leagues 
of very fine road through Castel Franco, Oberzo, and Molta: 
you know, general, how to go from Verona to Caste) Franco 
and from Verona to Bassano, and you will make what use 
you think proper of this information. 

A Ragusan captain, who left Trieste three days ago, has 
told me that, during his quarantine, he saw seven or eight 
of the barks despatched for the Po return and land 700 
men, to whom the Venetians had refused a passage upon the 
Polesino, as they did to the first whom I mentioned to you, 
and to whom the pope has just refused the same by the 
Mesola. Others were expected. 

This report, made to me very innocently, and without 
any questions on my part, has all the character of truth. 
This same captain told me that the departure of all vessels 
from Trieste was suspended on the news that there were 
French cruisers in the gulf. He saw the last French galley 
at Ragusa, and believes it to be off Ancona. 

Last week, I received orders from the government to 
recognize as Frenchmen worthy of the protection of the 
Mepnblic such only as will constantly wear the national 
coekade, and never appear before me without it. There are 
only five or six here; three of them have been settled 
twenty years at Venice, but they are es Frenchmen and 
determined to continue so. I notified the order to them, 
and they immediately obeyed ; but this morning Messieurs 


138 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


the Inquisitors of State sent their fante to citizens Barbette, 
clockmaker, and Pinot, dentist, who demanded their cock- 
ades and brought them away. I am drawing up a remon- 
strance to the senate: it shall be energetic, and I shall, no 
doubt, have an answer to-morrow. I dare say you will think 
proper to speak to M. Foscarini about it, as an insult to 
the nation, and for which we require satisfaction. 
LALLEMANT. 


The Executive Directory to General Bonaparte, Commander- 
in- Chief of the Army of Italy. 

; j Paris, 12 Prairial, year 4 [May 31, 1796]. 

Your despatches of the 28th and 29th Floreal and 3rd 
Prairial have reached the Directory, citizen-general. It had 
foreseen that the conquest of all Lombardy would be a glo- 
rious and necessary consequence of the skilful passage of the 
Po at Placentia, and the heroic passage of the Adda at 
Lodi; and it sees with ever stedfast satisfaction that: yow 
have gathered the fruits of vietory by marching to fresh 
successes. Its inteution is conformable to the course which 
you have adopted ; not to leave the enemy much breathing 
time in Mantua: to defer the entire defeat of a vanquished 
enemy is compromising the final issue. This principle 
ought to be strictly observed, for it is perfectly analogous to 
the national character, and particularly applicable to. the 
theatre of the war in Italy. The reinforcements received by 
Beaulieu will not relieve his troops from the sense of their 
inferiority ; you will force them in their new positions, and 
you will pursue the wrecks of them into the gorges of the 
mountains, whence they must be deprived of all hope of 
issuing, while part of your forces shall go to impose the 
laws of the Republic in Southern Italy. ti 
Herewith you will receive a copy of the letter which the 
Directory is writing to Salicetti. You will there see that 
its wish, conformable with the intention of the laws, is, that 
all acts, such as armistices, war contributions, and the like, 
which concern at once the civil and military authority, shall 
be signed by the generals-in-chief and by the commissioners 
of the government. | You will see, moreover, that the mea~ 
sures which you have taken in regard to the internal admi- 
nistration of the Milanese are approved. sob 
As to the question which you ask respecting the political 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES, 139 


state of that country, before the Directory can give a defi- 
| nitive answer, it must wait till the aceounts you give of the 
dispositions of the inhabitants enable it to judge whether 
those people are susceptible of independence. Meanwhile, 
direct their opinion towards liberty, bearing in mind that 
the fate of these States depends on the conditions of peace 
with the emperor, on our successes on the Rhine, on the 
essential conditions of our treaty with the Duke of Parma, 
and on the part that Spain shall take in it. ont + 
» Watch also over the proceedings of the authorities which 
you have retained or created, and the secret intrigues of 
those which you have suppressed. 
The Directory approves the remittance which Bs pro- 
ose to make of a million to the armies on the Rhine: it 
thinks that this trait of generous fraternity on the part 
of the army of Italy will produce the happiest effects 
among them, They open their campaign to-day, and 
are going to commence a daring plan of offensive, which 
will make the emperor repent his rupture of the armistice, 
and slacken his impotent efforts to repair his losses in 
Italy. ‘ 
Ten battalions of the army of the Coasts of the Ocean have 
orders to join you. They will march by way of Chamberi. 
We expect to receive in a few days the courier who will 
bring us intelligence of new successes on the Mincio and 
the fall of the citadel of Milan. Rely with confidence on 
| that which we owe you by so many honourable titles, and 
maintain, citizen-general, the salutary harmony which pre- 
vails between citizen Salicetti and you, and in which we 
feel strongly interested. 
CARNOT. 


The Executive Directory to General Bonaparte. 


Paris, 16 Prairial, year 4 (June 4, 1796]. 

It appears, citizen-general, that, while the peace has been 
negociating with the King of Sardinia, they have learned at 
Turin that this:peace would afford to the patriots of Pied- 
mont a guarantee for their future tranquillity: in revenge 
for the efforts which some of them have made for liberty, 
the government has hastened: to deliver them up to the 
executioners before the ratification of that peace. The terror 
struck by the brave army of Italy into the courts of Rome 


120 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


and Naples seems to produce the same horrors in the south 
of Italy, and the prisons in which languish men whose ouly 
crime is that they have thought of vindicating their rights 
are emptied by similar executions. 

The intention of the Directory is that you notify imme- 
diately to the petty princes of Italy that they must put a 
stop to these atrocities, and that they shall answer for all 
the blood which they cause to be wsdl 

The prohibition to persecute the Italian patriots must be 
introduced as a necessary clause in all armistices that shall 


be concluded by the commissioners of the government with’ 


the army of Italy and by you. 
CaRNoT.” 


The Executive Directory to the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 


Paris, 18 Prairial, year 4 [June 6, 1796). 
The minister at war, citizen-general, has made observa- 
tions on the small number of troops at present in garrison 
at Toulon. The Directory begs you not to lose sight of 
that important place, and to keep up constantly there the 
force necessary for its defence. 
CARNOT. 


The Executive Directory to the General-in-Chief of the 
Army of Italy. 
Paris, 23 Prairial, year 4 [June 11, 1796]. 

The new successes which you report, citizen-general, to 
the Executive Directory in your despatch of the 17th, seem 
to crown the glory of the army of Italy, but it has still to 
acquire that of preserving those conquests: it will not be 
either less brilliant or less useful to the Republic, and it is 
equally reserved for the genius which has directed such 
<a) operations and the courage which has executed 
them. 

After you have expelled all the remnants of the Austrian 
army from Lombardy, you will guard, no doubt, all the 
outlets with the means of force and the precautions neces- 
sary for interdicting to Beaulieu all access to it, notwith- 
standing the reinforcements which he is receiving, or which 
he is to receive in Tyrol. The armistices which are about 
to be concluded with the Prince of Rome and the King of 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 141 


Naples, by leaving at your disposal the forces that were 

destined to march against them, will give great latitude to 

your dispositions for at once enabling the French to retain 

quiet possession of the Milanese, and for preventing the 

ravages of the dog-days. The Leghorn expedition must 

not be neglected, but undertaken only when you shall think 

the occasion favourable. The first of your considerations 

is to keep a vigilant eye on the enterprises of an enemy, 

who will set everything at work to repair his losses. The 

glorious opening of the campaign on the Rhine will strike new 

| consternation into Austria and operate a powerful diversion 

in your favour : the left of the army of the Sambre and Meuse 

has beaten on the left bank of the Rhine the corps of the 

Duke of Wirtemberg in two important actions at Ukerath 

and Altenkirchen. A corps of more than 30,000 men, 

under the command of the brave General Kleber, formed of 

the left and part of the centre of General Jourdan’s army, 

| is advancing at a rapid rate along the Lahn, and perhaps 

the entire army commanded by the latter will soon march 

for the Mayn; that of the Rhine and Moselle is preparing 

to act on its part by combined movements, the object of 

which is to transfer immediately the theatre of the war to 
the other side of the Rhine. 

The minister of the finances is about to profit by the 
notice which you have given of six millions at the disposal 
of the government. It would be desirable to know with 

recision where and in what hands that sum is, and if it 
includes the four millions mentioned in your preceding 
letters. The Directory has given orders for the escort on 
this side of Lyons of the two millions that are on the 
road. 
The noble Quirini, envoy of Venice, has transmitted a 
complaint of the licentiousness of the French troops in the 
Bressan : you will find a copy of it annexed, and you will be 
aware of the necessity of repressing these disorders, if they 
have really taken place. s for the Senate of Venice, it 
will not be amiss to act towards it with firmness. 

The sharp and severe measures which you have taken 
to quell the insurrection of the inhabitants of the Mila- 
nese were necessary : the laws of war and the safety of the 
army will always render them legitimate under such cir- 
cumstances. 

You will see in our despatch to citizen Salicetti what 


142 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


are our intentions ‘relative to the proposals made to you on 
the part of Rome and Naples: it would be — - 
repeat the contents of it here. 

The situation of the southern de lortments has occa- 
sisted the recall of the order given to baaeca Chateauneuf- 
Randon to conduct’ to the army of Italy the two demi- 
brigades formerly destined for you. That general’ will 
retain the command of the 9th military division till the 
return of tranquillity there is insured. | The Directory 
thanks you for the attention which icy have had to send 
horses for its use. i ot 


The Executive Directory to the General-in-Chief Boidiinek 


Paris, 23 Prairial, year 4 [June 11, 1796). 

Congratulate, in the name of the Directory, citizen- 
eek ol the 'grenadiers and carabineers of the advanced 
guard of the army of Italy,: on their gallant conduct at the 
passage of the Mincio.. History will carefully preserve 
the memory of the heroic aets which have shed lustre wt 
them during this campaign. 

» The general of brigade Murat has justified, by soit 
worthy of praise, the choice which the Directory made of 
him to rw ae honourable functions. Assure him, in its 
name, of the satisfaction which it feels in seeing him conti- 
nue-to range himself among the most intrepid defenders of 
the Republic. 

Tell ks chief of brigade Leclere, of the 10th regiment 
of chasseurs, that the Directory has seen him with pleasure 
in the list: of the brave men who distinguished rapeie 
at the battle of Borghetto. 

Cannon. 


The Executive Directory to the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 


Paris, 23 Prairial, year 4 [June 11, 1796]. 

The Executive Directory, in recommending to you by its 
letter of the 27th Floreal to visit and pay attentions to the 
eminent men of science and artists:in the countries where 
you are, made particular mention of the celebrated as- 
tronomer Oriani of Milan, as one who: ought: to ‘be’pro- 
tected and honoured by the republican troops. he 
Directory will learn with satisfaction that you have fulfilled 


ee eae ee. 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 143 


its intention in regard to this distinguished artist, and 
requests you, in consequence, to give it an account of what 
you have done to give citizen Oriani tokens of the interest 
and esteem which the French entertain for him, and to prove 
to: him that they know how to-unite the love of glory and 
liberty with that of the arts and talents. 


CARNOT. 


To the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 


Paris, 23 Prairial, year 4 [June 11, 1796]. 

_ The Directory has received, citizen-general, your letter 
of the 13th; by which you inform it that two millions in 
gold, being part of the contributions levied in the lately 
conquered countries, are on the way by post to Lyons, 
whence they are to proceed to Paris, their destination. 
The Directory has desired General. Kellermann to make 
all the dispositions necessary for the safety of these funds. 
The Directory has already requested you to transmit one 
million to the army of the Rhine and Moselle. As for 
the 200,000. livres destined for General Kellermann and 
the 10,000 which he has already received, that sum. shall 
remain at his disposal. 

The minister of the finances is authorised to draw upon 
Genoa to the amount of ten millions arising from contribu- 
tions in the enemy’s country. In these ten millions are 
included the sums which he has already expended, the two 
millions forwarded by you to Lyons; the funds sent to M. 
Balbi at. Genoa, under the superintendence of Faipoult, the 
enyoy ; and the produce of the jewels, diamonds, plate, 
&e. sent to Tortona. 

rae CARNOT. 


To the Minister of the Republic at Venice. 


Head-quarters, Roverbello, 16 Prairial, year 4 [June 4, 1796]. 

The senate has sent to me two sages of the council : it 
is necessary that you express to them the displeasure of the 
Republic, because Peschiera has been delivered to the Aus- 
trians. French blood has been spilt in retaking it. We 
must not, however, fall out with a Republic, whose alliance 
is useful to us. 

I spoke to the sages about the national cockade. I think 


144 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


you ought strongly to insist that all the French should wear 

it, and that reparation must be made for the injury that has 

been done. Inform me regularly of the minutest particu- 

lars. I am just setting out for Milan. Let me hear from 

ou there. Do not leave me in the dark as to what Beau- 

lion is about, and the movement of troops in Bavaria. 
BONAPARTE. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Ceresa, 17 Prairial, year 4 [June 5, 1796]. 

I arrived here at seven in the morning: the advanced 
posts of the enemy occupied the village; they retired ow 
our approach. My infantry not having arrived, I was 
obliged to wait before attacking. The Austrians were en- 
trenched behind two bridges, which they had broken down. 
Three pieces of cannon defended the approaches: the gate was 
closed, and the enemy, shut up in an embattled tower which is 
above it, kept up a very brisk fire. As soon as my infantry 
and artillery arrived, I gave orders for the attack, which was 
made with the greatest bravery. The artillery, directed by 
the chief of battalion Andreossi, rendered the greatest 

‘ service ; the briskness of our fire obliged the enemy to be- 
take himself to flight. Unluckily, the inundations on the 
one hand, and the breaking down of the bridges on the 
other, prevented our pursuit. We were obliged to bring 

i cannon to break open the a meanwhile, he was 

already in the place. I immediately had the bridges re- 
paired, and have just sent an eight-pounder with a strong 
detachment to interrupt the breaking up of the road, which 
the enemy is at work upon. At the same time, I have sent 
out a reconnoissance towards the Stradella gate, which we 

are within gun-shot of. The enemy is constructing a 

redoubt there; but I will take care to prevent him from 
finishing it. We have firm ground on both sides, and are 
beyond the reach of the inundations. 

AUGEREAU. | 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Verona, 17 Prairial, year 4 [June 5, 1796]. 
The proveditor has just sent me word that 2000 men 
have arrived at Rocoara, aud that more are expected : it is 


a 


(ae ae 5 
, > 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 145 


believed that others will descend by the Astico and the 
Brenta, which causes some credit to be given to the last 
news, namely that the enemy is seriously: engaged in re- 
pairing the roads. The proveditor has sent me an assurance 
that ‘a should be informed of all the movements of the 
Austrians. 

MASSENA. 


To the Executive Directory. 


Head-quarters, Milan, 19 Prairial, year 4 [June 7, 1796]. 

Annexed you will find a copy of the armistice concluded 
between the two armies, French and. Neapolitan. 

1. We take 2,400 cavalry from the Austrian army, 
and put them into a place where they will be at our 
disposal ; 

2. We take from the English five sail of the line and 
several frigates ; 

3. We continue to break up the coalitions ; 

If you make peace with Naples, the suspension will have 
been useful, inasmuch as it will have weakened at once the 
German army. If, on the contrary, you do not make peace 
with Naples, the suspension will still have been useful, in- 
asmuch as it will enable me to take prisoners the 2,400 
Neapolitan cavalry, and as the King of Naples will have 
taken a step that must displease the coalition. 

This soaae me to consider the military question—Can we 
and ought we to go to Naples ? 

The siege of the castle of Milan, the pec iomt of the 
Milanese, and the garrisons of conquered places, require 
15,000 men ; 

The guarding of the Adige and of the positions of the 
Tyrol, 20,000. 

There remain, including the succours coming from the 
army of the Alps, but 6000 men. 

But, if we had 20,000, it would not be advisable to make 
a march of twenty-five days, in the months of July and 
August, to seek disease and death. Meanwhile, Beaulieu 
would be resting his army in the Tyrol, recruiting it, re- 
inforeing it with succours arriving every day, and would 
retake in autumn what we took from him in spring. By 
means of this armistice with Naples, we are matic to dic- 
tate to Rome what conditions we please: already at this 

VOL. I. L 


146 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


moment the court of Rome is employed in preparing a bull 
against those who preach up civil war in France upon pre- 
text of religion. 

From a conversation which I had this morning with M. 
Azara, minister of Spain, sent by the pope, it appeared 
to me that he had orders to offer us contributions. I 
shall soon be at Bologna. Is it your pleasure that I should 
then accept from the pope, as the price of an armistice, 
twenty-five millions of contributions in cash, five millions 
in kind, 300 pictures, statues and manuscripts in properness 
and that I insist on the release of all patriots confined for 
revolutionary acts? I shall have sufficient time to receive 
_ your orders, since I shall not be at Bologna for these ten or 
fifteen days. Then, if the 6000 men commanded by 
General Chateauneuf-Randon arrive, it. may not be amiss 
to proceed from Bologna to Rome. At any rate, I beg 
you to rest persuaded that, when once you have positively 
acquainted me with your intentions, they must be 
difficult indeed for me not to be able to execute them. 

BoNAPARTE, 


To the Executive Directory. 


Head-quarters, Milan, 19 Prairial, year 4 [June 7, 1796], 

When M. Beaulieu learned that we were marching to 

ass the Mincio, he possessed himself of the fortress of 
Pauiists, which belonged to the Venetians. This fortress, 
situated on the lake of Garda, at the head of the Mincio, 
has a bastioned enclosure, in very good condition, and 
eighty pieces of cannon, which, it is true, are not mounted. 

M. the Proveditor-General, who was at Verona with 
2000 men, might therefore have so managed that this place 

- should not be occupied by the Austrians, who entered with- 
out any kind of resistance, when I had arrived at Brescia, 
that is to say, one day’s march off. 

As soon as I was apprized that the Austrians were at 
Peschiera, I knew that not a moment was to be lost in in- 
yesting the place and depriving the enemy of the means of 
provisioning it. A few days’ delay would have entailed 
upon me a siege of three months. The battle of Borgen 
and the passage of the Mincio put that place into our hands 
two days afterwards. The proveditor came in great haste 
to justify himself: I gave him a very. ill reception. I de- 


vO eee 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 147 


clared that I should march to Venice, to complain in person 
to the senate of such a manifest treachery. While we were 
talking, Massena had orders to enter Verona at whatever 
cost. The alarm at Venice was extreme. The Archduke 
of Milan, who was there, immediately fled to Germany. 

The senate of Venice has just sent to me two sages of the 
council, to ascertain definitively how matters stand. I re- 
peated my complaints to them ; I also referred to the recep- 
tion given to Monsieur; I told them that, for the rest, I 
had given you an account of every thing, and that I knew 
not how you would take the matter: that, when I left Paris, 
you expected to find in the republic of Venice an ally faith- 
ful to principles; that it was not without regret that their 
conduct in regard to Peschiera had obliged me to think 
otherwise ; that, at any rate, I believed that this would be 
astorm which it would be possible for the envoy of the senate 
to lay. Meanwhile, they agree with the best grace to supply 
us with every thing necessary for the army. 

If your plan is to extract five or six sailors from Venice, 
I have purposely provided this sort of rupture for you. 
You might demand it by way of indemnity for the battle of 
Borghetto, which I was obliged to fight in order to take that 
place. If you have more decided intentions, I think you 
ought to keep up this subject of quarrel, inform me of what 
you design to do, and await the favourable moment, 
which I will seize according to circumstances: for we must 
not have all the world upon our hands at once. 

The truth of the affair of Peschiera is, that Beaulieu 
basely deceived them: he demanded a passage for fifty 
men, and made himself master of the town. I am at this 
moment getting Peschiera put intoa state of defence ; and, in 
less than a fortnight, it will require siege artillery and a 


regular siege to take it. 
BoNAPARTE. 


To M. the Prince de Belmonte Pignatelli. 


Head-quarters, Milan, 19 Prairial, year 4 [June 7, 1796}. 
The armistice which we concluded yesterday will be, I 
hope, the preamble to peace. The negociations ought. to 
in as soon as possible ; and then, though the troops are 
long in arriving at their cantonments, I do not conceive that 
this ean be a reason for war, after the order of his majesty 
L2 


148 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES.: 


the King of Naples is received, and the troops are on their 
march for their destination. 
BONAPARTE. 


To Citizen Faipoult at Genoa. 


Head-quarters, Milan, 19 Prairial, year 4 [June 7, 1796]. 

I do not write to you so often as I should wish. I have 
sent you an account of the affair of Borghetto; to-day I 
inform you of the taking of the suburb of St. George at 
Mantua and the investment of that place. 

I came to Milan to put into execution the treaty of peace 
with the King of Sardinia. I beg you to inform me about 
the affairs of Corsica. I calculate upon transmitting to 
Genoa 1500 big hi to be sent thither for. the pur- 
pose of keeping up t 
told that the minister of the emperor at Genoa excites the 
peasants to revolt, and sends them powder and money. If 


this is so, my intention is to have him seized in Genoa 


itself. 
BoNAPARTE. 


To Citizen Lallemant at Venice. 


Head-quarters, Milan, 19 Prairial, year 4 [June 7, 1796]. 
I am glad to see that your discussions have terminated 
in the way they ought to do. 
Let me have regular accounts of the movements of Beau- 


lieu; neglect nothing; send out spies on all sides, to’ 


watch his operations and learn what reinforcements he 
receives. BoNAPARTE, 


To Citizen Carnot. 


Head-quarters, Milan, 20 Prairial, year 4 (June 8, 1796]. 

I owe you my thanks for the obliging things you say to 
me. The most gratifying reward for the fatigues, the 
dangers, the risks, of this profession is to be found in the 
esteem of the small number of persons whom one appreciates. 

By my letter to the Directory, you will see our position. 
If the battalions announced join us in time, it will be easy 
for us to go as far as Rome. Still, as the operations in 
Germany may change our position from one moment to ano- 


e insurrection of the patriots. I am. 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 149 


ther, I think it would be well if the faculty of concluding 
the armistice with Rome were left to me, or to go thither : 
in the first case, to prescribe to me the terms of the armi- 
stice ; in the second, to tell me what I am to do there, for 
our troops could not maintain themselves there long. The 
space is immense, the fanaticism excessive, and the great 
disproportion of strength makes men bold. 

As soon as the inundations are over, I shall be off to 
Leghorn and Bologna. There I shall receive your orders, 
and, if you accept the armistice with Rome, I will conclude it. 
' We shall soon be in July, when every march will put 
200 on the sick list. 

A commissioner of the Directory is come for the con- 
tributions. A million has been despatched to Basle for the 
army of the Rhine. You have eight millions at Genoa; 
you can reckon upon that. Two millions more were going 
off for Paris; but the commissary assured me that it is 
your intention that the whole should go to Genoa. 

‘ I will deserve your esteem ; I beg you to continue your 
friendship to me, and to believe me for life, &e. 
, BONAPARTE. 


To General Clarke. 


Head-quarters, Milan, 20 Prairial, year 4 [June 8, 1796). 

Your young cousin arrived here yesterday ; he appears 
to me active, though yet rather young. I will keep him 
with me: he will soon learn to confront danger and to dis- 
tinguish himself. I hope that he will prove worthy of you, 
and that I-shall have a good account to give you of him. 
1 am glad to do something that is agreeable to you. 

Here all is going on tolerably well ; but the dog-days are 
eoming on at a gallop, and there is no remedy against their 
pernicious influence. Miserable beings that we are, we can 
only observe nature, not overcome it ! 

The campaign of Italy has begun two months too late : 
we find ourselves obliged to remain in the most unwhole- 
some country in Italy. I see but one way of avoiding being 

ten in autumn: that is, to arrange in such a manner 
as not to be obliged to advance into the south of Italy. 

According to all the accounts that are given us, the 
Fre ge is sending a great many troops to his army of 
Italy. We are waiting here with impatience for news from 


150 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


the Rhine. If our army is successful, as I hope, we must 

make the emperor pay for his infatuation: meanwhile, I 

beg you to believe the sentiments of fraternity, &c. 
ONAPARTE. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Alexandria, June 8, 1796 [19 Prairial, year 4]. 

Having been informed that the manifesto issued by you 
on the 9th Prairial last was to be published in all the vil- 
lages of the arrondissement of this city comprised within 
the French line of demarcation, and that the intendant of 
Alexandria was directed to publish it, I have thought it 
my duty to send my aide-de-camp to Tortona, to confer 
on the subject with General Meynier: the precise and abso- 
lute orders contained in the said manifesto have not per- 
mitted him to come to any conclusion upon it. 

It — to me that a law addressed to the Milanese 

ple, ounded on the infraction of the order of the 6th 
Pretrial, unknown to the people of Tortona and Alexandria, 
cannot be deemed binding for the inhabitants of the said 
provinces. I observe also that several of the articles of the 
manifesto, concerning solely what is practised in the Mila- 
nese, cannot apply to us. 

However, the threatening punishments and all the mea- 
sures introduced by the rigour of war would strike alarm, 
consternation, and despair into the bosom of a people that is 
at peace with France, and whose countenance cannot have 
displeased, having submitted to the contributions and 

uisitions as cheerfully as it was possible to do. 

hen you prescribe disarming, is it not to be feared that 
rogues will keep their arms, while honest men give them 
up? Thus, the latter will find themselves incapable of de- 
fending their lives or their properties, of resisting banditti, 
and of contributing with the troops to the public safety. 

The alarm-bell, rung at seasonable times at the order of 
the person who has a right to give it, is also a means of 
public safety. The French army experienced the good 
effects of it at Oviglio and Castelluzzo, as General Meynier 
will have informed you. 

SoLaRi. 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 151 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Roverbello, 19 Prairial, year 4 [June 7, 1796]. 

Yesterday, at noon, all the orders with which you charged 
me were despatched. At two o'clock I set out for Gover- 
nolo, where there is an old dike that served to force boats 
to pass the toll-house. The Po is much swollen, and the 
current of the Mincio flows back to Mantua, which precisely 
fulfils the wishes of the Austrians, who are inundating them- 
selves as much as they can. 

I found at this bridge a guard of General Augereau’s, 
and the country praising the discipline observed by_ his 
troops. - I continued my route to Ceresa, where the division 
had arrived in the morning. A cannon-shot from this village, 
I found a bridge over a branch of the upper lake, which 
unites with the Mincio. The enemy occupies this bridge, 
covered by an embattled tower, oonnpine by 300 men, well 
entrenched and supported by a good battery of three pieces. 
General Augereau was aware that he could not execute your 
orders unless he carried the bridge and the entrenchments . 
of Ceresa ; in consequence, he disposed his troops and his 
artillery for the attack: his cannon protected the movements 
of the columns of infantry, which advanced with their usual 
impetuosity upon the tower, where they found the bridge 
broken down. Meanwhile, two battalions, which were de- 
ployed, kept up so brisk a fire that the enemy fled. Our 
grenadiers repaired the bridge, while a little drummer went 
up into the tower under the enemy’s fire, and descended 
again to open the gate to the grenadiers, who passed and 
pursued the terrified enemy, who had retired into the ad- 
vanced works. I proceeded reconnoitring to within pistol- 
shot of the cordon of the place, the side of which is the 
weakest. 

This tower and bridge are in the same position as_the 
bridge of Santo Giorgio, excepting that it is a plain which 
leads to the cordon of the place. This bridge is of the ut+ 
most importance for us, especially as it was well entrenched, 
and might stop the army, if the enemy defended himself 
stoutly in it. I think, therefore, that we ought to take all 

ossible pains to preserve it. I slept at Ceresa; to-day I 
ve followed the margin of the water, and, turning the 
place, I arrived at the causeway of Pradella, defended by a 
very good horn-work, constructed of earth, which has cannon 


152 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES, 


and is well palisaded, We approached to within hearing 
distance ; and, after receiving the honours of a few musket- 
shots, we pursued our route, following the upper lake of the 
Mincio to Goito. ; 

It results, general, that in that part of the fortress of 
Mantua pmprect between the upper Mincio and the lower 
Mincio, on the Po, there are but two causeways, those of 
Ceresa and Pradella, and that we are masters of the head of 
the most important ; that the place is well encompassed, but 
‘that it is indispensable to retain the positions occupied by 
General Augereau. 

I judge it, therefore, to be absolutely necessary that3000 
men should be employed in this part, independently of the 
troops of General Serrurier. 

All agree in reporting that the garrison is composed of 
only seven battalions and two squadrons ; that there is but 
a small stock of provisions ind ammunition in the place ; 
that the inhabitants refuse to sell any thing to the troops, 
Many country-people come out to leave the town, but are 
sent back ; it appears that, if we had means, it would be 

“easy to take the town. 

Central Augureau has killed some men of the enemy’s. 
General Serrurier took this morning twelve prisoners, who 
agree in confirming what you know; but they assert that, 
in the attack of Borgo Santo Giorgio, the enemy had 72 
wounded and about 50 killed. 

I have ordered that not a moment be lost in constructing 
the bridge over the Mincio below Mantua, in order to en- 
sure the communication between Augereau and Serrurier. 
Citizen Barral has orders also to construct one over the 
Po; but that is an operation of consequence, owing to the 
breadth of the river; he will attend punctually to it. As I 
foresee that the bridge cannot be ready for the passage of 
the troops, I have ordered the necessary boats sat pontoons 
to be secured, to supply the want of it, and to serve for the 
passage of the artillery. 

The three battalions of grenadiers are collected here, as 
well as the regiments, 1st hussars, 10th chasseurs, and 8th 
dragoons. 

‘To-morrow I set out for Verona, and thence proceed to 
reconnoitre between the lake of Garda and the Adige, then 
to see how the works get on at Peschiera, and then I shall 
rejoin you. 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES, 153 


‘I shall spend part of the night in giving such orders as 
I judge necessary for whatever may be useful to the exe- 
cution of yours. 

No news of the enemy from the quarter of the Tyrol: it 
appears that he is at a distance. 
ALEXANDRE BERTHIER, 


To General Kellermann. 


Head-quarters, Milan, 21 Prairial, year 4 [June 9, 1796]. 
I have seen with pleasure the demi-brigades which you 
have sent : they are in good condition and well disciplined. 
Iam not afraid of trespassing upon your kindness. I 
am sending to you an artillery officer, with the necessa 
funds, to provide for the transport of 5000 muskets, whic 
I earnestly entreat you to forward to us, together with 
twelve six-inch and twelve eight-inch howitzers. 

_I anxiously await your answer respecting the 1800 men 
whom I requested you to direct to be put into Coni, that I 
may be able to withdraw the garrison. ; 

ta ought to have received 100,000 franes ; I shall give 
orders for another 100,000 to be sent you. 
BONAPARTE. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


» Verona, 22 Prairial, year 4 (June 10, 1796]. 

I am come from Peschiera : the works ordered go on very 
slowly ; there is but a single captain of engineers to con- 
duct them. There is a want of tools; I will have some 
picked up to-morrow at Verona, as well as labourers. 

I have not found a single field-piece at the park : I shall, 
nevertheless, have need of eight—four at la Corona, and 
four at Brentino; we occupy those two posts since yester- 
day. One brigade is at Corona, from which a battalion is 
detached to the heights of Monte Baldo. 

Preabocco is also occupied by a demi-brigade ; it detaches 
one battalion to Brentino : the two new positions have abso- — 
lute need of mountain artillery ; there is not a single mule at 
the park, neither are there any artillerymen, so that I have 
two howitzers at Rivoli, which I am obliged to send to the 
park for want of men to work them. All my artillery of 


154 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


the two divisions consists of two 4-pounders, under the 
orders of General Rusca ; a howitzer, and one light artil- 
lery 8-pounder, with General Victor ; and two 8, and two 
3-pounders, with General Rampon, at Verona: that is all I 
have of the numerous artillery specified in my instruc* 
tions. 

The 18th and the 27th light infantry have arrived to-day 
at Peschiera. The position of the troops of the two divi- 
sions will be as follows :— 

One demi-brigade of light infantry at Corona ; 

Another at Preabocco, under the command of Général 
Joubert ; 

Two other demi-brigades of light infantry, in second 
line, to support the first two ; 

Two oadiee brigades of light infantry at Salo, under 
General Rusca ; 

One demi-brigade of the line, between Peschiera and 
Salo, one battalion of it detached to Pescheira ; 

The 18th demi-brigade of light infantry and the 18th 
of the line will form the grand camp between Rivoli and 
Garda ; 

At Verona I leave the 32nd of the line, and ome 
the 17th light infantry, having had information that the 
enemy is making some movements in that quarter. 

Be pleased, general, to give the necessary orders, that all 
that you destine for the two divisions under my command 
may : punctually furnished me, and then rely upon my 
punctuality and vigilance. 

MASSENA. 


To Citizen Comeiras. 

Head-quarters, Milan, 23 Prairial, year 4 [June 11, 1796]. | 
I will direct the Grisons to be supplied with 3000 quin- 
tals of corn, on condition that they will give us horses in 
ee I have at your desire caused the fort of .... to 
e destroyed. I will send all you ask for. It is necessary 
that you should exercise the greatest vigilance towards the 
Valteline, to learn the movements that Beaulieu may make, 

and to inform me of them in time. 
It would be easy for me to send you a few thousand 
fowling-pieces ; but would not these be well bestowed in the 
hands oP our friends? and, if it be true that the heads of 


x 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. es 


the Leagues are sold to the House of Austria, would it not 
be dangerous to increase their means of injuring us? 
BoNnAPARTE, 


To the Executive Directory. 


Head-quarters, Milan, 23 Prairial, year 4 [June 11, 1796]. 

General Laharpe was of the canton of Berne: the autho- 
rities of that canton confiscated his property at the com- 
mencement of the Revolution. I beg you to use your 
influence for obtaining its restitution to his children. 

The Swiss have demanded of us the circulation of some 
thousand weight of rice. We have granted that demand, 
but on condition that the canton of Berne shall restore to 
young Laharpe the possessions of his father. I hope that 
you will approve this measure. 

BONAPARTE. 


To Citizen Barthelemy, Ambassador at Basle. 


Head-quarters, Milan, 23 Prairial, year 4 [June 11, 1796]. 
The canton of Berne confiscated, at the commencement 
of the Revolution, the property of the late General La- 
harpe; I beg you to interest yourself, for the purpose of 
causing it to be restored to his son. 
BONAPARTE. 


To General Moreau. 


Head-quarters, Milan, 23 Prairial, year 4 [June 11, 1796]. 
I transmit to you 1,000,000, which you will draw from 
the hands of citizen Barthelemy, ambassador of the Re- 
ublie at Genoa,! to whom I have ordered it to be addressed. 
The army of Italy has solicited permission from the Direc- 
tory to send you that money, proceeding from the war con- 
tributions, in order to relieve our brethren in arms of the 

army of the Rhine. I am flattered that this occasion, &c. 
BoNnaPARTE. 


1 It should be Basle—a mistake probably arising from haste 


156 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


To the Chief of the Staff. 
: Head-quarters, Pavia, 24 Prairial, year 4 [June 12, 1796). 
You will give orders for 2000 beds to be made up in the 
castle of Pavia, with furniture complete. _The commissary 
of war will require for this purpose, from the city, the ne- 
cessary mattresses, sheets, and blankets. 
BONAPARTE. 


Head-quarters, Tortona, 25 Prairial, year 4 [June 13, 1796]. 
The general-in-chief prefers a complaint to the military 
commission against M. Augustin Spinola, lord [seégneur] 
of Arcquata, as being the chief of the rebellion which has 
taken place at Arcquata, where several French soldiers have 
been murdered, the tricoloured cockade torn, the effects of 
the Republic pillaged, and the imperial standard hoisted. 
The seigneur of Arcquata and his wife have always given 
yar to their perfidious instigations. 
require that they be tried by the military commission, 
conformably with the military laws. 
BONAPARTE. 


To the Governor of Alexandria. 


: Head-quarters, Tortona, 25 Prairial, year 4 [June 13, 1796]. : 

The officers and soldiers of the garrison of Serrayalle. 
have taken part in the late rebellion of the imperial fiefs: 
they have encouraged the peasants by furnishing them with 
munitions of war. 

This conduct is very far from being conformable with the 
intentions of the king and M. the Duke of Aosta. 
. I beg of you to punish severely the unworthy conduct of 
these officers and soldiers. 
- BONAPARTE.» 


To the Senate of the Republic of Genoa. 


Head-quarters, Tortona, 26 Prairial, year 4 [June 14, 1796]. 
The city of Genoa is the focus whence issue villains, who ~ 
infest the high roads, murdering the French, and intercept- 
ing our convoys, whenever they can. It is from Genoa 
that the spirit of rebellion is instilled into the imperial fiefs. 


ee =f ef 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES.” 157 


M. Girola, who resides in that city, has publicly sent them 
munitions of war: he welcomes daily the leaders of the 
assassins, yet dripping with French blood. 

It is on the territory of the republic of Genoa that part 
of these horrors are perpetrated, without any measures 
being taken by the government: it appears, on the con- 
trary, by its silence and the asylum which it affords them, 
to smile on the murderers. oe to the communes which 
behold with joy these crimes committed on their territory, 
and French blood spilt by assassins ! 

It is indispensable that a stop be put to this evil, and 
that the men who, by their conduct, patronize the banditti, 
be very severely punished. The governor of Novi protects: 
them: I require the government to make a severe example. 
of him. M. Girola, who has made Genoa a place d’armes 
against the French, must be arrested, or at least expelled 
from the city of Genoa. These preliminary satisfactions 
are due to the manes of my brothers in arms, slaughtered 
upon your territory. 

Respecting the future, I demand of you a categorical ex- 
planation. Can you, or can you not, clear the territory of 
the republic of the assassins who fill it? If you do not 
take measures, I will: I will have the towns and villages 
burned in which the murder of a single Frenchman is com- 
mitted. I will have burned the houses that shall afford 
refuge to the assassins. I will punish the. negligent magis- 


trates who shall have transgressed the first principle of ° 


neutrality, by granting an asylum to banditti. The murder 
of a Frenchman shall bring woe upon the entire communes 
that have not protected him. 
The French Republic will be inviolably attached to the 
—— of neutrality ; but the republic of Genoa shall not 
e a refuge for all the banditti. 
BONAPARTE, 


To Citizen Faipoult, Minister at Genoa. 


Head-quarters, Tortona, 27 Prairial, year 4 [June 15, 1796). 

I send you General Murat, my aide-de-camp. I desire 
you to introduce him immediately to the senate, for the 
purpose of delivering to it the note which he will commu- 
nicate to you. If you were to present it, it would take a 
fortnight to get an answer ; and it is necessary to establish 


eS en eee 


158 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


a more speedy communication, that shall electrify those 
gentlemen. 

The army of the Rhine has beaten the enemy. General 
Berthier must have sent you the bulletin from Basle. 

All is going on well ; i embrace you. The intelligence 
from Paris is of the 19th: nothing new. 

I have had above a score of chiefs of banditti who mur- 
dered our soldiers apprehended. They shall be shot with- 
out mercy. At this moment a division is doing justice on 
Arequata and the imperial fiefs. 

Get a better governor appointed in Novi than the one 
who is there. I do not intend that the senate should suffer 
our soldiers to be slaughtered in detail. I will keep my 
word to it. Bonaparte. 


To Citizen Faipoult. 


Head-quarters, Tortona, 27 Prairial, year 4 [June 15, 1796]. 
We have established a great many batteries on the 
Riviera of Genoa: we ought now to sell the cannon and 
ammunition to the Genoese, that we may not have to 
them, but yet find them there in case we have need of 
them again. 
BONAPARTE. 


To the Governor of Novi. 


Head-quarters, Tortona, 28 Prairial, year 4 [June 16, 1796), 
You give an asylum to the banditti; the assassins are 
protected in your territory ; there are some of them at this 
moment in all the villages. I require you to cause all the 
inhabitants of the imperial fiefs that are to be found this 
day upon your territory to be apprehended. You will 
answer to me for the execution of the present requisition : I 
will burn the towns and houses that shall afford refuge to 

the murderers, or shall not arrest them. 
BoNAPARTE. 


To the Chief of the Staff. 


Head-quarters, Tortona, 28 Prairial, year 4 [June 16, 1796]. 
All the detachments of troops which are in the: different 
towns of the States of the King of Sardinia must rejoin 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 159 


their corps, excepting the garrisons of Coni, Ceva, Cherasco, 
Tortona, Alexandria, Oneglia, and Loano. 

The troops and conyoys of the army are forbidden to 

take any other route than by Nice, Coni, Fossano, Asti, 
Alexandria, Tortona, Pavia, Pizzigitone, Cremona, Casal- 
Major, Borgoforte ; or by Genoa, Novi, Tortona; or through 
the valley of Aosta. The troops of the King of Sardinia 
having undertaken to escort convoys, an escort of only one 
or two men will be sent with them. 
_ No further requisitions shall be made in the territories 
of the King of Sardinia; all the magazines that we have 
in those countries shall be evacuated and transported to the 
fortresses left in our possession. 

The commissaries of war are expressly forbidden to grant 

any route to soldiers separated from their battalions till 
their number amounts to twenty-five. To this effect, the 
soldiers who shall present themselves for the purpose of 
rejoining their corps must be subsisted in the place till 
they are of that number. The commissary of war will then 
make out a bill of the route to the place where they will 
have to separate, in order to rejoin their respective corps. 
. The commandants of fortresses will take care that the 
soldiers. be provided with arms, and give the command of 
these detachments to a subaltern of the garrison, if there be 
none among the men who are rejoining: this subaltern 
shall accompany the detachment to the nearest garrison. 

The general of division who commands at Nice shall have 
under his orders the whole department of the Maritime 
Alps ;_ he will appoint the commandants at all the stations 
[étapes} in order to superintend the passing soldiers and 
those stationed at the éapes. 

_ The general of division who commands at Coni will have 

under his superintendence the whole country comprehended 
between the department of the Maritime Alps, the Stura, 
and the. Tanaro, as far as the territories of Genoa; at the 
same time, he will command at Ceva and Cherasco: he will 
place at each station an officer to whom all soldiers having 
bills of route will address themselves, and on whose visa the 
Piedmontese commandants will deliver station-tickets to 
our soldiers, 

The general of division commanding at Tortona will 
have under his superintendence all the countries comprised 
between the Tanaro, the gulf of Genoa, the Po, and the 


Sy 


160 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


territories of the Duke of Parma: he will command also at: 
Alexandria: he will appoint officers to superintend the 
passing soldiers at each station. It will be upon his visa 
only that the agents of the King of Sardinia will deliver 
station-tickets to our soldiers. 

The general commandant of Lombardy will command : 
officers will be — for each station to superintend 
the men stationed there, and to maintain good discipline 
among the passing soldiers. 

The chief of the staff will send to these different gene- 
rals a list of the officers, wounded, supernumerary, or un- 
be: are who might be employed for this purpose. 

he chief of the staff will appoint two superior officers to 

superintend the routes from Cassano to Peschiera, and — 
from Pizzigitone to Goito: these two officers will quarter 

themselves, the first at Chiaro, and the second at Casale- 

Major: they shall appoint the officers at each station to 

superintend the soldiers and to take care that the agents’ 
of Niniieo deliver punctually and of good quality the station 
allowance to the soldiers and the horses. 

Each of the superior officers shall have with him fifteen 
men of horse edttinnaiicia and 150 men who shall serve to 
escort the prisoners, and to go wherever it may be neces-: 

for the safety of the route. 
he general commanding the Mantuan shall place officers 
in all the stations of his arrondissement; the generals of 
division shall do the same each in his arrondissement, and 
as far as the station that joins the high road. 

The route of Placentia will join the great communication 
of the army at St. Colombar. The superior officer com- 
manding the fortress of Placentia shall have the super- 
intendence of the whole route from St. Colombar to Parma. 

It shall take nine days to go from Coni to Pavia, seven 
from Pavia to Peschiera, and six from Pavia to Goito. 

BONAPARTE. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Pavia, 27 Prairial, year 4 [June 15, 1796]. 

I have this instant arrived from the bridge over the Po: 
it is not yet bound together, though people pass over, and 
even carriages: by to-morrow night it will be made as 
solid as possible. The roads to the bridge from both sides 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES: 161 


of the Po are superb: a corps de e is established for 
the guard of this bri e. npstmchat 
The repairs of the fortifications of the castle of Pavia are 
proceeding with all possible activity. I have given orders 
to the commissary of war to send off to Milan the horses 
that were in the depot here. LANUSSE. 


To the General-in-Chief. 

Castiglione, 29 Prairial, year 4 [June 17, 1796]. > 
There is no fort at Chiusa, but merely two drawbridges, 
which I have kept guarded since we have been in this 
country by 100 men, supported by 300 others: there are, 
besides, two pieces of cannon, so that there is nothing to fear. 
The enemy has made no movement about Verona: 
he has 8 ee our posts at La Corona: our scouts 
have already given chase to him, and I have ordered him 
to be attacked this morning by six companies of cara~ 
bineers, supported by two Shanti: I will give you an 
account of the result. 
General Guillaume, who commands at Peschiera, reports 
to me that he has not a single grain of powder in the place; 
‘that the two bastions of ike Verma gate are at length about 

to be armed, but that he has neither balls nor bombs. 

’  MASSENA, 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Pavia, 29 Prairial, year 4 [June 17, 1796]. 
Thirty-two hostages have set out for Tortona; these, 
added to thirty-four previously sent off, form a total of 
sixty-four. 
he bells of Pavia have been taken down: I shall have 
them all put together in a magazine. Tranquillity is per- 
feetly re-established here, and confidence begins to revive, 
LANUSSE, 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Castiglione, 30 Prairial, year 4 [June 18, 1796]. 

I informed you, in my letter of yesterday, that I had or- 
dered a chase of the enemy ; it has had all the success that 
I expected from it: our carabineers killed forty men and 

VOL. I. M 


162 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


‘made fifty prisoners, all of the regiment of Tuscany. I had 
sent a flag of truce the evening before: I had selected an 
intelligent officer, who had reconnoitred the advanced posts 
of the enemy: three were carried by the bayonet. This 
‘coup de main has so intimidated the Austrians, that the 
rest of the camp took to flight, and several left their arms 
behind them. It was in this flight that so many men were 
killed. 

I shall make an excursion to Salo to-morrow ; it is said 
that the enemy is within two leagues of the place: if there 
is any possibility, he shall be attacked there. 

MASSENA. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Venice, 30 Prairial, year 4 [June 18, 1796]. 

I have received the letter which you were pleased to 
write me on the 0th. I know not how it can have been 
so long in coming. 

Reinforcements are arriving successively in the Tyrol. 
My man at Bolzano informs me that, since the first to the 
30th of June,! there have passed through that town 21,000 
men for the confines, namely, 18,000 infantry, 14,000 of 
them by the Adige, and 4,000 by land, 1000 artillery, 
and 2,000 cavalry. 

These troops, with the militia, occupy all the passes of 
the Tyrol, and their advanced posts are on the Vicentine 
hills, eaies Recoara and Astico. A piquet of twenty 
Hulans and some engineers has wei to Bassano, but 
no ulterior preparation announces their descent into the 
plain. The Venetians are assembling their border militia 
and their Dalmatians. They are sending their Italians into 
‘their islands, and the direct. conferences with the govern- 
‘ment seem to be'taking a very favourable turn ; but it is\hard 
work to make the great number think of the future, and 
they are always strongest in an assembly of 200 ignorant 
and idle persons, where matters are decided by the plura- 
lity of votes. 

LALLEMANT, 


1 An evident mistake, perhaps for Prairial. 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 163 


The Executive Directory to the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 
Paris, 23 Prairial, year 4 [June 11, 1796]. 

The Directory has had laid before it, citizen-general, the 
letter by which you inform it that the republic of Venice 
has permitted the Austrians to enter the fortress of Pes- 
ehiera, and it has thought that this conduct authorized the 
French Republic to require that the funds belonging to the 
powers at war with us, especially those belonging per- 
sonally to the King of England, and which are at present 
deposited at Venice, be delivered up immediately to us, 
together with the ships of war, merchantmen, and all other 
enemies’ property whatever, that may now be in the ports 
of the republic of Venice. The Directory also thinks it 
possible to borrow of that republic to the amount of 
5,000,000 Dutch florins, for which it should accept assign- 
ments on the debt which the Batavian republic has con- 
tracted to us. It thinks also that you could, if necessary, 
give bills on the deposit of money at Venice belonging to 
the King of England, &c., in exchange for the fei er a 
in ‘kind which circumstances might oblige you to levy in 
the Venetian territory. 

The Directory leaves this object for your consideration, 
and recommends to you to concert for its.accomplishment 
with the commissioners of the government Salicetti and 
Gareau. It observes to you that it is not its intention to 
break with the republic of Venice, and your proceedings in 
this delicate affair ought to be such as not to promote a 
rupture. The Directory fs thoroughly convinced that they 
will be of a nature not to compromise the dignity of the 
French nation, and conformable in every respect with the 
instructions which it gives to you, as well as to the com- 
missioners of the government Salicetti and Gareau, by this 
present letter. 

CARNOT. 


The Executive Directory to the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 


Paris, 27 Prairial, year 4 [June 15, 1796). 
The Direetory has taken into consideration, citizen-gene- 
ral, the contents of your letter dated Roverbello, the 16th 
instant. By its despatch of the 23rd, it has acquainted 
you with its intentions relative to the republic of Venice. 
M 2 


164 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. ° 


Your letter must necessarily produce some modifications 
in them. The Directory thinks, in consequence, that it 
would be possible to borrow at least 12,000,000 tournois of 
that republic, and to induce it to accept as a guarantee 
assignments on the debt which the Batavians have contracted 
tous. Thesum lent might be taken from the funds which the 
king and the government of England have at present in the 
treasury of Venice. 

The Directory is highly satisfied with the conduct which 
you have pursued, both towards the proveditor-general and 
towards the two deputies whom the senate of that city sent 
to you. ; 
he Directory likewise approves of the measure you 
have taken for putting Peschiera in a state of defence. — 

CarNorT. 


+ 


The Executive Directory to the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 
Paris, 27 Prairial, year 4 [June 15, 1796]. 

You will no doubt have learned, citizen-general, the facts 
stated in the report of the French minister at Genoa, a 
copy of which the Directory has sent you annexed. The 
perfidious conduct pursued towards us by the Genoese 
government must be repressed: but, above all, it is impor- 
tant to withdraw from Genoa the funds which are there, 
and the French minister must already have given orders 
on that subject.. As for the provisions and ammunition of 
all kinds which may be there, the Directory trusts to you 
to attend to their removal to a place where they will be 
less exposed. 
The Directory has thought that it might be imprudent 
and prejudicial to the course of success of the army under 
your command, to take measures immediately for com- 
pelling the Genoese to make suitable reparation for the in- 
jury that has been done us. It is not till after you have 
concluded an armistice with Rome, till that agreed upon 
with Naples has been executed, and, lastly, till you have 
finished your excursion to Bologna and Leghorn: that it 
will be proper to take up the affair of Genoa. Till then, 
ou will content yourself with causing the interests of the 
Freeh Republic in the city of Genoa to be watched with 
the most vigilant attention; and, when the favourable 
moment has arrived, you will take the necessary measures 


ae 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES: 165 


for obtaining a signal reparation for all those perfidious 
proceedings in which the Genoese government has engaged 
against the French Republic, and you will demand a ed 
large indemnity for the capture of the five vessels whic 
the English have recently taken from us by means of the 
‘Genoese protection. 

For the rest, the Directory refers to the previous instruc- 
tions which it has addressed to you, and which relate to 
the city of Genoa. 

. Ifyou think it advantageous to cme in force the Gulf 
of Spezzia at the time when you demand reparation of the 
Genoese government, the Directory authorizes you to take 
‘that measure, and relies in that matter on your prudence 
and republican energy. n 
t CaRNoT. 


The Executive Directory to the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 


‘ Paris, 27 Prairial, year 4 [June 15, 1796]. 

The Directory has received, citizen-general, your letters 
dated Verona, the 15th Prairial, Rovetbello, the 16th, and 
Milan, the 19th and 20th of the same month. Though it 
could have wished that the King of Naples had contributed 
some millions when the armistice was concluded, the Direc- 
tory approves it, referring to what was written to you pre- 
viously on the necessity of making the commissioners of the 
government with the army under you take a part in trans- 
actions of that kind. 

It were to be wished that the 2400 horse soldiers who are 
to repair to Brescia, &c., on leaving the Austrian army, 
had been bound by the terms of the armistice to return to 
Naples on foot, sii to relinquish their horses with the har- 
ness to us. 

The Directory has read with pleasure the details of the 
affairs of the advanced posts of Mantua: it continues to 
applaud your conduct and that of General Dallemagne 
and of the chief of brigade Lannes, and owes particular praise 
to the general of division Augereau. 

The Directory approves of the idea of deferring the final 
arrangement of the armistice which is to be concluded with 
the Prince of Rome till you are at Bologna or Leghorn. 
The last despatches of the Directory fix the conditions of it ; 
but if you think the contributions which that prince can 


166 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


furnish ought to amount to 25,000,000 in specie and 
5,000,000 in kind, the Directory agrees to adopt this ad- 
vantageous modification: it likewise approves the proposal 
of other demands specified in your letter of 19th Prairial, 
and hopes that the pope will assent to them. 

Our aim must be to terminate the war in the south of 
Italy as speedily as possible, and to study only the means of 
— peace by our situation in the north of that peniu- 
sula. 

It is preferable to deposit either at Nice or at Grenoble, 
instead of Genoa, the funds which your successes and the 
armistice which you are going to conclude with the pope 
shall permit you to place at the disposal of the minister of 
the finances. 

The Directory will write to you very soon concerning the 
ulterior operations of the campaign. 

CaRNOT. 


The Executive Directory to the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 


Paris, 27 Prairial, year 4 [June 15, 1796]. 

It may happen, eitizen-general, that the court of Naples, 
satisfied with the armistice which has been concluded be- 
tween the French and Neapolitan armies, will neglect to 
send immediately to Paris plenipotentiaries to treat for 
peace, and seek to maintain itself.in that sort of state of 
neutrality, the prolongation of which would be very disad- 
vantageous to us. 

The formal intention of the Directory is that you cause 
it to be signified to the Prince Belmonte-Pignatelli, or to the 
court of Naples itself, that, if the negociations for peace be- 
tween the French Republic and the King of the Two 
Sicilies are not commenced in Paris before the expiration of 
a month, reckoning from the date of these presents, the 
armistice shall be considered as not having taken place. ~ 

It is essential, citizen-general, that you ret 3 strongly 
stimulate the court of Naples, whose intention in not sending 
to us promptly a minister plenipotentiary might be to amuse 
us by delays justified upon false pretexts, in order to place 
itself in a situation to regulate its ulterior conduct by the 
events of the remainder of the present campaign. 

CARNOT. 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES, 167 


PART THIRD. 


FROM THE TAKING OF BOLOGNA TO THE SECOND BLOCKADE 
OF MANTUA. 


To the Commissioners of the Government with the Army of 
Italy. 
Head-quarters, Bologna, 3 Messidor, year 4 [June 21, 1796]. 
The present. moyements of part of Wurmser’s army on 
the frontiers of the Grisons, the considerable reinforcements 
which Wurmeer is daily receiving, and those still more con~ 
siderable on march ; the operation upon Leghorn which the 
government has ordered me to undertake, and in which I 
have seen no military inconvenience, calculating upon the 
arrival of 6000 men whom General Chateauneuf-Randon 
was to bring, but who received counter-orders and are still 
at Nismes; the garrison which I shall be obliged to leave 
in the fortress of Leghorn—all render it necessary for us to 
make two demi-brigades of the army of the Alps join us as 
speedily as possible. It would be possible to withdraw one 
of the two that are at Lyons, and one which is in the de- 
partment of the Dréme. It will be easy for the general of 
the army of the Alps to replace the two demi-brigades by 
moveable columns, composed of sedentary national guards, 
put in requisition, and to this end I am transmitting to him 
150,000 livres in cash, to provide for their pay. 
I require you therefore to take the most prompt and effi- 
cacious measures in order that these two demi-brigades may 
roceed immediately to Milan; the need we haye of them 
is so pressing, that I think we ought to take the nearest, 
and to use all means to accelerate their march and their 
arrival in Milan. 
BonaPARTE. 
[Lower down is written :] 


Having seen the aboye letter from General-in-Chief 
Bonaparte, and for the considerations therein specified, 

The Commissioners of the Goyernment sy the Army 
of Italy and that of the Alps 

Require General Kellermann, commander-in- chief of the 


168 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES.” 


army of the Alps, to send without delay two demi-brigades 
of his army to Milan, to place themselves under the orders 
of the general-in-chief of the army of Italy. 
Done at Bologna, 3 Messidor, year 4. 
SALICETTI, GARREAU. 


To Citizen Faipoult. 
Head-quarters, Bologna, 4 Messidor, year 4 [June 22, 1796]. 

I have just received your courier: I am too well ac- 
quainted with the spirit of the perfidious Genoese govern- 
ment not to have foreseen the answer that it would make. 

I have just received, by an extraordinary courier from the 
Directory, a copy of the note which you presented at the 
time of the capture of the five vessels. 

Here then are two grounds of complaint. I charge you 
specially to take the most efficacious means that the money, 
jewels, and other valuable effects belonging to the Republic, 
which are at Genoa, be speedily removed from that place. 

Send for citizen Suci, and let me have, by an extraordi- 
nary courier, an inventory of the effects, whatever they may 
be, which are in Genoa. ; 

I beg you to make me acquainted, from time to time, in 
the minutest detail, with all that concerns our position with 


the senate of Genoa, , 
BonAPARTE. 


To Adjutant-General Leclere. 


Head-quarters, Bologna, 4 Messidor, year 4 [June 22, 1796]. 

You will repair to Coire, the capital of the country of the 
Grisons: you will there see citizen Comeyras, minister of 
the Republic ; you will traverse the country to the debouché 
of Swabia ; you will send out spies, to pick up information 
relative to the position and movements of the enemy on the 
other side of the mountains. Inform me of all that may be 
worth the trouble by an extraordinary courier, whom you 
will address to General Despinois at Milan. You will mark 
the positions which the enemy might take for descending 
from the mountains into the Milanese, supposing that he 
had a mind to attempt it. You will remain in the country 


Niassa . J 


| 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 169 


long enough to explore it, to make yourself acquainted with 

it, and to acquire a notion of the spirit that animates the 

inhabitants. * 
BONAPARTE: 


To the General-in-Chief of the Grison Leagues. 
Bologna, 4 Messidor, year 4 [June 22, 1796]. 

I address to you, citizen Leclere, i PAS Sb to give 
you a token of the friendship of the French Republic, and 
of the desire which I feel to be useful to you, relying upon 
a perfect reciprocity on your part. 

. BoNAPARTE. 


To the Minister of the Republic at Venice. 


Head-quarters, Bologna, 5 Messidor, year 4 [June 23, 1796]. 

"I beg you, citizen minister, to infuse more activity into 
our secret correspondence, and to send me every day a 
bulletin of the forces and movements of the enemy. You 
must have spies at Trent, at Roveredo, at Inspruck, and 
receive daily bulletins from those places; that is what 
citizen Barihulodry does at Basle, and thereby he renders 
important services to the Republic. I am informed, through 
an indirect channel, that Venice is arming, and you do not 
tell me what is the nature and what the force of those ar- 
maments. You are aware how essential it is that I should 
have timely information on all such points. 
Bon APARTE. 


To Citizen Miot, Minister at Florence. 


Head-quarters, Bologna, 5 Messidor, year 4 [June 23, 1796). 

I send you citizen Marmont, my aide-de-camp, chief of 
battalion, to deliver a letter to the Grand-duke of Florence : 
it is under a flying seal, so that you can see its contents. I 
should wish you to present it to his royal highness. If you 
have any thing to say to me, address to this place till to- 
morrow morning. 
BONAPARTE, 


170 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


To Citizen Miot. 


Head-quarters, Bologna, 8 Messidor, year 4 [June 26, 1796]. 

T learn this moment that, in consequence of a general 
order which has been issued not to permit any one going 
from Bologna to Florence to pass, it is possible that M. 
Manfredini may not have been allowed to pass, and may be 
still at Bologna. If that were the case, I should be exces- 
sively vexed at this unlucky accident. I beg you to make 
my excuses to the grand-duke, and to send off a courier im- 
mediately to Bologna with the annexed order. 

BONAPARTE. 


To the General Chief of the Staff. 


Head-quarters, Leghorn, 9 Messidor, year 4 [June 27, 1796]. 
The general chief of the staff will immediately give the 
most precise orders to the chief of battalion Hulin, com- 
mandant of the fortress of Leghorn, to cause the governor 
of the city to be arrested as soon as he shall be informed 
that the 75th demi-brigade is about to arrive; that this go- 
vernor be put under good guard in a house near this camp, 
and thence sent off to Florence in a carriage which shall 
escorted, when the general-in-chief shall have determined 
the hour for the departure of that officer, who, for the rest, 
must be treated with all due respect. 
BoNAPARTE. 


To General Vaubois. 


Head-quarters, Leghorn, 11 Messidor, year 4 [June 29, 1796]. 

General Vaubois will keep garrison at Leghorn with the 
75th demi-brigade, a company of artillery, and a squadron 
of the first regiment of hussars. He will get the batteries 
which defend the entrance of the harbour put into a good 
state of defence; he will have them arranged in such a 
manner that there shall be only pieces of one or at most 
two calibres at each battery ; he will have furnaces mounted 
for red-hot balls, and take care-that the guns be supplied 
with a hundred rounds: he will choose a fort of the town, 
that which is most capable of defending itself, and which 
has communications with the interior; he will have this 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 171 


fort put into a state of defence, make to this end such 
changes in the disposition of the artillery as he shall think 
proper, and establish a magazine, which shall contain suffi- 
cient to subsist 2000 men for forty days, with all the acces- 
sories for sustaining a siege. 

He will spare no means for keeping Leghorn in perfect 
tranquillity ; he will act in such a manner as to attach to 
himself the troops of the grand-duke of Tuscany, on whom 
he will keep a constant eye; he will keep himself in good 
harmony with the governor ; he will refer to him all matters 
of detail, pay him great respect, especially in private, but 

reserve a great superiority over him, especially in public. 
Should there be plots at Leghorn, or anything else inyol- 
ving the existence of the French troops, he will then take 
all the measures necessary for restoring tranquillity and 
punishing the evil-disposed. He will not spare, either 
persons, or property, or houses. 

In all the difficult affairs that may happen, he will consult 
citizen Miot, minister of the French Republic at Florence, 
who will be able to give him useful information. 

He will protect the consul in the interesting operation 
with which he is charged: being the first agent of the Re- 
at at Leghorn, he will attend to all the interests of the 

epublie, and report to me on all the abuses which it may 
not depend on him to repress. 

He will live in suitable style. He will frequently have 
at his table the officers of the grand-duke and the consuls 
of the foreign powers: an allowance shall be granted to him 
for extraordinary expenses. 

He will appoint an officer to superintend the harbour: 
he will appoint a commandant of each fort; he will keep 
privateers under a severe discipline, and see to it that they 
respect the neutral flag, especially the Spanish. He will 
have daily accounts rendered to him of the reports of the 
sentries ; he will inform me regularly of all that passes in 
the country where he is, and send me a report of all news 
from Corsica that reaches him. He will write to the 
imperial fiefs around the city to induce them to recognise 
the ee and he will acquaint me with the number of 
those fiefs, their population, their wealth, and the spirit 
which animates them. He will keep up severe disci- 
pline among his troops; he will make a point of having 
all the soldiers in barracks, and uot allowing any one, 


172 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


from the general to the lowest employé, to lodge at any in= 
habitant’s. . 
- He shall have with him an adjutant-general, a commis~ 
sary of war, and an employé for each branch of the admi- 
nistration. 4 
‘ BONAPARTE, 


‘ 
, 


To the Consul of the Republic at Leghorn. 

f Leghorn, 12 Messidor, year 4 [June 30, 1796]. 
The consul of the Republic at Leghorn will cause the’ 
seals to be taken off sid inventories made of all the maga- 
zities belonging to England and to English merchants, to the’ 
émperor, to the ezarina of Russia, and in short to all princes 
and private persons of States with which we are at war. 
He will take all steps and use all means for discovering, 

obtaining restitution of, and seizing all merchandize whic 
may have been deposited by different persons with Leghorn 
merchants ; and for this purpose he will even pay whatever’ 
he shall think necessary. 
BoNAPARTE. 


The Executive Directory to the General-in-Chief of the 
Army of Italy. 


The Directory forwards to you the annexed copy of a. 
letter which the minister of marine has just written to its, 
resident, an acquaintance with which may be useful to you 
for the diplomatic transactions that may take place in Italy. 


It sends a duplicate of these copies to its commissioner 


Salicetti. 
CARNOT. 


The Minister of the Marine to the President of the Executive 
Directory. 


: Paris, 2 Messidor, year 4 [June 20, 1796]. 

I think it my duty to beg you earnestly to write to 
citizen commissioner of the Directory Salicetti, the condi- 
tions which it may be te ol to impose on the governments 
of Italy: by means of these impositions, perfectly legiti- 
mate on the part of the conqueror, we can obtain the: 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 173 


rapid means of refitting our navy and reviving its 
prosperity. 
In the Romagna, in the territories of Naples, we shall 
find timber ready to be embarked in great quantity: in the 
Modenese, in the Bolognese, in the Ferrarese, in the March 
of Ancona, in Calabria, and the eastern part. of Sicily, war 
has caused hemp of the finest quality and sail-cloth to 
accumulate. Is it not fitting that each of these several 
States should furnish and transport to Toulon, with the 
least possible delay, the quantities which they shall be able 
to produce, and which they have already in magazine? 
Make Italy proud of having contributed to the splendour 
of our navy ; this, it appears to me, would be seconding the 
views of the numerous patriots of those countries, who 
take a noble pride in having assisted in the refit and the 

success of the arms of the Republic. 
I beseech you to submit these views to the Directory, and 
to obtain its consent to this important measure. ’ 
TRUGUET. , 


PS..I denounced, a few days since, to the minister 
for foreign affairs, the oblique conduct of the govern- 
ment of Genoa: I subjoin here an extract from the letter 
of the consul of the Republic at Leghorn, which will 
make you acquainted with that of the Tuscan govern- 
ment. 


Extract of a lettor from Citizen Belleville, Consul-General 
of the French Republic in Tuscany, to the Minister of the 
Marine. 5 


I informed you, by my last letter of the 8th, that M. 
Eliot and the heads of the English party had been 
apprehended in Corsica: the intelligence is confirmed, 
but the Corsicans have limited their demands to the 
abolition of the taxes and the dissolution of the pretended 
parliament of a few men whom they dislike. I am sorry 
that the islanders, whom I fondly believed to be specially 
born for liberty, are, in so favourable a circumstance, more 
intent on their present interest than on the honour of be- 
longing to the Republic. 

The English are removing from this place riches and im- 
mense stores for the purpose of transporting them to 


174 ‘LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


Corsica. Cattle, corn, horses, considerable sums, are all 
carried off with assiduity and profusion : is it respecting neu- 
trality to allow one of the baitipesons powers all sorts of 
facilities for starving the other ? 


Decree of the Executive Directory relative to Impositions on 
Conquered Countries. ; 


3 Messidor, year 4 [June 21, 1796.] 
The Executive Directory, considering that it is important 
to determine by a particular regulation all that relates to 
‘the form of the collection, paying in, produce, employment, 
and order of accountability of the impositions levied in the 
conquered countries, decrees : 


Ordinary Impositions. 


Art. 1. The ordinary impositions established in the con- 
quered countries shall continue to be collected for the profit 
of the Republic. 

2. The payment of what remains due a these im- 

positions is demandable, and shall be effected without 
delay. 
3. The collectors and ‘receivers at present existing shall 
be charged with this collection, and be obliged to give all 
the information that shall be demanded of them: in ease 
of the absence of any of them, the commissioners of the 
government shall supply their place. 

4, The commissioners of the government shall cause a 
statement of what remains due to be delivered to them : 
to this effect they shall employ such means as appear to 
them most expeditious. 

5. They shall send the statement as speedily as possible 
to the minister of the finances. 


Extraordinary Impositions. 


6. The general-in-chief shall have authority to lay on 
any extraordinary imposition that he shall think proper : 
he shall consult for this purpose with the commissioners 
of the government, if there are any with the army. 

7. When the amount of this extraordinary contribution 
shall be determined, the commissioners of the government 
shall be charged to make all the ulterior dispositions for 
the execution. 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 175 


8. They will, in consequence, late the tity to be 
borne by ak nebiieesae they shall, if they think rane 
cause the amount that is to be paid to be advanced by the 
persons assessed highest or the most wealthy, with the 
understanding of an ulterior assessment to be made by the 
constituted authorities of the country, and, in short, take 
all the most prompt and proper measures for getting it in. 

9. They shall cause the collection to be made by the 
receivers of the country, or by those whom they shall 
appoint for that purpose, according to what they shall deem 
to be most advantageous for the celerity of the getting 
in, which they must most especially keep continually in 
view. 

10. They shall acquaint without delay the minister of 
the finances with the sum to which the extraordinary impo- 
sition decreed will amount, and with all the arrangements 
that have been made to ensure its payment. 


Paying-in of the produce of the impositions, ordinary and 
eatraordinary ; application of this produce; order of 
accountability. 


11. The produce of the impositions, both ordinary and 
extraordinary, shall be paid with all diligence of the com- 
missioners of the government into a chest which they shall 
establish for this purpose near them. The cashier shall 
give receipts to the different collectors and receivers for 
the sums paid in. 

12. The cashier shall deliver all the sums that are indis- 
pensable for the subsistence and wants of the army to 
the per maeet general, who will account for them in the 
usual manner. 

13. The commissioners of the government shall give an 
account every week to the minister of the finances of the 
sums paid into the chest under their care, those remitted 
by them to the paymaster-general of the army, and those 
remaining in the chest. 3 regard to the latter, they 
shall conform to the instructions which it will give them. 


General Dispositions. 


14, The general-in-chief and the commanders of the 
armed force shall, on the requisition of the commissioners of 
the government, or of any other person appointed by them, 


176 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


furnish an armed force whenever it shall be necessary for 
the levy of these ordinary and extraordinary impositions. | 
15. The general-in-chief and the commanders of the 
armed force shall give the most precise and the most rigid 
orders that none of the moneys arising from these impo-— 
sitions be diverted and lost for the Republic. " 
16. The commissioners of the government will keep up the 
most active correspondence with the minister of the finances 
on everything relating to these same contributions; they 
will communicate to him, by courier after courier, the dispo- 
sitions which they shall have made, and the successive pro-. 
gress of their operations. , vi) 
17. When there shall be a special commissioner of the. 
Directory for the department of the finances and contribu-. 
tions with the army, the articles of execution relating to. 
this object shall principally concern him; still the other 
commissioners shall have a right to take cognizance of all 
the operations: in this case, he will deliberate with them, 
and cause minutes to be kept of the dispositions that. 


‘shall be determined upon. 
- 18. The minister of the finances is charged with the ex-_ 
ecution of the present decree. CaRNoT, — 


The Executive Directory to the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 


Paris, 4 Messidor, year 4 [June 22, 1796]. 

The column which you have sent towards the Lake of 
Como has produced the effect which you expected from it, 
and has somewhat alarmed the enemy for Swabia; it may 
have contributed several times to the departure of the 
corps which have been detached from the army of Wurm- 
ser, in order to reinforce Beaulieu: some bulletins which 
have reached the Directory represent their amount at 
20,000 men. Your spies and the agents whom you will 
have placed on the roads must have made you acquainted 
with the truth. These circumstances must hasten the ter- 
mination of your affairs with the powers of Italy. At the 
moment when the Directory is writing to you, you will 
probably have concluded an armistice with the Pope: make 
the plenipotentiaries of the prince of Rome repair with as 
little delay as possible to Paris, to finish the peace, and, 
above all, hasten the supplies in kind, with which, as it 
shall be agreed, the French Republic is to be furnished. 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 177 


~ It is equally urgent that the plenipotentiary of Naples 
should arrive in Paris : one day lost for negociations in time 
of war may occasion disasters. We strongly recommend 
to you, in consequence, to accelerate the departure of these 
ministers, that the Directory may have nothing to engage 
its attention but the north of Italy, whither the reinforce- 
ments which Beaulieu is receiving, and the occupation of 
the castle of Milan and Mantua by the enemy, summon you 
back. 

By the time you receive this, you will no doubt have 
executed the important movements of Bologna and Leg- 
horn. May the tutelary genius which watches over the 
high destinies of the Republic have brought you to that 
port in time to secure some English ships and the maga- 
zines, &c. of those islanders ! 

You will, no doubt, have heard of the retrograde move- 
ment of the left wing of the army of the Sambre and 
Meuse, from the Lahn to the Sieg. The Directory has 
ordered it to resume the offensive. The army of the Rhine 
and Moselle has had some success in advance of Manheim: 
it is to pass the Rhine immediately in the environs of 
Strasburg, and to throw itself with impetuosity into Swabia 
and Franconia. If that commanded by General Jourdan 
seconds it boldly, as the Directory wishes it to do, it is to 
be presumed that they will soon bring back part of the 
troops that Wurmser appears to have detached ayainst 
the army of Italy. 

This state of things would oblige the Directory to pre- 
scribe to you, as it does, to confine yourself to acting on 
the defensive in the Tyrol, if the disposition of the inha- 
bitants of the conquered countries in Italy did not make it 
an express law for you. 

What you have done in the imperial fiefs near Tortona 
and in the Milanese will inspire them, no doubt, with a 
salutary fear, but it would be imprudent to trust to that: 
it would be far more so if the army were to remove further 
from Lombardy in penetrating too far into the Tyrol. This 
operation could at most take place in case the republican 
armies fighting in Germany should succeed in beating back 
the enemy towards Bohemia or the Danube ; but, in pre- 
scribing to you this defensive, the Directory does not mean 
to deny you the faculty of attacking the enemy whenever 
you find a favourable occasion : it merely wishes that you 

VOL. I. N 


178 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES, 


should not dash on too far into the Tyrol, because it be- 
lieves that this course would prove disastrous. 

The Directory approves the articles agreed upon between 
you and Lieutenant-Colonel de St. Marsan ; it will, as you 
desire, welcome citizen Serbelloni and the other Milanese 
patriots, deputies at Paris. It deems it superfluous to re- 
mind you that the fate of the Milanese depends on the 
events that may happen, and pans pealy on the success of 
the armies of the Sambre and Meuse and of the Rhine and 
Moselle in Germany. 

The Directory has thought fit to defer for some time any. 
measure relative to the organization of one or several bat- 
talions composed of the Milanese youth. 

‘ CARNOT. 


The Executive Directory to General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 


Paris, 4 Messidor, year 4 [June 22, 1796). 
It is asserted, citizen-general, that the marble bust of 
Marcus Aurelius is at Pavia: it is for the interest of the 
arts that it should be transmitted to France: the Directory 
commands you to cause all necessary precautions to be 
taken that it may arrive without damage. 
CARNOT. 


To the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 


Castiglione, 1 Messidor, year 4 [June 19, 1796]. 

I yesterday ordered a reconnaissance in force along the 
Adige. Our troops have chased the enemy as far as Avis : 
we have taken forty s fepigeaton and killed many men. Our 
loss is two killed and six wounded. 

The position and force of the enemy are as follows. 
General Colli, with 8000 men, is at Roveredo and Campara ; 
General Hohenlohe, who has succeeded Beaulieu, is at Trent, 
with 12,000. 

MASSENA. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Castiglione, 4 Messidor, year 4 [June 22, 1796]. 
I reconnoitred yesterday about Salo and the positions 
occupied by our troops, and assuredly there is nothing to 


re 


i ti 


>" = 


2 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 179 


fear in that quarter. I crossed the lake in the felueca which 
has been equipped at Peschiera. This felueca has no sails 
in it yet; it were very necessary that it should have. 

I am setting off for Chiusa: I have some changes to 
make thereabouts. I am guarding the posts upon the 
Adige, Bussolenga, La Sega, and La Chiusa, by which the 
enemy might attempt to cross: those three posts occupy a 
demi-brigade. 


MASSENA. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Venice, 7 Messidor, year 4 (June 25, 1796). 

The videttes which I keep at Bolzano and Trent inform 
me that from the 15th to the 18th of June there have 
passed by that route 3600 more infantry, 1600 of them 
upon the Adige. They add that the Austrian general has 
men at work on the road from Trent to Areo, whether he 
purposes to break into the Brescian, or merely wishes to 
draw your attention to that quarter, while he gets to 
Mantua, through the Venetian territory. 

Citizen Barthelemi, in giving me the first good news from 
the Rhine, adds that Wurmser has considerably weakened 
his army by detaching from it 20,000 men for Italy. If 
these reinforcements unite, there will be above 50,000 men 
to put into Italy. 

I learn this moment, by a letter from Trent, dated June 
22nd, that 2400 more infantry arrived there on the 19th 
and 20th ; bunt it appears that these troops and some others 
comprehended in is preceding notes come from Inspruck, 
and form part of the detachment from the Rhine. I am 
applying for an explanation. 

LALLEMANT. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Pietati, 8 Messidor, year 4 [June 26, 1796). 
All the works of the engineer department would have 
been finished this morning, a certain general of brigade 
been able to read, or taken the trouble to read, the order 
given him by the staff of General Serrurier, to furnish us 
with labourers in the night between the 6th and the 7th. 
Owing to our not having had any that night, the siege has 
N 2 


810 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES: 


been retarded twenty-four hours. Last night, we partly 
made amends for this neglect: but, to tell the truth, our 
grand communication will not be practicable for cannon till 
to-morrow. Do you not think that we have delayed the 
artillery for want of communications! In the first place, had 
it been ready, it might have passed behind the dikes, at 
night, as you have observed ; but, let what will be said, 
three or four batteries have not the necessary strength, and 
I am afraid that they will not long withstand the enemy’s 
fire. One of the two batteries of St. George is more ad- 
vanced and more solid; but that which ought to take the 
advanced works in rear was not begun till the 6th, when I 
passed that way. 

If the artillery can, by its ricochets, weaken the enemy ; 
if the battery of howitzers which | have applied for on my 
right can beat down the enemy’s works, I have nothing but 
a trench of 120 toises to make, and I shall get within 50 
toises of the palisades, that is to say, near enough to carry 
them without difficulty, if the attack is well conducted. I 
might succeed, were I to undertake this trench in the night 
between the 9th and 10th; but I am fearful of unmasking 

“my designs, and had rather wait till our artillery has pro- 
duced some sort of effect: another thing that decides me to 
this step is that the enemy is working more on our left than 
on our right ; he seems to be on the wrong scent. 

You should have had a plan of the trenches, if all my 
people had not been either on duty or ill; I have not even 
a secretary, 

CHASSELOUP, 
Chief of brigade of engineers. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Milan, 8 Messidor, year 4 [June 26, 1796]. 
We had yesterday thirty-two pieces in battery against 
the Castle. I ordered the attack to begin this mores 

with the bridge and the prolongations both together ti 
noon: our batteries played perfectly till past that time. 
The enemy kept up such a tremendous fire, that they have 
suffered much. All the epaulements of the battery No. 1, 
suburb of Venelina, have been broken up. The battery 
No. 7, suburb of Camasina, is also damaged. In most of 
them we have had pieces dismounted, bad carriages, and 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 181 


coups Cembrasure. Our mortar batteries of the centre and 
the left of attack acted, however, extremely well ; they set 
places on fire several times. To-night we shall work at re- 
pairing the batteries. The mortars will continue to play: 
we shall determine upon the batteries dattente for the pieces 
from Alexandria. A combination of efforts and resources 
is required here. 

The enemy has particularly annoyed us by his bastioned 
towers, from which he plays upon all our prolongations. 
We had eighteen men killed or wounded. 

I shall not yet bestow praises on our artillerymen: but 
for a detachment of the army of the Alps, which has given 
us a good lift, en passant, we could not have kept our ground. 

Punishments and rewards—these are the two motives to 
which I have recourse. I have been much pleased with 
some of the bombardiers, and have signified this to them by 
gratuities. 

I learn this moment that General Dugard has made a 
bargain for the transport of artillery from Alexandria to 
Pavia in a fortnight, and I recognize him in this trait. 
Luckily, Captain Gastinel has set out with 160 horsed car- 
riages for Alexandria, where he will certainly put an end to 
this grievous bargain. As for the siege of the Castle, you 
desire speedy success, and nobody is more interested in that 
than myself; but there is plenty of work here, and how 
wretched are the means that ought to hasten it! To- 
morrow you shall have particulars of our situation. The 
day has been hot in all ways, and I am worn out with 
fatigue. 

DESPINOIS. 


To the General-in-Chief. 
Castiglione, 9 Messidor, year 4 [June 27, 1796]. 
_ The day before yesterday, four imperial barks appeared 
at Torni, for the purpose of attacking the demi-galley which 
we had there, armed. I had sent it that morning to Pes- 
chiera: the Austrian vessels, not finding ours as they ex- 
pected, fired about a hundred cannon or howitzer shot at 
the troops charged with the defence of that port, and stood 
up the lake. I was aware of the necessity of accelerating 
the armament of our flotilla; and, in consequence, I re- 
paired yesterday to Peschiera. I have ordered men to be 


182 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


set to work on the ship gun-carriages, to enable the other 


two demi-galleys to get out with one 8-pounder each: 
these pieces were taken from the park, till those destined 
for this object, of which we have notice, arrive. I hope, 
from what the captain has told me, that the three demi- 
galleys will be cruizing by the day after to-morrow: people 
continue at work on the great barks, and it is said that th 
will be ready to start in ten days. The demi-galleys wi 
certainly do us better service than the large barks; infi- 
nitely lighter, going in a superior manner with oars, the 
afford advantageous means of boarding; to this end I shall 
man them with good troops. 

I shall have a line formed upon the lake, to prevent the 
— of supplies for the Austrian troops. They have 
ong had nothing to live upon but corn brought them by the 
Venetians ; as soon as our naval force is in a state to sail, 
we will cut off that resource. 

To-morrow, a battery will be established at Torni, to pro- 
tect the anchorage of our vessels there. 

To-morrow morning, General Joubert will make a recon- 
naissance in force, in advance of the Col de Campiou. 
Yesterday, the ordinary reconnaissance killed one and 
wounded several of the enemy. 

General Rusca will make a strong reconnaissance, and 
push it as far as possible along the river Chiesa. 

All reports agree in stating that the enemy is very far 
from us, excepting at Corona, where there is every morning 
a slight fire of small arms. 

MASSENA. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Castiglione, 10 Messidor, year 4 [June 28, 1796.] 

Informed that the enemy was reinforcing himself, and 
constructing works to fortify himself in all his positions, 
I ordered a general attack, to ascertain, by sure recounois- 
sances and in force, the truth of these reports. 

Nine companies of carabineers and 600 men of the 4th demi- 
brigade of light infantry had orders in consequence to pro- 
ceed under the command of General Joubert to the Bochetta 
of Campiou: I went thither myself with my staff, and 
accompanied by General of Brigade Valette, to satisfy my- 
self as to the force of the enemy’s positions. 


q 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 183 


By one o’clock in the morning, the chief of battalion 
Marchand, with the nine companies of carabineers, had 
invested and attacked the enemy in their formidable en- 
trenchments. General Joubert, with 600 men of the 4th 
light infantry, followed him: the enemy, taken by surprise, 
retired within the entrenchments, where our brave repub- 
licans attacked them, arms in hand, and using only their 
bayonets and swords to storm the redoubts. The regi- 
ments of Lattermann, Shosoldo, and 400 Tyrolese defended 

ositions which would have been impregnable had they 
Soom defended by Frenchmen ; but our brave fellows, re- 
gardless of the numbers, the positions, or the terrible fire 
kept up by the enemy, drove them out of their little for- 
tresses, killed and wounded many, and made 200 ane 
they took four camps of about 400 tents, all the baggage of 
the officers, cooking utensils, &¢., and 25 mules, with about 
15,000 cartridges. The commander of these troops was 
killed in the entrenchments ; 200 of Lattermann’s regiment 
flung themselves from a rcck to avoid the bayonets of our 
intrepid warriors. I shall acquaint you, citizen-general, 
with the deeds of valour that deserve to be known. General 
Joubert and his staff behaved admirably, especially the 
brother of that general who headed oneof our columns. Since 
the promotion of his brother to the rank of general of bri- 
gade, he has performed the duties of aide-de-camp, without 

eing an officer. I solicit of you, citizen-general, the rank 
of sub-lieutenant for this young soldier. 

You cannot imagine, general, the number and strength 
of the entrenchments which the Austrians had thrown up in 
this quarter. The officer of engineers, who was charged 
with the direction of it, had orders to make it fit for the 
reception of the whole present army of Beaulieu, and that 
which he expects from the Rhine: there would have been 
room besides for the recruits of two years. The quantity 
of works which those men have constructed in the space of 
five or six days is incredible: rocks were suspended on the 
top ofall the heights to crush assailants, but all these terrible 
means of defence could not stop our brave fellows for a 
single moment. 

‘he chief of battalion Recco, commanding at Preaboceo 
and Brentino, had orders to march, with the 11th light’ 
infantry, which he commands, reinforeed by two com- 
panies of carabineers and two of grenadiers, upon Belona, to 


184 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


reconnoitre the positions and strength of the enemy. That 
officer, known for his military talents and his yalour, made 
his dispositions so ably, according to our instructions, that 
his carabineers and grenadiers enveloped all the advanced 
osts of the enemy, and not one of them escaped. Eight 
hundred Austrians defended the excellent positions of Belona; 
but our brave warriors, regardless of the number and the ex- 
cellent positions which the enemy defended, pushed on with 
bayonets fixed, and overturnedall before them. More than 
100 Austrians were slain, 70 prisoners were left in our 
hands, and, but for the battery of four pieces which the 
enemy had on the left bank of the Adige and the impos- 
sibility of crossing that river, which is not fordable, the 800 
Austrians would have been entirely cut off. 
Our loss in these two affairs is but six killed and eight or 
nine slightly wounded. : 
The report of general of brigade Victor, who was ordered 
to proceed on the left of the lake, with a battalion of his bri- 
gade, to Malsesena, has not yet reached me. I have no 
loubt that it is as advantageous to the arms of the Republic 
as the two others, 
MASSENA, 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Favorita, 10 Messidor, year 4 [June 28, 1796]. 

Agreeably to your order of the 28th ult., the command- 
ing officers of the artillery and the engineers and myself 
met, the day before yesterday, the 8th; we went and in- 
spesies together all the points of the citadel, and slept at 

eresa, On the morning of the 9th, we reconnoitred the 
environs of the city, finishing with St. George, where it 
was agreed that a mortar battery would be useful. 

The commandant of engineers ascertained that the part 
of the citadel easiest to attack is at the bastion of the 
Trinity, and the part of the city, on the right of the dike 
of Ceresa, independently of an incendiary battery, that is to 
be placed at the casa Micheli, which is on the left of the 
dike of Ceresa, nearly equidistant from the Pradella gate ; 
and another of mortars near St. George, as I have before 
mentioned. 

We have also fixed upon the site for the park of artillery, 
which will be at an equal distance from the gate of Ceresa 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 185 


and the casa Micheli, on a spot. commodious enough and 
sufficiently in rear: it will only be necessary to take some 
precautions in regard to water. 

On our return yesterday evening, we agreed that, with 
the greatest possible economy, for the attack of the city, 
no fewer than thirty pieces of cannon and sixteen mortars 
could be employed; for that of the, citadel, twenty-four 
pieces and six mortars. 

According to our calculations, there will be required 
1084 artillerymen, and from 20,000 to 25,000 infantry 
for the two attacks of the city and the citadel, and 1000 
cavalry. 

We have judged that the attack of the city could not be 
made till all the posts in advance have been taken from the 
enemy ; an operation which must be combined on account 
of the difficulty of the approaches. 

The commandant of the engineers has issued the neces- 
sary orders for setting about the preparatory works, such 
as fascines, gabions, &c. 

I have said nothing about a change of artillery ; I pre- 
sume that the commandant of that arm will communicate 
with you about it. 

SERRURIER. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Castiglione, 11 Messidor, year 4 [June 29, 1796] 
The long march which general of brigade Victor had to 
make yesterday, in the reconnoissance which I had ordered 
upon Malsesena, caused it to be very late when he reached 
the enemy: so that his affair was attended with no other 
results than driving back all the advanced posts, and a 
brisk fire of small arms between the tirailleurs on both 
sides. Five imperial barks fired a great.deal upon the 
troops: General Victor says that the artillery of those 
vessels is ably worked; he estimates the enemy in Mal- 
sesena and environs at 1000 or 1200 men: I hope to dis- 
lodge them one of these days. 
o-morrow, those three galleys will come and cast anchor 
at Torre, where I have ordered a battery of two pieces to 
be placed for their protection. 
! MASSENA, 


186 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Milan, 11 Messidor, year 4 [June 29, 1796]. 

Our wishes are fulfilled: the commandant of the Castle 
of Milan capitulated this morning at three o'clock, and the 
troops of the Republic now occupy this fortress. Two 
thousand eight hundred prisoners, one hundred and forty- 
four pieces of cannon, two thousand weight of powder, five 
hundred muskets, numerous siege implements — such are 
the fruits of this capture. 

I am this moment sending off the Austrian garrison for 
Lodi, where it will await your orders. 

To-morrow you shall receive an exact inventory of all the 
things that we found in the Castle. I will likewise mention 
to you the officers who have particularly distinguished 
themselves. 

I perform to-day a very gratifying duty in commending 
the conduct of all the besieging troops: artillery, infantry, 
eavalry, have all concurred in the triumph of our arms. 
The volunteers multiplied themselves; they were at 
once on guard, at work, and manning the batteries; and, 
during the excessive fatigues of twelve days’ trenches, 
their courage and devotedness never slackened for a single 
moment. 

You will find annexed the capitulation which I proposed 
to M. de Lamy, and which he was obliged to accept. 

DEsPINOIs. 


PS. I have this moment learned that there has been 
found in the Austrian chests 72,000 livres. Out of these 
funds, I solicit a gratuity for the besieging troops, who 
have so richly deserved it. 


The Commandant of the Castle of Milan to the General of | 
Division Despinois, commanding in Lombardy. 


Castle of Milan, one a.m., June 29, 1796[11 Messidor, year 4]. 
If you will suspend hostilities, I will capitulate with you 
in the morning. 
Dr Lamy. 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 187 


To M. de Lamy, Austrian Commandant of the Castle 
of Milan. 
Milan, 11 Messidor, year 4 [June 29, 1796] 3 a.m. 

I cannot, sir, accede to a suspension of hostilities at the 
point where we are, unless in virtue of the following capi- 
tulation which I propose to you, and on which you will 
have to deliberate immediately, 


DESPINOIS. 


To the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 

Roverbello, 11 Messidor, year 4 [June 29, 1796]. 
~ We have made with General Serrurier and the com- 
mandant of the engineers minute reconnoissances of the 
city and citadel of Mantua. Having afterwards met to 
determine, agreeably to your orders, the points of attack, 
and the site of the park, the result of our opinions is as 
follows :— 

To attack the citadel and the city at the same time; to 
establish a battery for mortars to chro red-hot balls near 
the casa Micheli ; to establish a mortar battery near the 
casa Zampoli; to place the park 200 toises in rear of the 
casa Spolverini. The attack of the citadel to be made on 
the bastion of the centre, called the Trinity, and there 
would play six batteries: two of five pieces, two of four, 
and two others of two, with three mortars each; which 
| would make a total for that part of twenty-four pieces of 
heavy calibre and six mortars. 

The attack of the city to be made on the part to the 
right of the dike of Ceresa; and there would play three 
batteries, one of six pieces, one of four, and another of 
eight, with four mortars ; which makes in all, for this part, 
eighteen pieces and four mortars. 

The battery near the casa Micheli to be of twelve pieces, 
six of them for red-hot balls, of six mortars. The battery 
near the casa Zampoli to be of six mortars. 

The total of the cannon necessary would be fifty-four 
pieces and twenty-two mortars, those for change not in- 
eluded. 

To work this number of pieces, there will be required 
1,100 artillerymen ; of troops, there must be from 20,000 

| to 25,000 infantry, and 1000 cavalry. 
UGNY. 


188 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Bologna, 12 Messidor, year 4 [June 30, 1796]. 

_ T have just received, general, a letter from Cardinal Dug- 
nani, legate of La Romagna, in which he informs me that 
an armistice has been concluded between the French Re- 
public and his Holiness. As I am pint ignorant of 
the existence of such a treaty, I beg you to let me have a 
copy of it, and at the same time to send me your instruc- 
tions on the subject. You will find annexed a copy of the 
cardinal’s letter and of my answer. 

1 evacuated La Romagna on the 8th, conformably with 
your orders. I left there, as I have informed you, only a 
detachment of fifty horse and a company of infantry to cover 
‘the collection of the contributions and the removal of the 
chests. ' 

A courier has just arrived, by whom Captain Albani, who’ 
commands at Forli, informs me that an insurrection has 
broken out at Cesena ; that the rebels have seized adjutant- 
general Verdier, returning from the mission, on which, for 
want of an officer of engineers, I had sent him to Ancona 
jointly with adjunct @’ Amour. That ee officer has been 
exposed to the greatest dangers, and I know not yet whether 
he has been able to extricate himself from them. I imme= 
diately despatched a courier to the magistrates of the town 
where the rising had taken place. I summoned them on 
their responsibility to set at liberty citizen Verdier, and to 
send him to me under a good and safe guard. At the 
same time, I ordered the general of brigade Beyrand to march 
immediately, with what infantry I had left, a six-inch 
howitzer, and a squadron of cavalry, for Cesena, and to 
restore order there. I could not forbear giving counter-. 
orders to the battalion on march for Porto Legnago, that 
the Bolognese might not be left without troops. 

You see, general, how M. the cardinal and his infernal 
clique have excited the minds of the inhabitants: certainly, 
if the troops are withdrawn, we must give up the contri- 
butions, the collection of which would then be impracticable. 
Those who might be left to attend to the collection would. 
run the risk of falling victims to the fury of the populace, 
inflamed still more by the news of the armistice. 

AUGEREAU, 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES,; 189 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Genoa, 6 Messidor, year 4 [June 24, 1796]. 

The Genoese government has given me no new answer 
respecting M.Girola. I transmit to you, under No. 1, a copy 
of a declaration made to me the day before yesterday, con- 
cerning the transmission of muskets and ammunition by 
M. Girola to the rebels at Arequata. 

The senate, or, to speak more correctly, the secretary of 
state, despatched, on the 30th of this month, an extraor- 
dinary courier for Paris. I have no doubt that it was to 
inform the minister of Genoa in France of your letter and 
of Murat’s arrival. As it was possible for me to give to 
the same courier a despatch for the minister of the finances, 
I enclosed in that despatch a letter to the Directory, by 
which I informed it of all that I sent him, even the copy 
and translation of the insignificant answer that has been 
made to you. 

It is right, moreover, that you should know that the 
Directory, having appointed one Marco Frederic to the 
post of vice-consul of the French Republic at La Spezzia, 
Genoa refuses to recognize him. On its refusal, I re- 
plied by a note, of which I annex a copy, No.2; you 
will see that I wished to bring this perverse government, 
once for all, to an explanation concerning the system of 
repulsion and persecution which it pursues towards the 
oldest friends that the Revolution has ever had in its ter- 
ritory. This note is yet unanswered. 

The three points in litigation are these—Girola, the five 
vessels taken at the Arneca, and the cessation of all the 
animosity against those whom we may call the Genoese 
patriots. 

I see clearly why you desire me in your letter of the 
3rd to get everything belonging to the Republic removed 
from this place. 

As to the operations that have taken place here under 
my superintendence relative to the consignments which 
have been made to Balbi, the state of the case is this: 
The account of the cases of money arrived is made up : 
there has been found seven thousand and some hundred 
livres less than, as it was announced, they ought to contain. 
The whole of the plate has been weighed, and yesterday the 
melting was finished, with the knowledge of this city. ‘To- 


190 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


morrow, they will proceed to assay the ingots and weigh 
them. Five copies are made of the minutes of all these 
operations, which are extremely long. 

Happen what will, I see nothing to fear for the silver or 
the ingots: for, 1. the money serves every day to pay the 
bills of exchange drawn by the national treasury upon 
M. Balbi, and by the Ist of July he will have paid them 
to the amount of nearly 4,000,000 tournois; 2. the value 
of the sums which will then remain in the hands of 
M. Balbi, and of the ingots, which will then be assayed 
and weighed, being known, Genoa will be responsible to us 
for it. Genoa is incapable of resisting. You may dictate 
laws to Genoa whenever you please. Approach with 15,000 
or 18,000 men, and, above all, with a train of mortars. Send 
me, if you please, an eons he will make a tour out- 
side the fortifications ; he will discover how one may, by 
scaling the great wall and then choosing two favourable 
points between the great wall and the body of the place for 
planting mortars and howitzers, keep Genoa in complete 
dependence. 

Genoa must yield to you: you will always have it in 
oot power to force it to restore the sums in specie or bul- 

ion which may be taken at Balbi’s. As for the jewels and 
diamonds, to which I have not yet adverted, that is quite a 
different affair. We have not yet had time to reglue the 
ease which contains them: to ascertain the value of the 
diamonds and pearls, they must all be dismounted. One 
can set but very few hands about. this work, because they 
must be watched to prevent embezzlement. I am going to 
commence that operation the day after to-morrow ; it shall 
be continued without interruption, and regular minutes 
shall be taken. When you judge that they are ready, send 
me an order, signed by you and the two commissioners, 
Garau and Salicetti, by which, upon any pretext you please, 
that can neither lead to any surmise of your intentions, nor 
cause Balbi to suspect any diminution of confidence, you 
will direct me to fetch away from citizen Balbi’s the diamonds 
and jewels that are there, for the purpose of being conveyed 
to Tortona, or to any other place you may think proper. ~ 

For instanee, you may make a handle of the fall of the 
value of diamonds and pearls in Italy, and allege that in 
consequence you prefer sending them to France. 

You will only take care to keep at my disposal at San 


. 
| 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES, 191 


Pietro de Arena a detachment of fifty horse, to escort the 
eonvoy, which will not be bulky, but very valuable ; and I 
forewarn you that, without this escort, I will have nothing 
to do with the business of removal. 

I send you, under Nos. 2 and 3, translations of papers 
from among those sent me by General Berthier. 

I have sent off to the minister, Charles Lacroix, the 
translation of that from Drake to Nelson. He will, per- 
haps, have in his office the means of deciphering the secret 
article of that letter. It recommends to him at the same 
time to warn our government to have an eye upon Toulon, 
to which that article may possibly relate. The other letters 
sent, German, Italian, oa French, contain nothing worth 
translating. 

Before i conclude my letter, general, I must communi- 
eate to you some general ideas concerning Genoa. You 
will reconcile them with those which you may have con- 
ceived on the subject. 

What had best be done with Genoa for the advantage of 
our Republic, and, at the same time, I may say, for the 
true interest of Genoa itself? That is the interesting ques- 
tion to be resolved. 

Must we remind the Genoese of all the wrongs done by 
their government to the French—the affair of the Modeste; 
the affair of the Imperieuse, another frigate taken at the 
same time, and in the same manner, at La Spezzia; the 
affair in which, last year, the battery of La Lanterne fired 
grape at Sibille, who was on ree the little xebeck the 

eonidas ; the affair of the refusal of a loan to the French, 
when they were destitute of every thing ; that of the recent 
capture of five vessels at the Arneca; lastly, the obstinacy 
of the senate in persecuting and molesting all the old par- 
tisans of the French Revolution? Yes. 

Must we demand, insist on, the annihilation of all de- 
erees, and the cessation of all prosecutions commenced, 
under specious pretexts, for political language and opi- 
nions? Yes. 

Must we demand of Genoa a loan of from six to eight 
millions, and suitable indemnities for the prizes which they 
have suffered to be taken from us on their territory, without 
opposing the proceeding? Yes. 

ust we require Genoa to admit no more English vessels 
into its port or in its Riviera Yes. 


192 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


Yes, general, most assuredly all this is necessary ; but, 
in my opinion, all this will not be sufficient : without some 
further measures, you will obtain only a few momentary 
advantages ; while, the authority remaining in the hands of 
our declared enemies, we shall have constantly to watch and 
repress the underhand maneuvres of the ill-affected sena- 
tors and the resentment of a populace whom they will 
exasperate against us. You must, therefore, if you come 
to Genoa, and wish to produce there an effect worthy of 

our way of acting and of French dignity, command the 

anishment of about fifty ta ee hostile to France, and the’ 
reform of the mode of the deliberations, by insisting on 
their being decided heneeforward, in all eases, by a simple 
majority. Do this, and, above all, on approaching Genoa, © 
publish a manifesto, declaring that you are coming with no- 
other motives but to deliver the people, and even the nobi- 
lity, from the tyranny of the families which have —— 
all the powers: then your work will be durable; France’ 
will be able to rely on the good intentions of the Genoese, 
and to consider that State as disposed to continue friends” 
with her, both by inclination and by the consideration of 
the respective interests of the two nations. - 

I know not whether it would not be better for us, under 
certain circumstances, to correspond in cipher: I send you 
one, No. 6, which is of no use but between us two. ; 

FAIPOULT. © 


The Executive Directory to the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 


Paris, 10 Messidor, year 4 [June 28, 1796]. . 

The Directory learns with surprise, citizen-general, that 

a lighter and two merchantmen, with valuable cargoes, the 
first of which had retired under the fire of the battery of 
Portecros, near Toulon, and the other two under that of 
St. Pierre, have been taken without resistance by the 
English. It requests you not to suffer the approach of 
these pirates oe coasts of the Mediterranean, to attend 
to that service, which is said to be performed with the 
utmost negligence, and to give it all the activity which 
circumstances require. 


* 


CarRNo?. 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 193 


~ The Executive Directory to the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 

. , Paris, 12 Messidor, year 4 [June 30, 1796]. 

We have received your despatches, dated 8 Messidor: 
that which treats of your military position has convinced us 
that the Leghorn expedition has not made you lose sight of 
a more essential object—that of preserving the conquests in 
Italy, by Fears Beaulieu from re-entering the Mi- 
lanese. e participate in your just impatience for your 
return to this side of the Po; pe we think that you will 
soon be in a condition to collect your principal forces towards 
the points threatened. . 

The Prince of Rome, terrified at the rapidity of your 
march, will, no doubt, have demanded an armistice, and 
your instructions on this head will have enabled you to 
make conditions conformable with our wish, till eireum- 
stances and the consolidation of the triumphs of the Re- 
‘public fix the manner in which it will be consistent with 
the national dignity and our political system to treat defi- 
nitively with the oe ; 

Your measures in regard to Genoa are approved, and the 
Directory is desiring the niinister of the Republic to that 
pemul to insist on the expulsion of M. Girola: those which 

ave for their object.the safety of your communications, the 
tranquillity of the territory, and the avenging of perfidious 
acts executed or attempted against whatever belongs to 
the Republic, are likewise deserving of the assent of the 
Directory. 

The sec vodintn which you make on the abuses of the 
administrative service in the levy and 8, sangre the 
contributions have fixed our attention. It has appeared to 
us that unity of views and harmony among our agents 
ought to be the basis of the good order to be established in 
that department ; we have, in consequence, revoked the 
powers of citizen Pinsot: our commissioners, Salicetti and 
Garrau, will direct all the operations which belong to it. 
A copy of our instructions to the commissioners of the 
government with the armies is annexed, and the disposi- 
tions contained in our different letters fix the relations 
which ought to exist between them and you. The entire 
and = aE Sg confidence which you have acquired, citizen- 
general, in every respect, and that which the Directory has 
granted to its commissioners, Salicetti and Garrau, afford it 

VOL. I. Oo 


194 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES, 


the certainty that the same concert will continue to pr 
vail between you. Let not any thing then that can add 
to the fruit of the conquests of the Republic in Italy, and 
‘to the judicious application of the resources which are 
offered you, escape your vigilance. Point out with that 
courageous integrity which is peculiar to you all rogues and 
tors, and the just severity of the Directory shall not 
‘ail to overtake them. 

General Kellermann has reported to us the requisition 
made to him on your application for two demi-brigades, but 
he has only five battalions left ; and this reinforcement will 
necessarily meet with some delays before it reaches Milan. 
The 2000 men furnished by the army of the Coasts of the 
Ocean are on march. As soon as the first troops arrive at 
Lyons, General Kellermann will despatch to you those that 

ou apply for: he has been directed to send a two batta- 
ions; and one of the demi-brigades, commanded by General 
Chateauneuf, is about to receive orders to proceed to the 
army of Italy. ‘ it Rud 

The junction of these reinforcements, of the troops which 
you will bring back from Tuscany into the Milanese, and 
of those which the fall of the castle of Milan will soon 
render disposable, will form an imposing force, capable not 
only of resisting Beaulieu, but also of beating him in ‘his 
positions, till he is again overthrown. On the 6th, the 
army of the Rhine and Moselle effected the passage of the 
Rhine at Strasburg with brilliant success; that of the Sam- 
bre and Meuse is necessarily about to resume a vigorous 
defensive, under favour of this diversion and of a disposable 
corps lent it by that of the North. Considerable forces are 
acting at this moment on the right bank of that river, and 
we hope that the whole theatre of the war will soon be trans- 
ferred to it. ! 

We have been much pleased to learn that the troops are 
free from those diseases which usually attack the French in 
Italy. To satisfy the wants of the soldier, to keep him — 
from intemperance, and to maintain a vigilant discipline, 
are the most efficient means of preserving armies from those 
destructive calamities, the rock on which their triumphs are 
wrecked. 1s Sap 

The exquisite productions of the fine arts, of the despatch 
of which you give us notice, will add to the splendour of the 
trophies of the army of Italy. 109 


» 
A 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 195 


We must at once embellish and enrich France with all 
the valuable monuments and all the interesting productions 
of those flourishing countries. It would be useful to in- 
troduce into our country mares of a good breed, to improve 
that of our horses. The territory of several States, and 
especially that of Naples, affords particular resources of this 
kind, which the Directory requests you not to neglect. 

ARNOT. 


The General-in-Chief Bonaparte to the Executive Directory. 
Head-quarters, Roverbello, 18 Messidor, year 4 (July 6, 1796]. 

I learn, this moment, citizens directors, that the garrison 
of Mantua has made a sortie: it went back quicker than it 
came out, leaving behind it fifty killed. 

I shall make this evening a final reconnaissance for deter- 
mining upon the last operations of the siege : in four or five 
days the trenches will be opened. 

he divisions of the army which are on the mountains of 
the Tyrol are in perfect health. The division of General 
Serrurier, which is besieging Mantua and is 7000 strong, 
begins to have fifty sick every day. It is impossible for me 
to keep. fewer troops about Mantua, where there is a gar- 
rison of at least 8 or 10,000 men. It is now a month that 
I have kept the place blockaded in this manner. The 
enemy, informed probably of the weakness of the be- 
a has often stiotinptil to make sorties and always been 

ten 


But I am now obliged to reinforce this division, since the 
opening of the trenches is about to commence. I hope that 
we shall soon have the city, otherwise we shall have a great 


many sick. 

Bisistiner is beginning to make movements for attempting 
to raise the blockade of Mantua. I am waiting with some 
impatience for the ten battalions of the army of the Ocean, 
a have long promised me, and of which I have not 
yet any tidings. 

‘Ishall not turn my attention to the demands to be made 
upon Venice, till the business of Genoa is settled, Mantua 
reduced, and the matters about to be taken in hand termi- 
nated. 

-- It is computed that the reinforeements received by the 
enemy amount to 31,000 men, 10,000 of whom are Tyrolese ; 
02 


196 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


18,000, remnant of Beaulieu’s army; 8000, garrison of 
Mantua : total, 67,000 men. i | 
The force of our army is as follows: Massena’s division, 
13,000 men; Sauret’s, 8000 ; Augereau’s, 8000; Serru- 
rier’s, 7000 ; Despinois’, 5000 ; cavalry, 3000: total, err 
men. ar Bate 
You see the great superiority which the enemy has over 


us. . Rios) | 

In the 40,000 men above mentioned, the garrisons of 
Leghorn, Milan, Pavia, Tortona, &c., are not included. 
, f intirmed you in my last letter that I had demanded 
6000 muskets of the republic of Lucca; they were already 
on their way, but, not being of calibre, I sent them back. } 

I have caused all the property at Leghorn belonging to 
Neapolitans to be sequestrated, since, 7 op armistice, the 
suspension of arms is not considered to have commenced till 
the moment when the Neapolitan cavalry shall have arrived 
at the positions indicated to it. I think, however, that you 
might order restitution of the goods belonging to Neapolitans 
by an article of the treaty of peace. I have ordered all the 
inventories of the effects belonging to Neapolitans to be 
made before their consul, x) 


BoNAPARTE. 


To the Executive Directory. hs 


Head-quarters, Roverbello, 18 Messidor, year 4 [July 6, 1796}. + 

I transmitted to you, citizens directors, by my last courier, 
the requisition which I had made to the city of Genoa to 
expel the minister of the emperor, who never ceased foment- 
ing rebellion in the imperial fiefs and instigating the com- 
mission of murders. You will find annexed the note which 
the secretary of state has addressed to citizen Faipoult, 
and which he has sent to me. You will likewise find an- 
nexed a letter from the minister Faipoult relative to the 
affairs of Genoa ; I beg you to take it into consideration, and 
to give me your orders upon the subject. As for me, Lb 
think, like the minister Faipoult, that there ought to be 
“turned out of the government of Genoa a score of families; 
which, by the constitution of the country itself; have no 
right to be in it, since they are feudatories of the emperor 
or of the King of Naples ; that the senate should be com- 
pelled to repeal the decree which banishes from Genoa eight 


, 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. ° 197 


or ten noble families, namely, those which are attached to 
France, and which, three years ago, prevented the republic 
of Genoa from joining the coalition. By these means, the 

vernment of Genoa would find itself composed of our 

iends, and we might rely the more upon it since the new 
banished families would retire among the allies, and thence- 
forward the new governors of Genoa would fear them as we 
fear the return of the emigrants. If you approve this plan, 
you have only to give me your orders, and I will charge 
myself with the means of ensuring its execution. 

I shall expect your answer to this letter in the first 
decade of Thermidor. 

BONAPARTE. 


To General Bonaparte. 


Venice, 15 Messidor, year 4 [July 3, 1796]. 

I learn this moment, citizen-general, that a courier who 
has come to Drake, the English minister, brings him intel- 
ligenee that General Wurmser is at Trent with a consider- 
able Austrian army and another Austrian general whose 
name he has not given to me with sufficient accuracy. 

I think it right to lose no time in acquainting General 
Massena, as well as General Kilmaine, with this news ; and 
for this purpose I am despatching a courier, whom I shall 
address to ees Rampon at Verona; but it appeared to 
me not less necessary to give you the information. 
LALLEMANT. 


To Citizen Faipoult, Minister of the Republic at Genoa. 


Head-quarters, Roveredo, 17 Messidor, year 4 [July 5, 1796}. 

I had rather that the German deserters should take ser- 
vice in the Spanish army than in the Venetian ; I therefore 
beg you to inform the Spanish recruiter that I authorise 
him to go to Brescia, whither I will send all the German 
deserters to him. 

I have been here since yesterday. General Massena has 
been in quest of the enemy, killed 400 of his men, and taken 
350 prisoners. 

shall approach your walls by and by. 

» Bonaparte, 


ak 


198 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES.’ 


To the Commissary of the Marine at Toulon. 
Head-quarters, Roveredo, 17 Messidor, year 4 [July 5, 1796}. . 

Eighty carriages loaded with hemp are about to start 
from Bo ogna for Nice, where they will be at your disposal. 

I have written to the minister of the marine, to inform 
him that he might send commissioners to Rome, to receive 
to the amount of 4,000,000, in cash. 

I shall always have great pleasure in doing any thing 
that can contribute to the restoration of our navy, though, 
in reality, it requires an order of the government. 

BoNaPARTE. 


To Citizen Carnot, Member of the Executive Directory. 
Head-quarters, Roverbello, 18 Messidor, year 4 [July 6, 1796]. 
General Berthier is furious about the imaginary victory 
which the German news-writers have made antied i 
over us. For my part, I think those gentlemen are right 
to comfort themselves in the only way that is left them: 
dreams have always been the consolation of the unfortunate. 
All our diplomatic affairs in Italy, with the exception of 
Genoa and Venice, are terminated. Fat be Fe 
For Venice, the moment is not favourable: we must first 
take Mantua and give Wurmser a sound drubbing. 
As for Genoa, the precise moment has arrived: I am of 
the opinion of citizen Faipoult, who is for turning out of 
the government a score families who have betrayed us in all 
times, and to obtain, on the contrary, the recall of those in 
banishment who have shown friendship for us. The monient 
I know your intentions on the subject, I shall make it my 
duty to execute them; meanwhile, I shall begin with the 
negociations for the 10,000,000. . 
All goes on well; the enemy is reinforcing himself: we 
shall not seek him unless he comes too near the Adige; and 
we are going to concentrate all our means to take Mantua. 
BONAPARTE, 


The Executive Directory to General Bonaparte. 


Paris, 14 Messidor, year 4 [July 2, 1796]. 
The monastery of the Great St. Bernard has attracted, 
citizen-general, the attention of the Directory : it has thought 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 199. 


that it ought to contribute to the maintenance of an esta- 
blishment directed in favour of humanity and the directors 
of which afford hospitality to all nations. It recommends 
to you to order the sum of 6000 livres in money to be re- 
mitted to the religious of that monastery, to make up for. 
the aid which has been so long withheld. 

Carnot. 


The Executive Directory to the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 
Paris, 17 Messidor, year 4 [July 5, 1796]. 

‘ The Executive Directory reminds you, citizen-general, of 
the urgent request that it made you to. give precise orders, 
to be vigilantly followed up, that- plans of situations and 
decadary historical bulletins should be regularly addressed 
to it. It is sorry to see that, since the commencement of 
the campaign, the army which you command has not sent 
any of those different sbizcte, It is important that this task 
be henceforward punctually performed, and executed upon 
the plan of the model. 

When the occupations of the chief of the staff are too 
numerous for him to attend personally to this point, he 
can make an adjutant-general supply his place in drawing 
up the historical bulletin, which requires a particular talent. 

You will fulfil, citizen-general, the wish of the Directory, 
by paying serious attention to the object of this letter. 

CARNOT. 


The Executive Directory to the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 


: Paris, 18 Messidor, year 4 [July 6, 1796]. 

We have received, citizen-general, your despatches of the, 
8th. Messidor: we are satisfied with the armistiee concluded 
with the pope. The other advantages which you regret not 
to have derived from that negociation will be found, we hope 
with you, at the time of the definitive treaty, which we are 
in no hurry to conclude, persuaded that the army of Italy, 
in maintaining its glorious conquests, will give us all the 
latitude necessary for imposing upon Italy the conditions of 
peace most favourable to the Republic. In order to have 
avoided the difficulties which you have met with in the dis- 
cussion of the armistice, it would have been desirable that 
our commissioners should have conferred upon it in your 


200 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


presence only with M.d’Azara ; but at this moment we see : 
nothing but the importance of that event, and the precious — 
faculty which it has given you of marching rapidly back to , 
this side of the Po, before Beaulieu has had time to attempt | 
Re thing. 
he retaining of the port of Ancona promises advan 
to our Levant trade; but this measure appears to us to 
still uncertain for the future. We beg of. you, however, till 
something is settled in regard to this point, which is neces-. 
sarily connected with ulterior circumstances, to make all the 
i fer that you shall deem useful. ; 

- It will be very interesting for us to know what opinion 
we ought to attach to the overtures made to you by Prince» 
Pignatelli relative to Vienna; and you have acted wisely 
by directing him to repair without delay to Paris. In di-, 
ke pi as in war, moments are always precious. svc 
The expedition to Leghorn must have been to Genoa a. 
signal of just alarm, which its perfidious neutrality cannot. 
but excite in it. Let the national vengeance follow the vic-. 
torious army of Italy, and let us not neglect the indemnities 
demanded by the losses and the sacrifices of the Republic. 

The army of the Rhine and Moselle is continuing its vie-- 
torious and rapid course on the right bank of the Rhine; it, 
has overthrown part of Wurmser’s pore near Offenburg, , 
—— a battle on the 10th at Reinchen. a 

e learn this moment that the army of the Sambre and_ 
Meuse has, conformably with our precise intentions, resumed 
its offensive movement, and that the divisions which had 
crossed the Rhine in falling back have recrossed the river 
by main force. The Austrians cannot withstand the com- 
bined attack of these two powerful armies, which are impa- 
tient to follow the immortal traces of that which you com- 
mand. , CaRNOT. 


To M. the Proveditor-General. 


Head-quaiters, Roveredo, 19 Messidor, year 4 [July 7, 1796}. - 
I have received several reports of murders committed 
upon Frenchmen by inhabitants of Pont Santo Mareo, 1. 
have no doubt that you will put a stop to this as speedily . 
as possible, otherwise the villages will be exposed to the. 
just resentment of the army, and I will make a terribleex- . 
ample of them. tA D 


a aa. iia 


i 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 201 


I flatter myself that you will cause the guilty to be appre- 
hended, and place additional detachments in that town to 
secure the communications. 

BONAPARTE. 


To M., the Proveditor-General. - 


Head-quarters, Verona, 20 Messidor, year 4 [July 8, 1796}. 
There prevails between the French troops and the 
Slavonians an animosity, which ill-affected persons, no 
doubt, study to inflame. To prevent greater evils, not less 
ievous than contrary to the interests of the two repub- 
es, it is indispensable, sir, that you should send away 
from Verona to-morrow, on the most plausible pretexts, 

the battalions of Slavonians which you have in this city. 

BONAPARTE. 


To M. the Proveditor-General. 


Head-quarters, Verona, 21 Messidor, year 4 [July 9, 1796]. 
The present circumstances of the war and the necessity 
for defending Verona, oblige me, sir, to place artillery on 
the ramparts of this city. I have the fea he to apprise 
you that I have given instructions to this effect to the 
general of artillery. 
BONAPARTE. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Bergamo, 17 Messidor, year 4 [July 5, 1796]. 

The reports of my spies and of travellers agree in assur- 
ing me that the enemy is fortifying himself at the mountain 
of Tonale, and that he is going to form a camp at Bal- 
zente, To-morrow I shall have some more positive infor- 
mation, on the return of a trusty person; and by an 
odors [adjoint] whom I have sent into the Valteline, you 
will have certain intelligence both respecting the adjutant- 
general whom you have sent to the chief of the Leagues and 
the dispositions of the Grisons: I am assured that they 
are disposed and quite ready to take arms against any army 
that should attempt to violate their territory. 

From Bergamo there are four different routes to the 
country of the Grisons: that of the Lake of Como and 


202 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES: 


Chiayenna,; that of the valley of Brembo; that. of Serio 
and Schalvo; and that of Val Camonica. All these routes. 
are very difficult: they are covered by extremely high and. 
steep mountains. : os 

The debouchés from the Tyrol to Bergamo are by the 
Tonale, Ponte di Legno, Val Camonieca, and the Grisons. 


The first is as bad as the others. if 
CERVONI. 44 


To General Berthier, Chief of the Staff. 


: Bologna, 18 Messidor, year 4 [July 6, 1796). 
Your order of the 17th of this month, general, reached. 
me only just at the moment when I was: setting out for 
Lugo, where there is formed an apostolic army of 15 or. 
20,000 men. Those rebels have cavalry, leaders, and 
generals; they give egw dated ‘ Head-quarters, 
Lugo :” ca have killed two of my volunteers and a horse 
chasseur. I have despatched a battalion, two pieces of 
cannon, and a squadron, and am going at their head to re- 
duce those fanatics to order. I consider this measure as 
indispensably necessary before leaving this country. I 
have nevertheless sent off last night M. the Baron de Ca-. 
peletti, chargé d’ affaires of his Catholic Majesty, to try 
the effect of remonstrance. I am waiting for his answer, _ 
: AUGEREAU. 


To the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 


Leghorn, 18 Messidor, year 4 [July 6, 1796]. 

I reported to you in my last, citizen-general, that the. 
military department was going on well at Leghorn: it is 
the only one about which Tam able to satisfy you. Ihave’ 
been excluded from other matters, and am very glad of it, 
for I am relieved from the responsibility of them. 

From what the consul of the Republic tells me, the’ 
English magazines will probably yield 5,000,000, if em- 
bezzlements, of which he is himself apprehensive, can be’ 
prevented. TI had slipped my Argus into the commission 
charged with the sequestrations, inventories, and perhaps’ 
the sale; he was turned out by a resolution. 

The consul of France has just left me: he has been to 
complain of the cruelties practised upon the merchants of 


q 
q 

‘ 
\J 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 203. 


the country. These merchants, on receiving intimation 
that they were to pay to the Republic the amount of what 
they owed to the English, insisted at first that there was 
much more due to them from the English than they owed, 
and that, at least, compensation ought to be made. They 
were told that they might compound, and that, to excuse 
them from producing their books, which should be verified, 
the French would be content with 5 or 6,000,000. Yesterday, 
“as the consul told me, they offered 5,000,000: it was re- 
fused. The consul appears to be extremely vexed at this: 
he declares that this treatment is driving the merchants to 
— 

he port is, by order, closely shut: of course it can no 
longer be frequented, even by neutrals.. Might not great 
injury result from this to the country! The Greeks and 
other neutrals suffer; and if Provence were in need of 
corn, are we not driving away those who procure it ? 

Be it said, between ourselves, I believe that there is a 
disposition to injure Leghorn for the benefit of Genoa. 
The Genoese consul Lachdse has been placed on the com- 
mission by the commissioners : many Genoese are arrivi 
here, and probably speculating on the goods of the English ; 
this competition sonkd not be otherwise than advantageous ; 
but beware of connivances ! 

In short, general, I am convinced that, with fair and 
gentle means, this city would have fulfilled your expecta- 
tions, and produced, without erying out, 10,000,000 to the 
Republic. 

V AUBOIS. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


_ Formigosa, 18 Messidor, year 4 [July 6, 1796). 

I went yesterday, according to your orders, to the lake 
of Mantua: after long and useless inquiry for the casa 
Tasidiani, which nobody knew, guided by the localities, I 
came to a house which I believe to be that marked in 
the plan. 

The road to it must be constantly above the water in the 
highest inundations. It is almost entirely sheltered on the 
side next to the enemy: at any rate, the columns may file 
along at the rear, without the place having the slightest 
suspicion of the matter. 


204 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES.’ 


. The house is situated on the margin of the lake, or, to’ 
speak more correctly, of the inundation: one may embark at 
once, or, if the water is low, by means of some small flying 
bridges 6f little consequence. No muddy marsh to cross, 
consequently no hurdles, &e. : 

The lake is covered, in front of the house, for a regular’ 
breadth of two hundred fathoms, with reeds ten or twelve 
feet high. For this space, which we crossed with very 
great difficulty on account of the reeds, the lake is of sufhi-. 
cient depth to carry large boats. | Guat 

We also traversed it by following the canal marked in the 
plan on the left of the house; but this direction carried us 
too far below the entrenchments, and we examined the first. 

Beyond the reeds is the Mincio, the channel of which 
may be from twenty-eight to thirty fathoms in width, which 
we measured this morning a little lowerdown. Beyond the 

Mincio is a flat shore covered with rushes. : 

» No dispositions having been made yesterday evening for 
measuring the breadth of the Mincio and the space covered 
with seals, the operation was deferred till to-night, espe- 
cially as, by that time, we shall know in what direction we 
must take these measures: which it is important to ascer-. 
tain, as will be seen by and by. : 

The house called Tasidiani is found to correspond by its’ 
position nearly with the centre of that of the enemy, be-~ 
tween the canal of the cut and the place. In this interval 
you perceive the entrenchment which defends the cut ; it is 
very raking [rasant]; a large camp parallel to the canal of 

St..George, with posts in advance, one of which faces the 
casa Tasidiani, with a stationary boat, that, I believe, does 
not ply at night. We saw it retire yesterday evening and 
arrive this morning at daybreak ; it has six oars and but 
few hands. The great camp appears to support itself upon 
an entrenchment which covers the side of the place towards’ 
the canal of St. George ; this entrenchment, which is pali-. 
saded, is extremely raking, appears insultable, and might 
be turned. 

At the angle of the flank of the bastion on the right of 
this entrenchment, is the termination of a dike which runs 
to a great distance in front of the enclosure that faces St. 

George. The enemy is busily at work augmenting the re- ; 
lief. It covers a sallyport, placed in that part of the enclo- 
sure which is beyond the third flank. oes 


| 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 205 


As to the arming of the part of the enclosure, there are 
to be seen only six embrasures on the face to the right of 
the tower, two embrasures on the face that comes next, and 
one embrasure at the flanked angle, looking more to the right 
face than to the left. 

Now for the reflections suggested by these localities, and 
what we propose in consequence of those reflections. 

A landing upon the right bank of the Mincio appears to 
us to be practicable, but, instead of making it in front of 
the entrenchment, it is proposed to make it in rear, near 
the dike, in order to turn that same entrenchment. The 
means are these : : 

To make three cuts running to the same point in the 
forest of reeds in front of the casa Tasidiani; to make the 
three great barks which are to carry the men for landing 
keep moving to and fro in these three canals. 

To establish on the remaining part of the Mincio, as 
well over the canal as through the reeds, a bridge so con- 
structed that the boats be placed lengthwise instead of 
breadthwise—a necessary precaution both for the facility 
of the maneuvre and the obstacle opposed by the reeds. 

This bridge will be brought ready formed, or at least it 
will be put together in a very short time in the middle cut, 
and it will be propelled or hauled to the opposite bank. 
For this operation expert and intrepid swimmers must be 
employed. 

Supposing the Mincio to be thirty fathoms in width, and 
the patch of reeds on the right bank likewise thirty 
fathoms, there will be sixty fathoms to provide for, 
and eighteen boats of three fathoms each will be 
sufficient. 

This is not all. The bridges and the lighters can be 
brought at night before the casa Tasidiani, without the 
enemy perceiving this movement. I followed this eh 
a canal, which runs along the left side of the Mincio behin 
the reeds, that carried me to the Mincio, down which I 
proceeded to Formigosa. 

I was accompanied in the reconnaissance of yesterday 
evening by citizens Samson, chief of battalion of en- 
gineers, and Duroc, captain of labourers, and in that of 
this morning by Captain Duroc alone. 

ANDREOSSI. 


206 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


To the General-in-Chief. . aids 

Formigosa, 19 Messidor, year 4 [July 7, 1796). _ 

The reconnaissance of last night has produced nothing. 

According to the report of Captain Duroc, the cruizin 
bark has prevented ours from debouching from the reeds. i 
shall go thither myself this evening. st 
Citizen Duroc perceived distinctly at sunset the bastion 
on the right of the entrenchment, which covers the enclo- 
‘sure armed with six pieces of cannon @ barbette on the 
side next to the Mincio. 
The day before yesterday, we had heard the retreat 
‘beaten at the camp, and the sentinels calling to each other 
to be upon their guard. Yesterday, the retreat was not 
beat ; the utmost silence prevailed, and not a bell in the 
city sounded. ’ 
The water is rising, which will facilitate the landing: it 
begins to be a little mooonlight. a 
en are at work upon the bridge for the cut. I have 
given orders for the construction of six gun-carriages a 
coulisse, that is to say, three for eight-pounders and three 
for howitzers. I shall have boats sufficient. for landing from 
300 to 600 men collected to-day; I shall have, besides, 
several small boats to move about with celerity to the 
right and left: such were the orders you gave me 

yesterday. 

ANDREOSSI, 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Verona, 19 Messidor, year 4 [July 7, 1796]. 

I am writing, citizen-general, from Vicenza, where the 
enemy, who is very near, apprised of my coming, had formed. 
a plan to carry me off, or at least to lie in wait for me. 
as I left the town: I did my business all the same. 

I sent off yesterday morning from Vicenza two trusty 
men, one for Bassano and the other for Premolano.. One 
returned in the night, with rather circumstantial details, 
which tally with those that have been given me by three 
persons from Bassano. I wait here for the second emissary 
and also two others whom I have despatched to Trent. 
The details that I have received are these : 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 207 


~ At Bassano, 5000 men, 2000 of them cavalry ; at Bressa- 
via, 300 Hulans; at Pazza, 100 horse. 

On the left bank of the Brenta, at Citadella, 200 cavalry ; 
at Dampo and Pietro, 150 cavalry; they are said to be 
Neapolitans. 

At Premolano, 6000 to 7000 men, expected to-day at 
Bassano, of whom about 2000 cavalry. At Bassano and 
Premolano there is only field artillery and no bridge 
equipage. 

The inhabitants of Vicenza and the environs appear very 
well disposed, and the extraordinary attentions paid by the 
principal inhabitants and the podesta do not indicate that 
they expect to see us driven out, as people said at Verona. 
The Bishop of Vieenza, who arrived yesterday at Bassano, 
observed that it would require something more than that to 
drive out the French. 

The Slavonians have all been sent away from Verona, 
and are at Padova: it appears that they have been strongl 
excited against us; so I have been told by one of their 
officers whom I saw at Vicenza. At Venice and Padova 
there are about 10,000 Slavonians: it is their chaplains, 
together with some silly jests of our soldiers, that have 
occasioned their animosity. 

The Venetians, with the exception of three or four thou- 
sand Slavonians from Venetian Italy, are arming only at 
sea ; but they appear to be doing so with activity. 

I expect here two men from Trent and one from Premo- 
lana: they will arrive this evening ; they are trusty fellows. 
Meanwhile, here is what I am informed from Trent. 

The advanced posts of the enemy at Alla and Borghetto 
amount to 2500 men. In Roveredo and the environs, there 
are 15,000 men; at Bolzano, 12,000. It is said that they 
expect 15 or 20,000 more. In what they have at present, 
there are 10,000 cavalry, including the Neapolitans, who 
have not yet left them. It appears that no troops of the 
enemy have marched for Bergamo. KILMAINE. 


Note presented to the Doge and Senate of Venice on the 20th 
Messidor (July 8), by the Minister of the French 
Republic. 


The minister of the French Republic, agreeably to the 
orders which he has just received, has the honour to inform 


208 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


your serenity and your excellencies that the French go- 
vernment cannot see with indifference the assemblage of 
Slavonian soldiers and of national troops, which has been 

ing on for some time in Venice and in the islands of its 

istrict. < 

The Venetians took no defensive measure when the. 
Austrians marched considerable corps of troops into the 
Venetian territory, and threatened to introduce them at 
other points which in all ages had been respected. It seems. 
strange that, at the moment when the French, pursuing 
their wien upon the same territory which he is still vio- 
lating with impunity, are forced to occupy, though as 
friends, posts indispensable for the success of their opera- 
tions, there should be collected extraordinary forces, the. 
object of which is not even apparent. f 


P wv 
It is known to your serenity and your excellencies that, 


the ferment excited by this novelty has extended to the 
whole Venetian nation. It must necessarily have caused it: 


to believe that these dispositions were directed solely against. 


the French, and this opinion is so accredited through the 
perfidious insinuations of the emigrants and the partizans of . 
Austria, that the coffee-houses and the publie places still 
ring with the most scandalous expressions, in spite of the 
reiterated complaints which have been made and the 
measures which the administration has taken to suppress, 
them. 

The general-in-chief of the French army considers these 
dispositions as hostile, or dictated by a confidence injurious” 
to Venice, and contrary to the interests and the dignity of 
the French Republic. 

The minister of France has orders to demand of your: 
serenity and your excellencies a frank and honest expla-. 
nation respecting the nature and the object of this moye-, 
ment. He ought to rely upon the positive assurances which; 
the Senate has given to the Executive Directory by its am-> 
bassador in Paris, and which M. the Chevalier ae is, 
daily repeating, of the firmest and the most constant friend- 
ship of the republic of Venice for the French Republic ; 
but he further expects from its wisdom the immediate ces- 
sation of an arming, the continuance of which, in justifying 
the founded suspicions that it excites in the general, 
would decide him to steps, which must destroy in a moment 
that good understanding which the respective ministers of. 


i 
| — 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES, 209. 


the two governments have thus far exerted themselves to 
maintain. 

He thinks also that a prompt and satisfactory answer, 
which should be sent immediately to the general-in-chief of 
the army, would have the effect of destroying the disad- 
vantageous ideas that he must have conceived, and revive 
his confidence. 

LALLEMANT. 


Proclamation of the General-in-Chief to the people of Mantua. 


Head-quarters, Roverbello, 18 Messidor, year 4 [July 9, 1796]. 

The general-in-chief is informed that abuses of all kinds 
are committed, and that the good people of the duchy of 
Mantua are crushed by abusive requisitions. In conse- 
quence, he orders, 

1. That there shall be three assemblies in the duchy of 
Mantua, composed of one deputy for each commune, who 
shall meet on the 24th of the month. ; 

The first meeting shall be held at Roverbello, and com- 
prehend the deputies of all the country between the Mincio, 
the Po, and the States of Venice. 

The second assembly shall be held at Gouraque, and 
shall comprise the deputies of all the conquered countries 
beyond the Po. 

The third shall be held at Castiglione de Scrivia, and 
comprehend the deputies of all the countries comprised 
between the Mincio, the Po, the Brescian, and Lombardy. 

2. Each deputy shall bring with him: 1, his act of depu- 
tation by the municipality ; 2, a paper of complaints which 
the inhabitants have to make against different individuals 
of the army ; 3, a statement of the contributions in money 
which the country has furnished, and into whose hands ; 
4, a statement of the contributions in kind that have been 
furnished, and to whom delivered; 5, a statement of the 
amount found in the public chests ; 6, a statement of the 
direct and indirect impositions, and what-is due. 

3. The oldest member of each assembly shall be the 
ster en ; it shall assemble in a place that shall be speci- 

ed by the municipalities, where they will meet. 

4, Each assembly shall nominate three deputies, to go 
with all the papers of complaints and the statements above- 
mentioned to the general-in-chief. Immediately afterwards 

VOL. I. P 


210 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


the assembly shall be dissolved: it must not last longer 
than twelve Tare: 

5. The general-in-chief forbids, upon the severest penal- 
ties, agents of the services, commissaries of war, or officers, 


to make ome unless it be signed by the ordon- 


nateur en ¢ f 
BONAPARTE. — 


To General Bonaparte. 


Roverbello, 19 Messidor, year 4 [July 8, 1796]. 

I am come hither, general, to give you an account of 
my reconnaissance of last night. 

Between ten and eleven o’clock I approached, by favour 
of the reeds, with two. boats, as far as the canal of St. 
George: from that place I detached two men with the 
lightest of those boats: they proceeded, unperceived, to the 
opposite bank, above the entrenchments, as you had 
scribed: when the poles with which they propelled their 
boat were not long enough to reach the bottom, they swam 
with those same poles. No trees in this part; very little 
herbage ; and, in the shallowest parts, two fathoms water. 
The opposite bank is a dike, the slopes of which afford an 
easy access ; aes brought me. back specimens of that land 
of promise, which will soon be ours, if the means are well 
combined, as I have no doubt they will be: order and 
silence, and I will answer for the landing. 

On attentively examining at sunset the bastion on the 
right of the entrenchments which cover the enclosure, I did 
not perceive the six pieces of cannon mentioned in my letter 
of yesterday: with a good glass I clearly distinguished two 
caicasutes formed on the parapet with gabions full of 
earth; it did not appear to me that this battery was armed. 

The stationary boat went up a little before the retreat; 
a second came down a little before ten ; so apparently.a 
boat does pass the night in this position. 

The sentinels of the city cried a good deal till about 
twelve o'clock, when I retired: those of the camps and the 
sosiy depending on them maintain the most, profound 
silence. 

All that you have ordered me shall be ready to-morrow 
evening. 


F. ANDREOSSI. 


: 
’ 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 211 


To General Bonaparte. 
Bologna, 20 Messidor, year 4 [July 8, 1796]. 

The apostolic army and its head-quarters no longer exist. 
The Chouans of the Romagna and the Ferrarese have been 
chased, beaten, dispersed, at all points; and, if I am 
not mistaken, it will be a long time before they take a 
fancy to fight us again. 

Some priests, who conceived themselves still in the a 
of the crusades, and five or six villains animated with the 

irit of revolt, contrived to collect, by means of terror, a 
silly and misguided rabble, to which they ridiculously gave 
the pompous name of army. Regulations, proclamations, 
acts of authority of all kinds, had already issued from this 
focus of insurrection ; workshops of all sorts were in full 
activity: all trembled under the tyrannical yoke of these 
rivals of Charette. 

I ordered General Beyrand, who was then at Forli, to 

seize, if possible, the printer, whose name was attached to 
an incendiary proclamation which I mentioned to you at the 
time: that general sent a piquet of cavalry and a detach- 
ment of infantry to Lugo, for this operation.. Those troops 
were received with a fire of musketry, and obliged to retire, 
after having had three men and a horse killed and four .or 
five men wounded. 
- Inceused at the audacity of these brigands, convinced of 
the necessity of preventing the spreading of the insurrection, 
and anihink to avenge French blood, I determined to begin 
with a decisive blow. 

I ordered General Beyrand to repair.to Imola, where I 
directed a battalion of the 4th deinisbrignds, 200 horse, and 
two pieces of artillery, to assemble; and I repaired thither 
‘igre The chief of brigade, Pourallier, had orders to set 
out with half of the troops that were at Ferrara, and to 
march to the. rear of Lugo, to cut off the rebels, while I 
should attack them in front. 

On arriving at Imola, M. the Baron de Capaletti, chargé 
des affaires of the King of Spain, proposed to me his medi- 
ation, and proceeded to Lugo to persuade that horde to lay 
down their arms and to return to order: they were obsti- 
nate, and rejected these proposals. I marched against. them 
yesterday morning, with nearly 800 infantry, 200. horse, 
and two pieces of artillery. ‘About a league and a half from 

P2 


212 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


the town, their advanced posts, concealed among the hemp 
crops, began to fire: our advanced troops dislodged them, 
Bis 2 drove them faster than at a foot pace into the town, 
where they fancied themselves safe. 1 ordered a few can- 
non-shot to be sent after them, and several houses to be 
fired. This demonstration, combined with a brisk fire of 
musketry, made them shift their quarters pa ape 
they fled. in disorder into the country, where I caused them 
to be closely pursued. About 300 were left on the spot. 
The affair cost us four killed, and six or seven wounded, 
The leaders of these rebels, certain of the treatment that I 
should reserve for them, had prudently betaken themselves 
to flight. ee 

On entering Lugo, shots from windows killed two of my 
men. I would have burned the town; but women, old 
men, and children only were left in it ; they were respected. 

AUGEREAU. 


To General Bonaparte. 


Leghorn, 21 Messidor, year 4 [July 9, 1796}, 

I avail myself of the first opportunity to give you an 
account of the state of Leghorn. ; 

I venture to assure you that the military service is going 
on well, that the forts are respectable, that the conduct of 
the troops is good, and that we are ready to receive the 
enemy. ' 

Ido not think that the commission created here to secure. 
to the Republic all that belongs to the English will give 
you the same satisfaction. Dissension is breaking out in it. 
The consul of France, Belleville, would have withdrawn ; 
the minister and I prevailed upon him to remain: he gave 
me to understand that he was afraid of peculation. A 
Genoese colony has come to take the lead in business. 
Lachaise, consul of Genoa, associated with Belleville, has 
taken a high tone: I might even complain of his corre- 
spondence. 

The commercial business has miscarried, in my opinion. 
If, as the commissioner Garrau assured me, the merchants 
offered 5,000,000 in specie, I think it was wrong not to 
close with them. These merchants allege that the English 
are prodigiously in their debt, and that they have advice 
that the English will not pay them; they proclaimed the 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 213 


stop’ of their payments immediately. I think them in 
a horrible crisis. I wish the Republic may be a gainer by 
it; but I doubt that. This business has been roughly 
treated. A little more suavity and pliability would have 
succeeded better. 

The English magazines are very considerable, as I am 
told; but [I am very often reminded too that the whole 
will not be for the Republic. The commission is nume- 
rous, some of its members not of the best repute ; the prin- 
cipal of them have the pen always in their hands; the 
magazines are frequented only by the subordinates ; the in- 
ventories are made only by them: in short, they are at 
liberty to fish in troubled water. 

I wash my hands of all these affairs, and confine myself 
to the military department. VAUBOIS. — 


The Senate of Venice in answer to the Note of the 
Minister Lallemant. 


Venice, 9 July, 1796 [21 Messidor, year 4). 

The memorial which you have this morning sent affords 
the Senate occasion, which is always agreeable to it, to 
renew, in a solemn manner, the assurance of the sincere 
and constant friendship which it has avowed to the French 
Republic, and of the firmness and punctuality with which it 
wil exert itself to keep in the principles of the strict neutra- 
lity which it has adopted in the course of the present war. 
The sincerity and frankness of its public conduct, to which 
the Senate is able to bear a noble testimony in face of 
the government, will certainly never stoop to malicious in- 
terpretations, which could have been devised only by male- 
volence, and a desire to disturb the perfect harmony which 
so happily subsists between the two republics. 

And as for the arming which we are directing, and which 
forms the subject of your memorial, though we have already 
intimated the innocent use to which it was destined, we 
make it a duty to give you the most precise information on 
that head. 

The entire confidence of the Senate in the friendship and 
sincerity of the belligerent powers has always disinclined 
it to take precautions for ensuring the external tranquillity 
of its States, and has always caused it to confine itself to 
the maintenance of order in the interior: it still rests upon 


214 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


the same basis: but, having reason to fear at this moment 
that the environs of this capital may soon become the 
theatre of violent military struggles, it cannot refrain from 
taking the precautions necessary for securing it against 
unforeseen descents of affrighted inhabitants, or of armed 
men, dispersed or fugitives, who, coming thither in quest of 
an asylum, might occasion confusion and terror. be; 

Such is the sole motive of the measures which we have 
taken, in drawing part of the naval forces nearer to these 
parts, in directing a suitable number of armed barks for 
their service to be prepared, and in summoning a sufficient 
quantity of we for the guard of the capital. We are 
persuaded that the noble frankness of the Senate will en- 
tirely dispel the suspicions which may have been conceived 
respecting the object of those same dispositions. ; 

It flatters itself that, in this cireumstance, you will give 
it a new proof of the constant pains you take to strengthen 
the good understanding between the two governments. We 
assure you once more of the sentiments of our particular 
consideration. 


To General Bonaparte. 


Venice, 23 Messidor, year 4 (July 11, 1796}. : 

On my arrival in this city, to repair to. my post, I have 
met with some particulars which appear to me to be quite 
certain respecting the state of the enemy’s troops towards 
Bassano, and which, in consequence, I thmk it my duty to 
transmit to you. 

Persons who went from that city expressly to look at 
the Austrian camp have reported that, on the 19th in- 
stant, there were below Bassano 600 Hulans, 600 hussars, 
400 Neapolitan cavalry, 200 light cavalry, two battalions of 
infantry, and five a of cannon. They added that the 
cavalry was very fine, but that the infantry appeared to be 
in a bad state. They said too, what I was told elsewhere, 
that he has very advanced posts as far as Costavolo on the 
Brenta, some miles on this side of Bassano: their rincipal 
oceupation was the transport of provisions, which they 
bring from the Venetian States and convey to Bassano u 
the river. Lastly, they have confirmed the statement that 
frequent patroles are sent towards Vicenza to make recon- 
naissances. 


| 
: 
| 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 215 


* Moreover, general, I am assured here that the Venetian 
government is seriously engaged in the choice of a general 
to command its troops. — According to the laws of the 
country, as you are no doubt aware, that general must be a 
foreigner; in consequence, three persons, it is said, have 
been thought of, not one of whom, certainly, is a friend to 
our Republic. These are, 1, M. Salis, formerly colonel 
of a Swiss regiment in France; 2, the Prince of Nassau ; 
3, the Polish general Komarzewski, an old favourite of 
Stanislaus, the servant and protégé of Russia. I shall seek, 
the moment I arrive in Venice, to verify this fact: if it is 
true, it might give rise to still greater distrust on our part. 
JACOB, 
Secretary of the French Legation at Veriice. 


To General Bonaparte. _ 


Florence, 23 Messidor, year 4 [July b1, 1796). 

I have not been able to set out, general; so soon as I 
wished, on my journey to Rome. I thought it right, be+ 
fore my departure, to agree with M. Azara respecting the 
course which I was to pursue, and it was agreed that I 
ought not to arrive till after him in that city; for whieh he 
will not start himself for these two or three days. I should 
not, however, have heeded this motive of prudence and ex- 
posieoy: had I not been obliged to prolong my stay here. 

have received news from Leghorn concerning the project 
formed by the English for possessing themselves of Porto 
Ferrajo, which has be em some explanations on my part 
with the government of Tuscany. 

T have desired, in order to relieve ourselves from all fear 
of'an invasion, which it is highly important to our interests 
to prevent, that the pesetons of Porto Ferrajo, 4 man sold 
to the English, should be changed; that the grand-duke 
should give orders for strengthening the garrison of that 
place, too weak to resist any serious attack; and that it 
should even be agreed that we should add to it 200 men 
drawn from Leghorn. | 

Of these proposals, one only, the change of the governor, 
was adopted ; the others’ were plumply rejected. The 
government; founding itself on the princip a fieutrality, 
which it considers as inherent in its system of administra- 


216 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


tion, and supporting itself upon the plea that it is at peace 
with all the iis, dala at it os laid it down as a con- 
stant rule not to augment its means of defence in any place ; 
and, setting out from this point, it refuses to send succours 
to Porte Ferrajo. 4 

It is therefore evident to my eyes that it is resolved to 
make no resistance to the English, in case of attempts; 
and that we must expect to see Porto Ferrajo in their 
hands very shortly, if the thing is not already done. 

I have not dissembled here any of my thoughts as to 
the consequences of such a determination, and what bitter 
but too late regrets it might some day cost Tuscany ; but, 
in showing all the dissatisfaction that I feel, I can do no more 
than I have done. In my opinion, it is proper to abstain 
from illusory threats, and especially in Italy, where, when 
people are afraid, they always represent the evil to them- 
selves as much greater than it is destined to happen; but, 
on the other hand, they soon pass from terror to insolence, 
when they have not experienced all the ill they feared, be- 
cause it is in the vindictive character of the inhabitants of 
this country to see always impotence in their enemies and 
never generosity. et 
- It will, therefore, be for you, citizen-general, to enlighten 
me respecting the conduct that I am to pursue. It is, as 
you perceive, delicate, and will perhaps be still more so by 
and by, especially at Rome. The examples of Pavia, 
Binasco, Lugo, ought to be present to us, and impose upon 
us the law of extreme prudence and extreme distrust. I 
am far, however, from entertaining any alarm, or to think 
that it is necessary to draw forces to the centre of Italy ; not 
but that I believe they would be useful to ensure the execu- 
tion of the armistices which you have made, because, look- 
ing back incessantly to the real object of the war, I should 
consider the dissemination of our forces as an obstacle to the 
execution of the plan of campaign of Tyrol, to the impor- 
tance of which every other consideration must give way. 

Moor. | 


To the Executive Directory. 


Head-quarters, Verona, 24 Messidor, year 4 [July 12, 1796]. 
General Sauret, with 3000 men, defends from Salo, situ- 
ated on the Lake of Garda, to the Lake of Iseo. ; 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 217 


. General Massena, with 12,000 men, defends from Torre 
to Rivalta on the Adige, and thence he defends the passage 
of the Adige to San Giovani, three miles lower down than 
Verona. The city of Verona has been put into a state of 
defence by means of the artillery found in that place. 

General Despinois defends, with 5000 men, from San 
Giovani to Runco. 

General Augereau, with 8000 men, defends from Runco 
to Castaniara; there are sluices, by means of which the 
whole of the low country may be inundated. 

General Kilmaine, with 2000 cavalry and 12 pieces of 
light artillery, is at Valeza, ready to start for any point at 
which the enemy might be disposed to attempt a passage. 
Porto Legnago, where there is a bridge over the Adige, 
has been put into a state of defence, by using the Venetian 
artillery found in the place. 

Besides the bridges which we have at Porto Legnago 
and Verona, I am getting a bridge of boats constructed 
opposite to the Chiusa, defended by good batteries of posi- 
tion. e 

By means of these three. bridges, the army will pass 
rapidly, on the first movement of the enemy, from the 
defensive to the offensive. 

The enemy has his advanced posts at Alta and Mal- 
sesena, and he is now pushing very considerable columns 
behind the Brenta. There are nearly 8000 men at Bas- 
sano. We have been for several days observing that posi- 
tion. 

Woe to him who shall caleulate wrong! ... 

As for us, we.are solely occupied with the siege of Man- 
tua. I meditate a bold stroke: boats, Austrian uniforms, 
incendiary batteries, shall all be ready by the 28th. The 
ulterior operations will entirely depend on the success of 
this coup de main, which, like those of that nature, de- 
pends absolutely on luck, on a dog or a goose. 

This state of things makes me think that we ought to 
defer the operation of Genoa for ten or twelve days, espe- 
cially as I shall not before then receive your answer to a 
letter that I have sent you. 

You will find annexed a copy of a letter which I have 
written, in consequence, to the minister of the Republic 
Faipoult. _M. Cattaneo, whom the senate of Genoa has 
sent to me, arrived this morning. He has, as you may 


218 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES, 


conceive, been extremely pleased with what I have told him. 
‘The steps that Faipoult will take, and other accessory 
operations, will enable us to attain our aim, which is to gain 

ut a fortnight, by which time our situation in Italy will 
be so decided that I shall follow, without obstacle, point by 
point, the orders that you shall give me respecting Genoa 
and Venice. 

The latter republic is arming briskly. Citizen Lalle- 
‘mant has not apprized me, as he ought to have done, of the 
nature and activity of these armaments. You will find 
annexed a copy of the note which he addressed to the senate, 
and of the answer of the senate. At any rate, I am master 
of all the strong places of the republic of Venice on the 
Adige. Perhaps you may think proper to begin now to 
pick a little quarrel with the minister of Venice in Paris, 
in order that, after the taking of Mantua, and after I have 
driven the Austrians from the Brenta, I may find the 
greater facility for the demand which you intend me to 
make of some millions. 

We begin to have many sick before Mantua, but not one 
death yet. The heat is excessive, and the air of Mantua 
extremely unwholesome. 

BONAPARTE, 


To the Executive Directory. 


Head-quarters, Milan, 26 Messidor, year 4 [July 14, 1796}. 

All the troops of the divisions employed in the expedi- 
tion to Leghorn and Bologna have recrossed the Po. I 
have only ordered that 400 men should be left in the citadel 
of Ferrara. By the treaty, the legation of Ferrara is: to 
remain united to the French Republic. 

A monk, coming from Trent, brought intelligence intothe 
Romagna that the Austrians had passed the Adige, raised 
the blockade of Mantua, and were making forced marches to 
the Romagna. Seditious papers and fanatic preachers were 
everywhere preaching insurrection: they a9 in a 
few days what they called the Catholic and Papal Army ; 
they established their head-quarters at Lugo, a large’ vil- 
lage of the legation of Ferrara, though surrounded by the 
‘Romagna. 

. General Augereau ordered the chief of brigade Pou- 
rallier to go and reduce Lugo. That officer, at the head of 


“gles 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 219 


a battalion, arrived before Lugo, where the alarm-bell had 
been ringing for several hours: he found there some thou- 
sands of peasants. -An officer of grenadiers advanced, with 
a flag of truce: they made signs to him to approach; and 
a moment afterwards a shower of musket-balls was poured 
upon him, These wretches, cowardly as perfidious, ran 
away : some hundreds were left dead on the ground. Since 
this event, which occurred on the 18th, order has been re- 
stored and all is perfectly quiet. 
BONAPARTE. 


The Grand-Duke of Tuscany to General Bonaparte. 


Florence, July 13, 1796 [25 Messidor, year 4]. 

By the copies of the three notes annexed from M. Miot, 
minister plenipotentiary of the French Republie and the 
answers that have been made to them, you may acquaint 
yourself with his = tending to an augmentation of 
the garrison of Porto Ferrajo, for the purpose of defending 
that place against an attack of the enemy. Being at e 
with all the powers of Europe, and, in the course of the 
present war, having never augmented by a single man the 
small military forces of the grand-duchy, in the intention 
of repelling foreign hostilities, I cannot lend myself to 
such measures prejudicial to the neutrality, (the funda- 
mental law of Tuscany) assured by treaties and particularly 
the last concluded with the French Republic, and recog- 
nised by all the belligerent powers. 

To these grave and important motives is added that of an 
absolute impossibility to send any reinforcement to Porto 
Ferrajo, since, before the receipt of M. Miot’s notes, the 
sea was not free, and Leghorn was blockaded by English 
ships, which permit nothing to approach, and prevent the 
departure of every vessel ; which reduces that port to the 
last extremity. 

‘The question, general, relates to a matter in which the 
glory of your name is concerned : you guaranteed to me the 
observance of that same neutrality in your letter dated 
June 24th last, and I earnestly solicit you to interpose your 
authority that this demand may remain without effect. I 
flatter myself to obtain this from your equity, and am with 
particular esteem — FERDINAND. 


220 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


To General Bonaparte. 


Castiglione, 25 Messidor, year 4 [July 13, 1796]. ¢ 

The apprehension, which I expressed, citizen-general, in 
my despatches of the 23d of this month, are realized: the 
fortress of Porto Ferrajo was surrendered to the English 
the day before yesterday ; they landed 800 men, who were 
admitted without difficulty. 

I have taken, as I have informed you, all the steps in my 
power, to prevent an event so contrary to our interests and 
especially to the tranquillity of Leghorn, where it might 
ina moment develop the seeds of disturbance and revolt, 
which pains are there taking to propagate in all quarters, 
and now I think that I can do nothing more without positive 
orders. Itis for the Directory to give them, or for you to 
communicate to me your intentions, in case this cireum- 
stance should have been provided against in the instructions 
which you have. I wait with anxiety for letters from you, 
to enlighten me in regard to the course which I am to pur- 
sue in this delicate cireumstance, and especially respecting 
the plans that you shall have formed. 

Mior. 


To General Bonaparte. 


Venice, 26 Messidor, year 4 [July 14, 1796]. 

The last letters from Trent of July 9th give the enu- 
meration of the Austrian troops, which are at present in 
position in General Massena’s quarter: they are represented 
as amounting to about 24,000 men, besides those which 
are on the Lake of Garda and in the valley of Lidro ; viz. 

Eight thousand at Bica, entrenched; 4000 below, along 
the Adige; 8000 on the passes of Monte Baldo; 4000 at 
Valasso, Terraguolo, and Solgaria. These corps are com- 
manded by Colli and Mitrowski. 

The corps of 5000 encamped from Valsugana to Bassano 
is preparing to return to the mountains ; it is too weak to 
withstand an attack with which it is threatened by the 
French, and it is probable that it will join the others. 

Mantua reduced, and I hope it will not be long first, 
I think, general, it would be “io important to detach 
rs of the disposable forces by Bassano. Pardon this 
unt. , 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 221 


- The Venetians have decided to withdraw all their Sla- 
vonians from the terra firma, and to confine their defensive 
to the sea and the lagoons. They will have at sea ina 
few days in the Adriatic Gulf forty light vessels, besides 
their galleys sent te Istria, and sixteen armed barks in the 
lagoons, which were occupied by the 6000 Slavonians whom 
they had sent for. 

All the letters from Germany say that the reinforcements 
destined for Italy have had orders to halt. 

LALLEMANT. 


To the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 


Milan, 27 Messidor, year 4 [July 15, 1796]. 
It cannot but be-painful to me, general, to be of a differ- 
ent opinion from you on a subject of such importance as 
that of the supplies to be furnished to the Grisons: the 
habit of very just thowgh very rapid apprehension, which 
T know you to possess, causes me to mistrust my reason, 
whenever it is in contradiction to yours. This sentiment 
has led me to examine anew the motives of my conviction: 
as it has not depended upon me to change it, I ought to 
tell you the causes with that frankness due to each other 
from two fellow-citizens, alike solicitous for the welfare of 
their country, and differing only about the means which 
may. perhaps promote it. 
ou think that the conquest of the Milanese has de- 
stroyed all treaties concluded by its dukes with foreign 
powers; I think so too, and you will find this opinion put 
forth as a principle in the memorial No. 1, which I have 
transmitted to you; but take notice that the Directory, to 
conciliate the Grisons, and on my application, has consented 
that the treaties which concern them, and which promise 
them fifteen hundred loads of corn on their paying for it, 
shall be executed, and that it has transmitted a warrant for 
it to you. This admits of no application to the general 
principle of the effect of a conquest, since the French 
gexepmens has consented not to avail itself of that point. 
ear in mind, too, that I have notified this resolution to the 
heads of the three Leagues; that they have a right to cal- 
culate upon its being executed, and that it is, no doubt, to 
this persuasion that I owe my almost unanimous recognition 
as resident; lastly, bear in mind that, before even the 


222: LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


resolution of the Directory existed, you had promised the 
Grisons, at my solicitation, to take care that they should’ 
be supplied with four thousand sacks of corn, and that you 
made no condition that the chiefs of the Leagues should: 
demand of you the execution of the capitulations : so that 
to insist on it now would be in a manner to retract your 
promise, which you have certainly not yet done towards “ 
one, or to appear to be striving to overreach them, which 
would be a part not worthy of you. ii 08 

You ask me—“ If you consent to grant purely and sim- 
ply the fifteen a er 2 loads of corn, where is my certainty, 
if you have need of passages, that they will consent to 
grant them, after having received beforehand the means of 
doing without you %” 

I answer, in the first place, that my certainty on this 
point is founded on the experience of what I have already. 
obtained in this country, without having procured for it so 
important a benefit as that of sustenance. Recollect that, 
supported by your victories, I have crushed the Austrian 
party there, caused. the Republic to be unanimously recog~ 
oe and, what was more difficult than all the rest, that, 
in place of the constitutional anarchy, I have brought about 
the establishment there of a provisional government, in- 
vested with very extensive powers, in which the partisans 
of our Republic have the exclusive sway. 

I answer, in the second place, that, with the means with 
which you supply me for paying the disbanded soldiers and 
pe, gr I will make of them so many missionaries, who 
will not only vote and induce others to vote for the 
sage, when you or I shall demand it, but who, on the jst 
signal. from us, would knock on the head those who should 
dare attempt to oppose it. se 

I answer, moreover, that the possessor of the Milanese 
holds the Grisons not merely by the corn, but that he holds 
them also by an infinity of still stronger ties, for they can 
procure corn in Suabia, but they cannot make Suabia, like’ 
the Milanese, a market for their cattle and for their other 
produce, nor a place of passage and consumption for the 
commodities whieh traverse the Grison country, and the 
transit of which, together with the tolls arising from them, 
constitute their only public revenue: so that, in order to 
unite the Grisons absolutely and overturn.their government, 
for want, of funds, you need. but, as conqueror and ruler of 
the Milanese, close your passes against them. 


—- 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 223 


In the last place, I answer that if, notwithstanding all 
these reasons, you wish to hold the Grisons by a still 
stronger tie, instead of fifteen hundred loads of corn, sup- 
ply them provisionally with but a thousand, and assign, as’ 
the motive of this diminution, the displeasure which you 
have felt at the conduct of twelve communes out of the 
sixty-three, where the Republic has been insulted and the 
admission of its minister refused; which causes you to 
consider those communes, until their retractation and the ex- 
“er punishment of their ringleaders, as enemies of the 
Republic, and consequently deserving to be excluded from 
its benefits. 

In this manner, you will — the revolution, which is 
‘commencing in favour of liberty and in favour of France 
among the Grisons, from a You will prevent 
Austria, which offered corn when she saw that we were 
about to grant it, from enhancing that favour by your 
refusal. 

I earnestly beg of you to reflect on these reasons, and 
also to grant something to my word which would be com- 
ee and this might cost me the popularity which I 

ve acquired with the Grisons, and which it is for the 
interest of the Republic that I should retain. 

CoMEYRAS. 


The Executive Directory to General Bonaparte. 


Paris, 23 Messidor, year 4 [July 11, 1796]. 

We have received, citizen-general, your interesting de- 
spatches of the 14th Messidor. The success of the Leg- 
horn expedition has given us great satisfaction, and we 
approve everything that you have done and ordered in that 
auspicious circumstance for the Republic. We must now 
strive assiduously to reap all the advantages that it affords. 
To sequestrate all effects belonging to the powers at war 
with France, to impose heavy contributions on the indivi- 
duals belonging to them—such are the measures which we 
must employ without deviating from them ; but it is the 
English in particular against. whom this right of war must 
be most rigorously exercised: we have at once to avenge 
upon them the right of nations, which the Machiavelian 
government of England has incessantly violated, and the 
independence of the neutral nations, which it has despised, 


224 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


in order to injure us with the more security. The English 


settled at Leghorn must be in our eyes like inhabitants of © 
London ; let them be subjected to severe impositions: the 
national generosity, however, dictates to us, while seeking — 
to indemnify ourselves for our losses, not to carry rigour to 


the length of cruelty. 

Though, citizen-general, we say nothing to you about 
Genoa, and the measures which you have to pursue in 
regard to it, according to our preceding instructions, we 
think, nevertheless, that you will have made such disposi- 
tions as that important object requires: we shall be glad 
to receive some account of them forthwith, and we have no 
doubt that you are proceeding in this matter with the 


same wisdom and firmness that you have shown in 


Tuscany. ; 
M. Corsini, the minister of the latter, has made remon- 


strances on what concerns that power: it is admitted, © 


however, that the conduct of England rendered ours per- 
fectly legitimate: for the rest, he receives but vague 
answers from us; we shall make no alteration in the in- 
structions which you have, and it is for you and our com- 
missioners to act in consequence. 

The taking of the Castle of Milan is a fortunate opera- 
tion: the troops employed in it deserve that we should 
charge you to congratulate them in the name of the Repub- 
lic on this success. 

We are of opinion, upon military and political considera- 
tions, that this castle ought to be denshishge: You will 
give the necessary orders: it is useful to cause this 

emolition and that of the barracks at the parade to be 
regarded as that of another Bastile, which Austrian despo- 
tism had hitherto employed to keep under its yoke those 
flourishing countries, which seem peculiarly formed for 
liberty. By favour of this idea, which you will accredit 
among the people, excite a generous enthusiasm for the fall 
of that citadel. It will no doubt be but a faint image of 
that which presided at the destruction of the Bastile: but 
it will awaken the ancient hatred of Lombardy against the 
emperor, and make it dread the return of his domination. 

All the artillery, all the effects in the magazines, found 
in Milan, which will not be necessary for the army, shall 
be sent to France. Keep with you only what is serviceable 
to your movements, nothing that is liable to embarrass them. 


~ 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 225 


Your return to this side of the Po adds to our confidence 
in regard to the position of the army which you command. 
After negociating ably and gathering the fruit of those 
victories, you are about to display again the military 
talents which prepared them. Everyt ing bes that 
the campaign of the Rhine will be equally brilliant and 
decisive. 

CaRNoT. 


The Executive Directory to the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 
Paris, 23 Messidor, year 4 [July 11, 1796}. 

The Executive Directory is informed, citizen-general, by 
the resident of the Republic with that of the Grisons, that 
you have promised those people to permit in their favour 
the exportation of corn from the Milanese, which had been 
pera granted to them. The Directory finds no fault 
with this measure, so long as it is not prejudicial to the 
supply of the army; but thinks it useful to recommend to 
you to inform yourself eee whether, in return for the 
exportation of corn from the Milanese into the country of 
the Grisons, the latter were not obliged to grant a free pas- 
sage through their territory to the imperial troops. If such 
a elause exists, you will feel the importance of getting it 
renewed for our advantage. 

The Directory cannot, at this moment, settle any thing 
relating to the Bileghans and Ferrarese; but it is glad to 
see that this interesting part of the State of the Church is 
impatient to shake off the yoke of the pope. We ought to 
study to keep up in that country dispositions favourable to 
liberty, till its political fate is decided, according to the 
desire which you express, or to ulterior circumstances. 

The difficulty which has arisen in regard to the legation 
of Ravenna cannot bear discussion ; it is evident that the 
town of Faenza cannot be taken here for the entire legation, 
of which it is the principal town ; and, whatever desire the 
Directory may feel to accede to the observations of M. 


@Azara, out of regard for the court of Spain, it cannot in 


this circumstance overthrow the sense of an article of the 
armistice which has been sincerely assented to. Be pleased, 
citizen-general, to make a suitable use of this decision, in 
repeating to M. d’Azara the assurance of our consideration 
for his court, 

VOL. I. Q 


226 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


The safety of the valuable objects of art that Rome is to 
furnish ought not to be endangered ; they must be carried 
by land, and any means of transport employed which the 
country can afford, on payment of course of the necessary 
remuneration. 

The thoughts of the government are naturally directed 
by present circumstances to Corsica and the expulsion of 
the English from that island. Promote the explosion of 
the elements of insurrection which it contains against its 
proud dominators. ; 

The Directory authorizes the delivery of letters-of- 
marque to the armed vessels of the Mediterranean ; but it 
is important to require a legitimate surety from the captains 
to whom they are delivered, and to prevent the abuse that 
has been cada of them: this has been.so great that French 
ships have been captured by pirates, which had taken these 
letters of marque. 

The Directory begs you to take all the precautions re- 
quired for the conveyance of the effects and money, which, 
as i give notice, you will have to transmit. 

he commissioners of the Directory, Salicetti and Garrau, 
have sent us a report on the importance of occupying Porto 
Ferrajo, which might be held with a a of a hundred 
men. If you think this measure useful, we give the neces- 
sary authorization to that effect. 
CARNOT. 


To Citizen Faipoult, Minister at Genoa. 


Head-quarters, Milan, 25 Messidor, year 4 [July 13, 1796]. 

I have not yet seen M. Cataneo, citizen minister; when 
I see him he shall be satisfied with me, and I shall neglect 
nothing to lull him and to give the senate a little more 
confidence. ~ 

The time of Genoa is not yet come, for two reasons : 

1. Because the Austrians are reinforcing themselves, and 
I shall soon have a battle. If conqueror, I shall have 
Mantua, and then a mere estafette at Genoa will be as good 
as a whole army ; 

2. The ideas of the Directory relative to Genoa appear 
to me not yet fixed. 

It has ordered me to demand the contribution, but not 
permitted me any political operation. I have despatched an 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 227 


extraordi courier with your letter, and asked for orders, 
which I shall have in the decade of next month. Be- 
tween this and then, forget all the subjects of complaint 
that we have against Genoa. 

Give them to understand that you and I have ceased to 
intermeddle in such matters, since they sent M. Spinola to 
Paris. Give them to understand that we are both highly 
satisfied with their choice, and that it is to us a guarantee 
of their good intentions. Tell them positively that I have 
been extremely pleased with the measures which they have 
adopted relative to M. Girola; in short, omit no circum- 
stance that can revive hope in the heart of the senate of 
Genoa, and lull it to sleep till the moment for awaking. 

I have received all your notes. Your correspondence is 
becoming extremely interesting to me. 

You will find annexed a letter addressed to me by M. 
Vicente Spinola. It seems to me that there must be some 
territory which is in discussion between Genoa and Pied- 
mont. Give me some explanations on this subject. Let 
me know what interest they attach to it, and, on the demand 
of the senate, tell them it is possible that they might be im- 
mediately put into possession: in short, citizen minister, 
manage so that we gain a fortnight, that hope revives, as 
well as confidence between you sad the Genoese government, 
in order that, if we are beaten, we may find it friendly. 

Transmit speedily to Tortona all that is at M. Balbi’s. 
It is the intention of the Directory to collect all at Paris 
for the purpose of making a grand financial operation. I 
shall send thither thirty millions. 

Bonaparte. 


To Citizen Miot, Minister of the Republic at Florence. 


Head-quarters, Castiglione, 2 Thermidor, year 4 [July 20, 1796]. 

I have received, citizen minister, your different letters 
relative to the occupation of Porto Ferrajo by the English. 
So long as there was any hope of prevailing on the grand- 
duke to put that place into a condition for resisting, you did 
right to speak firmly to him ; now, I think with you, threats 
would be impotent and useless. I think that we ought to 
make no further mention of the matter, not to show any 
mark of resentment, and wait till circumstances and the 
orders of the government shall enable us to act, not talk. 

Q2 


228 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES.” 


I beg you to keep an eye on what is doing at Leghorn, 
and to let me hear frequently from you. 

If circumstances should oppose your promise imme- 
diately to Rome, let me know, that 1 may take other 
measures, BONAPARTE, 


To Citizen Sapey. ; 


Head-quarters, Castiglione, 2 Thermidor, year 4 [July 20, 1796]. 

All the Corsicans have orders to repair to Leghorn, to 
embark there for the island.. General Gentili is going him-. 
self. Prepare all possible means of embarkation and: passage. 
I am ordering General Vaubois to keep 8000 pounds of 
powder, 4000 fowling-pieces, 1000 pair of shoes, and a cer- 
tain quantity of ball, at your disposal, in order to supply 
the insurgents of that department. 

I authorize you to take the measures which you propose 
in your letter of the 19th Messidor. Spare no means to 
transmit succours and to obtain news from the departments 
of Corsica, BoNnaPARTE. 


? 


To Citizen Bonelli. 


Head-quarters, Castiglione, 2 Thermidor, year 4 [July 20, 1796]. 

I have received your letter from Bocognano, dated the 
23rd of June. I congratulate you on your arrival in Corsica. 
I have given orders to all the refugees to prepare themselves 
to set out, for the purpose of putting themselves at the 
head of the brave patriots of Corsica, shaking off the English 
yoke, and reconquering liberty, the perpetual object of the 
solicitude of our countrymen. 

What glory for them, if they can single-handed drive 
those proud English out of their country! Glory and hap- 
piness to those who shall first declare themselves! I re- 
commend to you not to give yourself up to any party-spirit ; 
let all the past be forgotten, except for the small number of 
perfidious men who have misled those brave people. 

The armies of the Sambre and Meuse and of the Rhine 
are in the heart of Germany: every thing smiles upon the 
Republic. Manage to let us hear something about you soon. 
Embrace our good friends, and assure them that before long 
they shall be delivered from the tyranny which oppresses 
them. BONAPARTE. 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 229 


To the Ordonnateur-in- Chief. 
; Head-quarters, Castiglione, 2 Thermidor, year 4 [July 20, 1796). 
You will place 100,000 franes at the disposal of citizen 
Sucy, commissary of war at Genoa, to supply the wants of 
the hospitals, the transport of artillery and of the siege 
equipage which is at Savona, and all the other expenses 
relative to the troops that are still left in the Riviera of 
Genoa. 
BoNAPARTE, 


To Citizen Garrau, Commissioner of the Government. 


- Head-quarters, Castiglione, 2 Thermidor, year 4 [July 20, 1796]. 

The requisition which you have made, citizen-commis- 
sioner, to General Vaubois, is contrary to the instructions 
which the government has given me. I beg you for the 
future to keep within the limits of the functions prescribed 
you by the government of the Executive Directory: other- 
wise T shall be obliged to forbid, by an order of the day, 
compliance with your requisitions. We are all only by the 
law: he who would fain command and usurp functions not 
granted to him by the law is no republican. 

When you were representative of the people, you had 
unlimited powers ; everybody made it a duty to obey you: 
now, you are commissioner of the government, invested 
with a very high character : positive instructions have regu- 
lated your functions: adhere to them. I am well aware 
that you will repeat the remark which I shall make like 
Dumouriez—It is clear that a general who has the pre- 
sumption to command the army which the government has 
‘entrusted to him, and to issue orders without a resolution 
of the commissioners, cannot but be a conspirator. 

, BONAPARTE. 


To General Vaubois. 


Head-quarters, Castiglione, 2 Thermidor, year 4 (July 20, 1796). 

I am not at all pleased, general, with your proclamation. 
The commissioner of the government has no right to make 
requisitions to you ; and, in the important place which you 
command, a man is as culpable to obey those who have no 


230 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


right to command as to disobey his oe superiors. 
From the spirit of the instructions which I had given you, 
and from all that I had said to you viva voce during my stay 
in Leghorn, it ought to have been easy for you to perceive 
that that proclamation would not have my approbation. 

Citizen "Belleville has been solely charged with the opera- 
tions relative to the sequestration of the property in Leg- 
horn belonging to our enemies. I have learned with asto- 
nishment the wisth and disorder existing in that business. 
You ought to grant citizen Belleville all the force that he 
has need of, and to invest him with all the confidence neces- 
sary for him to denounce abuses, and to enable him to turn 
to the profit of the Republic the goods which we have se- 
questrated from our enemies. 

Hasten the arming and equipping of the 75th demi- 
brigade, because, as soon as those brave fellows have rested, 
my intention is to recall them to the army. ’ 

It is not the intention of the government that any inj 
should be done to the Leghorn merchants or to the subjects 
of the Grand-Duke of Tuscany. At the same time that we 
study the interests of the nation, we ought to be generous 
and just. I have been as much grieved as astonished at 
the vexations committed against the commerce of Leghorn. 

Be pleased to give me a detailed account of all that has 
been done on this subject. You will take care, in particular, 
to inform me by what authority citizen Lachaise has quitted 
his consulship at Genoa to intrude into the affair of Leg- 
horn. A great quantity of Corsican refugees are proceeding 
to Leghorn, to take shipping there for the island. Keep 
4000 fowling-pieces, 1000 pair of pistols, 6000 pounds of 
powder, and ball in proportion, at the disposal of citizen 
Sapey, who will have instructions to transmit them to the 
insurgent patriots of that department. 

BonaPARTE, 


To the Executive Directory. 


Head-quarters, Castiglione, 2 Thermidor, year 4 [July 20, 1796]. 
I have to speak to you, citizens directors, of our position, 
military, administrative, and political, at Leghorn. 
The batteries against the sea are in good condition: we 
have repaired a citadel, in which the garrison can shelter 
itself against an insurrection. We have there a garrison 


wo 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 231 


of 2800 men, very good troops, two suiopenian of artillery, 
and a good officer of engineers, If the French army were 
obliged to abandon the north of Italy, that garrison would 
retire by Massa and the Riviera of Genoa. General Vau- 
heats who commands it, is a prudent, firm, and excellent 
officer. 

At the time of our entering Leghorn I directed citizen 
Belleville, consul of the Republic in that place, to put seals 
upon all the magazines belonging to the English, Portu- 
guese, Russians, and all other powers with which we are at 
war, as well as to the merchants of those different nations, 
I warned citizen Belleville that he should be personally re- 
sponsible for any dilapidations that might take place. This 
man is universally esteemed for his integrity, After my 
departure, a host of Genoese stock-jobbers came to get 
session of all this wealth. All the measures that I 
taken were deranged; instead of one responsible person 
were substituted commissions, each member of which plun- 
ders while amusing his neighbour. You will find annexed 
extracts from two letters from General Vaubois. People 
are conducting themselves in a harsher manner towards 
Leghorn merchants, and treating them with more rigour 
than you wish them to treat the English merchants them- 
selves: this alarms the commerce of all Italy, makes us 
pass in its eyes for Vandals, and utterly estranges the mer- 
chants of the city of Genoa ; and the mass of the people of 
that city, which has always been favourable to us, is now 
decidedly gainst us. 

If our <decaumeatire conduct at Leghorn is detestable, 
our political conduct towards Tuscany is no better. I have 
always refrained from making any kind of proclamation, 
and expressly ordered that no act, wearing the semblance 
of an act of government, should be issued. You will see, 
by the annexed proclamation, how little heed is paid to my 
intentions, and to the orders which I have given. The 
measure for driving emigrants from Leghorn, and from the 
country for twenty leagues round it, by a proclamation, is 
as useless as it is impolitic. There are very few emigrants 
in Leghorn: the duke himself has given orders for 
their expulsion, It, would have been much more simple to 
have caused three or four to be apprehended by the native 
authorities, and then the few others would have run off fast 
enough. This proclamation, arrogating a jurisdiction over 


232 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


twenty leagues of country, has a very bad effect, unless— 
which is totally contrary to your instructions—we were to 
assume the tone anu galley of ancient Rome. 

The English have taken possession of Porto Ferrajo, 
Masters of the sea, as they are, it would have been difficult 
to oppose this enterprise. When we shall be masters of 
Corsica, which cannot be long first, it will beeome ible 
for us to drive them from this island. You will dnd an 
nexed a copy of the letter written to me by the Grand 
Duke of Tuscany, of that of our minister at Florence, and 
of the answer. syeps 

In the present position of Italy we must not make our- 
selves any new enemy, and await the issue of the campaign, 
in order to adopt a course conformable with the true in- 
‘terests of the Republic. No doubt you will then be sen- 
sible that it is not expedient for us to leave the duchy of 
Tuscany to the brother of the emperor. I should wish 
that till then no threat, no hostile language, should be used 
at Leghorn against the court of Tuseany. My slightest 
words, and those of your commissioners, are watched and 
approached with the utmost respect; but here people ima- 
‘gine themselves to be in the lobbies of the Convention. 

BONAPARTE. ~ 


To the Executive Directory. 


Head-quarters, Castiglione, 2 Thermidor, year 4 [July 20, 1796]. 

Citizen Comeyras, minister of the Republic to the Gri- 
sons, has arrived in these last days at head-quarters. He 
could have wished that, in consequence of capitulations 
existing between the Archduke of Milan and the Grison 
Leagues, I had ordered these latter to be supplied with 
corn. We have even had a little discussion, because he 
alleged that you had ordered this supply ; but, on referring 
to the letter written to me by the minister, Lacroix, he 
was convinced that it was a mere authorization to furnish 
it, if I thought fit. I then observed to him that it was 
impossible to furnish the quantity of corn that he desired, 
‘unless the Leagues insisted on the execution of this article 
of the capitulations, which would give us a right to demand 
the passage that is granted to the Archduke of Milan, by 

pe indemnity for the said supply. 
e have agreed, in consequence, that, on his arrival at 


| 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES.’ 233: 


Coire, he shall write to the chiefs of the Leagues, that he 
had met with some obstacles to the execution of the order 
of the Directory for the supply of the corn, which cannot 
take place till they have officially communicated the capi- 
tulations to me. The commissioner Comeyras asked me 
for money to pay the pensions of the Grisons: he thinks 
that, with 60,000 francs, our party in that country would 
be considerably increased. 

If the circumstances of the war were to carry us into 
the country of the Grisons, or if we needed a force there to 
oppose the incursions of the enemy, would it be amiss to 
form a corps of all the Swiss who have been in the service 
of France and are pensioned? This would form a corps 
élite of 800 men, perfectly acquainted with the roads, and 
who might be of great service to us. 
BONAPARTE. 


To the Executive Directory. 


Head-quarters, Castiglione, 2 Thermidor, year 4 [July 22, 1796]. 

The gentlemen of the senate of Venice would have liked 
to serve us as they did Charles VIII. They calculated 
that, like him, we should penetrate to the foot of Italy, and 
were probably waiting for us on our return. 

I immediately seized the citadel of Verona, which I have 
armed with their cannon, and at the same time I sent a 
courier to citizen Lallemant, our minister at Venice, to bid 
him enjoin the senate to desist from its armaments. You 
have seen the notes that I sent you on the subject by my 
last courier: the arming is slvenily discontinued. 

The republic of Venice has already furnished us with 
3,000,000 for the subsistence of the army: not that it fur- 
nishes this itself, but a contractor, whom it secretly pays. 
So I agreed with the proveditor-general, promising, how- 
ever, that some day the French Republic should pay. 

This contractor has called upon me several times to apply 
for money. I have dismissed him with promises, and a 
positive order to continue to supply : he has been to the 
commissioners of the government, who have given him a bill 
of exchange for 300,000 livres, to receive out of the contri- 
butions of the Pope. Of all measures this was the worst, 
so now he will supply no more. By this bill of exchange 
for 300,000 livres, payable at a time when it is known that 


234 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. ° 


there are 21,000,000. coming to us, they have taken away: 
all hope of being paid, and at the same time led people 
to conclude that by importunity and withholding supplies. 
they may extract money from us: so that now I am obliges 

to storm against the proveditor, to exaggerate the m Ts 


committed on our troops, to complain bitterly of the arming,- 


which was not attempted while the Imperialists were the 
stronger, and hereby I shall oblige him to supply all that 
is required, in order to appease me. That is the way to 
treat these folks; they will continue to supply me, half 
willingly, half forcibly, till the taking of Mantua, and then 
I will tell them plumply that they must pay me the contri- 
bution mentioned in your instruetions, which will easily be 
done. I think it might be well for you to express to M. 
Quirini your astonishment at the arming of the Venetians, 
which was no doubt directed against us. There is not a 
government more treacherous and more cowardly than that, 
BONAPARTE. 


To the Executive Directory. 


Head-quarters, Castiglione, 4 Thermidor, year 4 [July 22, 1796]. 

I have informed you, citizens directors, that I have sent 
over a score of refugees to Corsica. You will find an- 
nexed a letter which I have received from him who com- 
mands them. ‘ 

I have ordered general of division Gentili, and generals 
Casalta and Cervoni, to proceed to Leghorn, whence they 
will sail to put themselves at the head of the insurgents, 
General Gentili, who is to have this command, is a clever, 
prudent man, possessing the esteem of the country-people, 
and the confidence of the mountaineers. 

I am ordering the gendarmerie of the department of Cor- 
sica, of 180 men, all natives, to repair to Leghorn, whence 
I will get them also sent over. These, together with 4000 
fowling-pieces, and 6000 pounds of powder, will give us the 
whole interior of the country. The moment all this is 
organized, I will send over a company of artillerymen, with 
five or six mountain pieces, with which it will be. easy to 
take St. Florent, which has no permanent fortification, 
This port taken, the English will have no interest to keep 
the others; besides, the people of Ajaccio and Bastia are 
very impatient of the English yoke. ; 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 235. 


- I beg you to be pleased to let me know if you think there 
will be any inconvenience in granting a general amnesty to 
the people of that department, excepting the principal 
chiefs, 

BONAPARTE. 


To the Executive Directory. 


Head-quarters, Castiglione, 4 Thermidor, year 4 [July 22, 1796]. 
The town of Reggio has risen against the Duke of Mo- 
dena; deputies of that town have come to solicit’ protection 
and assistance: as we have concluded an armistice with the 
duke, I thought it advisable to exhort them to tranquillity. 
I mention this merely that you may know that the subjects 
of the dukes of Parma and Modena are very little attached 

to their princes, 
BONAPARTE. 


To his Eminence the Cardinal Secretary of State of Rome. 


Head-quarters, Castiglione, 3 Thermidor, year 4 [July 21, 1796]. 

I have the honour, monseigneur, to send to his Holiness 
citizen Cacault, agent of the French Republic in Italy, that 
he may attend to the execution of the armistice which has 
been concluded between the French Republic and his Holi- 
ness, under the mediation of the court of Spain. I beg you 
to be pleased to recognize him in that quality. 

BONAPARTE. 


To Citizen Cacault. 


Head-quarters, Castiglione, 3 Thermidor, year 4 [July 21, 1796]. 

You will find annexed a letter for M. d’Azara, and the 
cardinal secretary of state for foreign affairs of his Holiness, 
with a copy of the armistice concluded between the Re- 
public and the pope, as well as an additional article relative 
to the legation of Faenza, with the decision of the Execu- 
tive Directory. 

You will be pleased, in consequence, to demand an order 
from the pope for the commandant of Ancona to receive 
the eo that I shall send thither. 

ou will despatch the 5,000,000 which are to form the 
first payment, namely, 2,000,000 to the head-quarters, for 


2 


236. LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


which a receipt shall be given by the Pay tewes of the 
army, and the rest to Tortona. The first convoy must 
leave Rome twenty-four hours after your arrival. 

The 5,000,000 that are to form the second payment. 
must leave Rome a few days after the first ; for, accordin 
to the armistice, it ought to be despatched by the 5th 
Thermidor. . 

The 5,500,000 livres which form the last payment ought 
to leave Rome by the 5th Vendemiaire. 

The scientific men and artists, who are to select the 
pictures, manuscripts, and statues, will address themselves. 
to you, and you will afford them the necessary protection,, 
by taking such steps as may be expedient. If it were ad- 
visable to give funds to the artists for defraying the expenses 
of carriage, let them be taken from the funds arising from 
the pope’s contributions. 

Four millions out of the 5,500,000, which the pope is to 
furnish as the last payment, are destined for the navy. 
The minister of the marine is to send commissioners for this 


eee i 
ou will give notice, meanwhile, that the hemp, timber, 
and other materials of that nature for ship-building, may 
be got ready. i}, 

he remaining 1,500,000 livres are to be furnished in 
horses and cloth for clothing the troops. You will de- 
mand, in consequence, 400 horses, of the height for hussars ; 
400 for dragoons; and 600 for draught, which are to be 
transferred to Milan, where they shall be appraised by 
General Baurevoir, director of the depéts of the army, and 
skilful persons sent by the pope: for the rest, blue and 
white cloth for clothing the troops. 

You will demand the liberation of all persons who have 
been apprehended at Rome for their opinions, and especially 
those named in the annexed list, as well as citizen Lar 
brousse of Bordeaux. 

In consequence of the decision of the Directory, and of 
the commission appointed in Florence by M. d’Azara, the 
pope is bound to pay the contributions which had been im- 
posed upon the legation of Ravenna, amounting to 1,200,000 
frances in goods, and 1,200,000 in money. 

BoNAPARTE, 


3 
7 


_¢ uh a ag Gee eg oe ws 


ee Lie >a 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 237 


The Executive Directory to the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 
Paris, 29 Messidor, year 4 [July 17, 1796). 
According to the last despatches from the general-in- 
chief of the army of the Alps, citizen-general, it appears 
that he had not received the 200,000 francs in money which 
you have been charged to send him. The state of things is 
such, that the transmission of these funds cannot be longer 
delayed without the most serious inconveniences. We 
request you, therefore, tosend off those 200,000 franes with 
the least possible delay. CaRNOT. 


The Executive Directory to the Genoral-in-Chief Bonaparte, 


Paris, 29 Messidor, year 4 [July 17, 1796]. 

The Directory, citizen-general, has received the letter 
which you addressed to it from Roverbello, on the 18th 
instant: it has learned with pleasure that the troops block- 
ading Mantua, under the command of General Serrurier, 
have repulsed with advantage the sorties attempted by the 

rrison. 

If the Directory had before it a statement of the supplies 
that are likely to be in the place, it might be able to decide 

whether it were preferable to open the trenches before it, or 
to be content with a simple blockade, by means of which we 
should make ourselves masters of it. The sickness which 
has begun to appear in the division of General Serrurier 
causes the Directory to think that the resolution which you 
have taken to open the trenches is most suitable in the 
present circumstances ; and it has learnt with satisfaction 
that you have not neglected to employ in the works of the 
siege the prisoners that you have taken from the Prince of 
Rome, &c. 

According to —_ letters from General Berthier, it 
appears that the fevers which have manifested themselves in 
the French division at Mantua, are but ephemeral ; perhaps 
they will cease on the immediate removal of the sick to a 
certain distance, and by enabling them to breathe a more 

wholesome air: we found great benefit from this course in 
Zealand. 

You must soon have accounts of the march of the rein- 
forcements which the army of the Coasts of the Ocean has 
detached for the army of ‘Ttaly. The Directory sends you 


238 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES, 


annexed a statement of the demi-brigades and the battalions 
which compose it ; these troops form a total of 12,000 men. 
The Directory thinks it right to observe, that the army of 
the Alps is reduced, as it were, to nothing, and it is expe- 
dient that you should leave General Kellermann about 2000 
men, which are indispensably necessary, as well to attend 
to the demolition of the fortresses of Piedmont, as to main- 
tain the police in the departments under his command. 

The statement you have sent us of the enemy’s force 
which is — to you has appeared to us exaggerated. 
The general-in-chief Moreau seems even to believe that 
some of the Austrian reinforcements detached by the 
army of Hohenlohe to strengthen that which you are 
fighting have returned towards the Rhine, to oppose the 
efforts of the army of the Rhine and Moselle. When 
Mantua shall be in the power of the army of Italy, the 
troops which have taken it, united to those which you have 
towards the Tyrol, will give you a great superiority of foree 
over General Wurmser. 

The fusils of the republic of Lucca might be made useful 
for Corsica. 

The Directory approves of the measures which you have 
taken for the sequestration of the property belonging to 
Neapolitans at Leghorn. 

Carnot. 


The Executive Directory to General Bonaparte. 


Paris, 29 Messidor, year 4 [July 17, 1796]. 
Intelligence which has just reached the Executive Diree- 
tory, of the successes of the armies of Sambre and Meuse, 
and Rhine and Moselle, leads it to presume, citizen- 
general, that the Austrians, finding it absolutely impossible 
to defend the right bank of the Rhine any longer, have re- 
solved to abandon it: they appear to have an intention of 
retiring into the heart of Germany. The orders which the 
Directory has transmitted to the Republican generals, to 
pursue them with vigour, give it hopes that they will be 
driven back either upon Bohemia or the right bank of the 
Danube. 
Annexed you will find a copy of the letter which we 
wrote to General Moreau on the 5th Messidor: we have 
thought that it might be useful to communicate it to you. 


r 
¢ 
=a y 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 239. 


In regard to what concerns Venice, the Directory thinks 
as you do. The first operation to make sure of is to reduce 
Mantua; the second is to drive back Wurmser, in case he 
should attempt to re-enter Italy; and, above all, to keep 
him in a state of harassing anxiety for the soldiers whom he 
commands. 


CaRNoT. 


The Executive Directory to General Bonaparte. 


Paris, 29 Messidor, year 4 [July 17, 1796}. 

It is with regret, citizen-general, that the Directory finds 
itself compelled to abandon, in some measure, the principles 
which it laid down for itself, and which it has steadily 
followed till this day, with the city of Genoa: but the 
conduct of the Genoese government towards the French 
Republic has forced it, against its will, to take the severe 
measures contained in the annexed resolution. 

You will be pleased, general, to carry it into execution 
as soon as circumstances permit. The Directory trusts to 
your prudence relative to the choice of the moment and 
that of the means of execution ; in like manner, it leaves to 
you both the proclamation which is to precede your demands, 
and the precautions to be taken that the funds and other 
valuable effects deposited at Genoa may not run the slightest 
risks: it will be better, general, to place those objects in 
safety than to be obliged to claim them. 

CARNOT. 


The Executive Directory to General Bonaparte. 


Paris, 29 Messidor, year 4 [July 17, 1796]. 

The Executive Directory, which has received, citizen- 
general, roer letter of the 18th Messidor, relative to the 
means of driving the English out of Corsica, and restoring 
those departments to the Republic without efforts, has 
adopted all the views which you have there expressed. 

It authorises you to get shipped for Corsica, either at 
Leghorn or by any other way, all the Corsican patriots 
whose courage and civism are ibe to you. 

It authorises you to send over eight to ten thousand 


fowling-pieces, and seven or eight thousand pounds of 
powder. 


240 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. : 


It authorises you to promise, in the name of the govern- 
ment, proofs of the national gratitude to all the Corsicans, 
who are fighting for the liberty of their native country, . . 

It authorises you to promise a general and absolute pardon 
to those who shall return to their duty. 

It authorises you, in short, to use all the means that 
you shall deem practicable, in the operation with which 
you are particularly charged. 

The Directory, convinced that, to ensure the success of this 

eat operation, it is necessary to give it a chief known for 

is talents, his civism, his attachment to the French Re- 
public, and who unites the confidence of the government 
with that of the Corsican patriots, is writing by the same’ 
courier to citizen Salicetti: it informs him that it has east- 
its eyes upon him for this purpose, and promises him all the 
succours that will depend on itself and you. To complete. 
your glory and render it more brilliant, you have ania 
to do, general, but to add to the title of conqueror of Italy. 
that of liberator of the country which gave you birth, 

The Directory hopes it from your talents and your energy.. 

CARNOT..., 


To Citizen Salicetti. 


Head-quarters, Brescia, 4 Thermidor, year 4 [July 22, 1796.) . 

Fortune has appeared for a moment contrary to us: so 
many events have occurred during the last five or six days, 
and I am yet so much engaged, that it is impossible for me 
to give you an accurate account of them ; but, at last, thanks 
to the victory of Lonado and the rigorous measures which 
I have adopted, things will take a satisfactory turn. I have 
raised the siege of Mantua, and am here with nearly my 
whole army. YS en? 

I shall seize the first occasion to give battle to the enemy ; 
it will decide the fate of Italy. Beaten, I shall retire from the 
Adda; beating, I shall not stop at the marshes of Mantua, 
Louis! will give you a verbal account of our two victories 
of Lonado and Salo. Louis will talk to you about my 
present force and that of the enemy. Write to General 
Kellermann, to send me all the disposable troops by double 
marches. Be assured that the castles of Milan, ortene 
Alexandria, and Pavia, are provisioned. We are ex- 


1 His brother, Louis Bonaparte, 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 241 


tremely fatigued here; five of my horses have died of 
fatigue. I cannot write to the Directory ; I beg of you to 
inform it in a few words of what you see and what Louis 
will tell you verbally. - BoNAPARTE. 


To the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 
Rome, 22 July, 1796 [13 Prairial, year 4]. 

Monsieur le General, permit me to call myself to your 
remembrance on an occasion so glorious for the arms of the 
Republic and for you, who direct them with so much glory: 
I suppose the conquest of Mantua to be accomplished, and 
this triumph added to the others that you have so justly 
won in Italy : : 

Citizen Miot will, no doubt, have informed you of the state 
of the commission with which you have entrusted him, for the 
execution of the treaty of armistice concluded at Bologna 
between the Republic and the pope. Every thing is admirably 
arranged, and the first five millions are already despatched 
for Imola, where we agreed that they should be put into the 
hands of the deputies of the Republic. As to all the rest, 
the pope assents with all the sincerity in the world, and 
citizen Miot has attended to the interests of the Republic 
with such care and vigilance that every body renders him 
the justice which is his due. He is about to return to 
Florence ; citizen Cacault, whom you have sent to take his 
place, having arrived. The scientific commissioners have 
arrived, too, and I shall try to do my best in order that they 
may fulfil their commission, and to render their stay at 
Rome as agreeable as possible. 

The Sieur Ratti, who will have the honour to deliver this 
letter, will speak to you for me about la Messola and Santo 
Martino, which the Ferrarese were desirous of compre- 
hending in their territory ; but it is so notorious throughout 
all Italy that those two properties were purchased by the 

pes, and have never been governed or administered by the 
legates of Ferrara, that this has no need of proofs: never- 
theless, I have the honour to send you two authentic docu- 
ments of the contracts for the purchase of the lands in 
question ; and, I hope, general, from your justice, that you 
will be pleased to order that the pope be left in possession 
of what legitimately belongs to him, according to the letter 
and spirit of our treaty. 

VOL, I. R 


i er. i 


242 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


I hope, general, that. your triumphs will soon give us 
a peace useful and glorious to the Republic which you serve, 
and necessarily to mankind. Meanwhile, I have the honour 
to be, with the sentiments of admiration with which you 
have inspired me, &e. THE CHEVALIER D’AZARA. 


_PS. M. Cacault has just delivered to me the two letters 
with which you haye honoured me, dated 3rd Thermidor, 
and I thank you for the care you have been pleased to take 
respecting the additional article relative to Romagna. For 
the rest, the person of Citizen Cacault has long been known 
to me, and I hope that he will complete the execution of 
the treaty to your entire satisfaction. I presented him this 
morning to the pope and to the secretary of state, b 
whom he was received with all the distinction that he could 
desire, and citizen Miot took leave at the same time. 


To the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 


Venice, 5 Thermidor, year 4 [July 23, 1796). 

All the letters from the Tyrol speak of nothing but the 
perplexity of General Wurmser. He was anxious to 
descend and to attempt the deliverance of Mantua; he 
wished also for more force, that he might at once act and 
guard the threatened Tyrol. You will take Mantua in a 
few days; you will attack the camp at Bassano; and you 
will force the passes of the Tyrol by the two routes. 

It was reported here, the day before yesterday, that 
2,400 men, who had come to Trieste by the Friule, above 
Udine, had gone to reinforce the camp of Bassano; but it 
is added that all is quiet there. 

It has also been reported that a corps of Austrians, like- 
wise come from Trieste, nobody knows how, had arrived at 
Ferrara, to pass through the territory of Venice by the 
Polesino. ‘The senate does not believe a word of it; but, 


embarrassed as it is with its Slavonians, it has just given - 


orders for the departure of fourteen barks manned by 1500 
or 2000 of these same Slavonians, which are to station 
themselves at the conflux of the Adige and the Po, above 
Brondolo; they will never be dangerous there: they are 
commanded by Cleva. 

All that has — before my eyes, and some expressions 
dropped by M. Pesaro, lead me to believe it to be true, as 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 243 


it is reported, that the Venetians are really threatened by 
Russia and England, as well as by the Austrians: accord- 
ingly, all their efforts of defence are directed towards the 
sea, and I can assure you that they will soon have nothing 
to fear in that quarter for their capital. 

LALLEMANT. 


The Executive Directory to the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 


Paris, 7 Thermidor, year 4 [July 25, 1796]. 

We have received, citizen-general, your letters dated the 
18th, 24th, and 26th Messidor. 

Weare very glad to learn that the divisions which you 
conducted beyond the Po have recrossed that river, and 
that you are vigorously pushing the siege of Mantua. The 
insalubrity of the as of that siege and the preparations 
going on in the Tyrol make us earnestly desire to see that 
place surrendered very soon to the troops which you com- 
mand, Stratagems and daring coups de main are in fact 
an essential part of the art of attacking fortresses ; and those 
which you meditate against this will, no doubt, accelerate 
the surrender, by favour of the secrecy in which you will 
contrive to envelop their profound combinations, and by the 
rapidity of their execution. 

Our last despatches will have informed you of our adhe- 
sion to the proposals which you made to us relative to 
Genoa; and we think with you that that poms ought 
to be deferred, as well as that concerning Venice, till the 
moment when the taking of Mantua shall have consolidated 

our position in such a manner as to deprive those two 
Btates of all hope of eseaping the justice of our demands 
and the empire of the arms of the Republic. 

It is to be regretted that the interesting island of Elba is 
in the hands of the English, who find in it a sort of com- 
pensation for the loss of Leghorn, and whence they may 
molest your dispositions in favour of Corsica; but that event 
has the advantage for us of unveiling the secret intentions 
which the inaddnies had hitherto coloured with the ap- 
parent desire to preserve his neutrality. In any other 
circumstances, we should not have scrupled to propose war 
to that perfidious power ; but, when the rapid course of our 
triumphs is daily tending to dissolve the remnant of the 
coalition and necessarily heading to a general peace, it has 

R2 


244 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


not appeared prudent to us to kindle fresh flames of war, 
reserving to ourselves to remonstrate hereafter against this 
violation of treaties, which we show that we are ourselves 
tenacious of respecting. ' 

Reports are in circulation that the emperor, aceording to 
the ae ie of a health always precarious, is approach- 
ing his end. To take advantage of this event, it is neces- 
sary that you should be informed of it with the utmost 
possible celcrity, when it has taken place. Keep up for 
this pd erg secret correspondence with Vienna. The 
grand-duke of Tuscany, heir to the imperial throne, will 
not hesitate to repair to his capital immediately after the 
death of his brother. The point will then be to prevent 
him, to seize him as an enemy of the Republic, and to oc- 
cupy Tuscany militarily. This plan, though based upon 
conjectures by no means certain, is not the less deserving 
of all your attention. 

The seditious movements, repeated on the part of the 
Italians against the French troops, bespeak a profound 
hatred in them of our successes, since the false report of a 
reverse, how improbable soever, is sufficient alone to make 
it break forth in so serious a manner. Combine, citizen- 
general, with the activity of your military labours that care 
which is claimed by the constant and rigid repression of 
those alarming germs of insurrection, which might perhaps 
astonish the troops and cool their courage against the Aus- 
trians, to whom it must never cease to display itself with the 
same brilliancy. One powerful expedient to be employed 
against revolt is to carry off a great number of hostages and 
the most considerable persons in the different countries. 

The right of the army of the Rhine and Moselle nearly 
touches upon the Lake of Constance, and will soon alarm 
the rear of the Austrian army of Italy. Prince Charles, 
reduced to half his force by his losses and the garrisons 
which he has thrown into fortresses, is taking the route of 
the Danube. Generals Moreau and Jourdan are briskly 
pressing him on his two flanks. 

The most decisive fog appears to be already secure 
from any reverse, and the news which the Directory ex- 
pects very shortly from you, citizen-general, will add still 
more to the glorious and astonishing situation of the Re- 
public. CaRNoT. 


‘ 
‘ 
“! 
: 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 245 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Venice, 8 Thermidor, year 4 [July 26, 1796]. 

According to a letter, dated July 23rd, which I received 
yesterday, there had passed through Bolzano from the 20th 
to the said 23rd, 9150 infantry, 1800 cavalry, and 34 
artillerymen. This new number, added to all those of 
which I previously had advice, appears to me rather ex- 
cessive ; but, on the other hand, I have some reason to 
rely upon the writer: so that I suspend my judgment, and 
nevertheless think it right to transmit you this information. 
My man adds that the infantry and the artillerymen come 
from the Rhine. 

It appears from other letters that the Austrians are re- 
tiring from Bassano, but that they are marching detach- 
ments of twelve to fifteen hundred men, in different parts of 
their frontiers from the side of the Friule, to Goritz, Gra- 
disca, and the Pontieba. It is difficult to guess what is 
their design in this. 

I am informed, besides, that 600 cavalry had no sooner 
arrived at Roveredo than it received orders to fall back. 

The minister of Prussia at Vienna writes, in a letter 
which I have seen, that a courier had come to that cabinet 
from the court of Naples, and that, from what transpired, 
this courier had brought to the emperor the assurance that 
the king of the Two Sicilies would not subscribe any dis- 
graceful peace. 

LALLEMANT. 


To the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 


Venice, 8 Thermidor, year 4 [July 26, 1796]. 

I had yesterday a conversation with M. Pesaro, of which 
I think it my duty to give you an account without delay. 
We had to talk about some particular business ; but he was 
anxious to speak to me upon a subject that appeared to him 
much more important. It was the serious apprehension 
which he felt, as well as the principal members of the col- 
lege, that the republic of Venice would soon be at war with 
us. He told me that, according to the accounts which he 
had just received from Verona, you had clearly manifested 
the intention of declaring it; that you had expressed to 
him, who performs the functions of proveditor-general, ex- 


246 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


treme dissatisfaction ; that you had made demands, with 
which it was impossible to comply at the moment; and 
that you had, nevertheless, threatened to treat the Vene- 
tians as enemies if you did not immediately obtain what 
you desired ; that, besides, great rigour had begun to be 
shown in various places to individuals ; and, lastly, that you 
had expressly declared that, unless Venice disarmed in a 
very short time, you would actually declare war against it.” 
fter he had thus explained to me the causes of his 
alarm, he entered into very long justificatory details. He 
represented to me that ever since the French army had en- 
tered the territories of Venice, its government made it, 
he said, a duty and a pleasure to promote your arrange- 
ments and to comply with your demands ; if it had not done 
more, it was for want of means, or from the necessity in 
which it found itself to avoid embroiling itself with the 
other belligerent powers, from which, however, it was con- 
tinually receiving very severe reproaches: that, it is true, 
we might have had reason to complain of the sentiments 
and conduct of various individuals ; but that they had flat- 
tered themselves that, on directing our attention to the 
proceedings of the government, we should not judge of its 
principles and its mtentions by the indiscreet conduct or 
the imprudent language of individuals inflamed against us 
by ancient prejudices, by a sense of the momentary evils 
which they were necessarily suffering, and still more by the 
intrigues of a great number of malevolent persons, who wish 
for nothing better than to embroil Venice with France, and 
thus to punish it for its refusal to join the coalition; that, 
on the other hand, this same government neglected nothing 
that it could do without danger to change opinion in regard 
to us; that it curbed the licentiousness of our enemies ; 
that it had begun and should continue by degrees to remove 
the most ardent, that is to say, the emigrants, and that 
these precautions had already produced effects equally 
happy and perceptible; that, as for the arming, which ap- 
peared to excite your distrust, it had not had in its prin- 
ciple any other motives but those which have been stated 
in the written answer given by the senate; that, if any 
others have arisen to induce them to continue those 
parations for defence, which are such as ought to dispel all 
our suspicions, since they are threats seriously addressed 
to Venice, both by England and by Russia, the truth of 


__———- _— 


OE ee ee 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 247 


these reasons is proved by the nature and the direction of 
those same preparations ; that, besides, they are too incon- 
siderable to be regarded as the continuation of a design 
formed against France; that we ought not to draw any 
unfavourable inference either from the extraordinary con- 
tributions and impositions which the government has de- 
manded, for, in this, its intention has been much less to 
provide for its arming than to enable it to satisfy our re- 
quisitions; lastly, that the senate conceived that it had 
— in every way the sincerity and constancy of its 
riendly dispositions towards France, and that, in con- 

uence, the contrary dispositions which you now mani- 
fested caused those to whom they were known equal surprise 
and chagrin. 

Such was in substance the address of M. Pesaro. As 
I had no instructions, touching the alleged facts on which 
he founded his fears, I could not return any very precise 
answer ; but I thought that I ought, in one or other, 
to ree Hime apprehensions ; and for this purpose | employed 
general reflections, which it would be superfluous to repeat 
to you. I failed, no doubt, to cheer him completely, but 
I made him a little easier ; and for the rest he seemed to 
think that they ought to strive above all ra to please 
you, and to avoid all quarrel with France. He even ap- 

to think that such was the opinion of his principal 
colleagues, and that such would also be the resolution of 
the senate, to whom, he said, they should not fail to sub- 
mit, in the approaching sitting of Thursday, the accounts 
received from Verona. 

In addition, citizen-general, it seems to me absolutely 
necessary, in the present circumstances, to tell you what I 
know of the dispositions of our own government, and 
what I am able to judge of those of the government of 
Venice. Permit me to enter into some details on this 
subject. 

In the first place, I see, by the letters which I receive 
from the minister, that the Executive Directory appears to 
ealeulate upon the neutrality of the Venetian republie, and 
even to be satisfied with it, since it recommends to me to 
keep it up: nay, more, it appears to think of forming a 
much closer connexion between the two nations, and this 
matter has already formed the subject of several despatches. 
The latest that I have received, on Saturday last, insists 


248 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES, 


particularly on this point ; you may judge of it from the 
peregap which I transcribe. 

* It is time that the republic of Venice should rouse itself 
from the long sloth in which it has d ever since the 
peace of Passarowitz, and that it should resume among the 
powers the rank which it held before 1718: France now 
offers it the means to do so. Venice has an opportunity to 
increase her territory, to acquire fortresses, which will eon- 
solidate her power, and serve to form between the two 
republics a federative compact, founded on their reciprocal 
interests.” 
- I am ordered, besides, to persuade the Venetians to send 
a negociator to Paris. 

In the second place, as for this government, it is but too 
true that it has shown an extreme aversion for our revo- 
lution ; it is but too true that it has violently decried and 
calumniated it in its territories ; that several French indi- 
viduals have experienced rigorous treatment there; that 
hatred of us has there been industriously excited and fo- 
mented ; and that most heads, even those of several im- 
portant personages, have been heated and led astray by 
religious fanaticism. 

It is likewise but too true that this same government, 
long accustomed to tremble before that of Austria, has 
yielded more than it ought to have done to her influence, 
and that it paid the greater attention to her, and the less 
to us, because its old prejudices promised it something very 
different from our successes. But what appears to me not 
less true at this moment is, that it is sincere in its protesta- 
tions of neutrality and good understanding with France ; 
that, its prejudices giving way at last to its true interests, 
it frankly wishes to see the Austrian yoke broken, under 
which it bowed, like all Italy. I am not sanguine, it is 
true, in expecting that we shall induce it to help itself with 
its own hands: there are yet too many fears, too many 
prejudices, in a amet number of minds, and, besides, all are 
stupified by the long habit of indolence. But we may pro- 
mise ourselves, I think, that so far from crossing those who 
are labouring for its deliverance, it will at least make some 
secret efforts, and cherish some secret wishes in their favour. 

As for the arming, some doubts may be entertained re- 
specting the nature of the motives which have determined 
it; but, be this as it may, it seems to me that, in the state 


—="2 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 249 


in which it is, it ought not to excite any distrust. I have 
iven you an account of it in my preceding letters, and you 

avs, no doubt, judged that it was too feeble to excite any 

alarm. I will add, that I see before my eyes the truth of 

what M. Pesaro said to me. All the preparations which 

are making have no other object but the —— of the la- 

goons and the defence of the sea-coast. This indicates no 
ostile intentions against us. 

Such, citizen-general, is what I have thought it right to 
lay before you. Your wisdom and understanding will make 
amends for all that I might further have told you, and will 
not fail to suggest to you the resolutions most suitable to 
the interests of the Republic. It belongs to you to com- 
bine the glory of a victorious general and of a prudent and 
enlightened politician. 

LALLEMANT. 


The Executive Directory to General Bonaparte. 


Paris, 13 Thermidor, year 4 [July 31, 1796]. 

The Executive Directory, citizen-general, which cannot 
but be well satisfied with the indefatigable activity with 
which you combat the enemies of liberty—the Executive 
Directory, which shares with all the good citizens, with all 
the true friends of the country, with the sincere republicans, 
the admiration excited by the great military talents which 
you display, and which give you just titles to the national 
gratitude, sees with indignation the efforts that scribblers, 
covered with different masks, are daily making to deceive 
the public, and to second the enemies of our country by 
reports, which cannot have any other object but to sow dis- 
sension among the friends of order and peace. The Diree- 
tory sees with indignation the perfidy with which these 
coalition scribblers have dared to attack the loyalty, the 
constant fidelity of your services, and it owes to itself the 
formal contradiction which it gives to the absurd calumnies 
which they are impelled to hazard by the necessity of feed- 
ing malignity with, stories capable of sharpening it, and 
gaining readers for their productions. Some, openly roy- 
alists, crudely circulate a falsehood ; others, calling them- 
selves patriots par emcellence, but proceeding towards the 
same point, comment upon it, embellish it in their way, 
upon pretence of combating their so-called antagonists. 


250 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


Both are thus labouring to check the progress of ordet 
which is establishing itself; both are seconding the ene- 
mies of the Revolution ; both are striving to sow discord 
and to disorganize the armies ; both Pi in this manner 
upon the credulity of their readers and of those from whom 
they derive their subsistence, and they indecently ra 
them, as certain, tales which are the mere coinage of their 
wild imaginations. 

No, eitizen-general, never have the friends of Austria 
been able to prejudice the Directory against you, because 
the Direetory knows your principles and your inviolable 
attachment to the Republic. No, never has there been a 
question about your recall ; never has the Directory, never 
has any of its members, thought of giving a successor to 
him who so gloriously leads our republicans to vietory. The 
scribbler who, assuming the air of defending you, dared 
assert that he was acquainted with the intrigue plotted 
against you, and of which an affair of money was but the 
pretext ; the other who, dressing himself in a false virtue, 
dared to add that he had had the delicacy to keep silence 
about events which would have made our enemies laugh, 
are both impostors: both deceive the yp and are evi- 
dently unworthy of its confidence. If that man, so well 
informed, if that man, who, like his brethren in calumny, 
strives to give himself an air of importance, by pretending 
to be acquainted with all the secrets of the State—if that 
man is acquainted with one intrigue of the nature of that 
which he mentions, let him disclose it, let him make it 
known to the Directory: it is important enough assuredly ; 
it too deeply interests the public welfare and the progress 
of our armies, for him who can reveal it to be able to dis- 
pense himself from denouncing it to those whom its object 
is to lead into error. But the silence of that man, his 
silence which will be his condemnation, will enlighten the 
public as to the confidence that it will henceforth owe to his 
insinuations. 

You possess, citizen-general, the confidence of the Di- 
rectory: the services which you are daily rendering give 
you a right to it; the considerable sums which the Republic 
owes to your victories prove that you attend at once to 
glory and to the interests of your country: all the good 
citizens are agreed on that point ; you will have no diffieulty 
to abandon the boastings and the calumnies of the others to 


fies acetals | 


= 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 251 


the contempt which they deserve of themselves, and still 
more for the spirit which directs them. 
REVEILLERE-LEPAUX. 


The Executive Directory to the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 
Paris, 14 Thermidor, year 4 [August 1, 1796]. 
What you wrote to the Directory from Castiglione, 
on the 4th Thermidor, citizen-general, relative to the demo- 
lition of the fortifications of the castles of Milan and of 
Mantua, has its approbation. I think, however, that every 
thing ought to be prepared for playing ‘the mines and de- 
stroying the works, in case success on the part of the enemy 
should render that measure necessary. As for Mantua, 
the Directory adopts the proposal you make to demolish 
that place immediately, and to send to France forthwith 
the 300 pieces of artillery which are there. When that 
city has been demolished, you can order the destruction of 
the fortifications of the castle of Milan. 
REVEILLERE-LEPAUX. 


The Executive Directory to the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 
Paris, 14 Thermidor, year 4 [August 1, 1796]. 

The account you gave us, citizen-general, of the siege of 
Mantua morc us that you use all the activity which 
that operation demands, and the success of which we are 
impatiently expecting. It is superfluous to recommend to 
you to attend to the wants of the troops employed in it, in 
order to mitigate the effects of the labours in which the 
are engaged, and to check the progress of the diseases which 
have broken out among the divisions. 

We have approved in a particular despatch the proposals 
relative to that place, when daring, perseverance, and talent 
combined, shall have put it into our hands, as well as re- 
lative to the castle of Milan. 

We cannot second too heartily the zeal which you ma- 
nifest for recovering Corsica fom the English, and we 
authorize you to grant an amnesty there in concert with 
the commissioner Salicetti, specially charged with the exe- 
cution of the dispositions which you have made. 

AREVEILLERE-LEPAUX. 


252 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


The Executive Directory to the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 
Paris, 14 Thermidor, year 4 [August 1, 1796]. 

The Directory is informed, citizen-general, that, agree- 
ably to its orders, the minister of war has directed the 
general commanding in the 11th military division to retain 
in that arrondissement a squadron of the 18th regiment of 
dragoons, and to send the three squadrons of that corps to 
the army of Italy without delay. 

The disturbances which have broken out in the depart- 
ment of the Bouches du Rhone, and especially at Marseilles 
and Aix, have induced us to send thither immediately Ge- 
neral Willot, who has our confidence. We beg him to 
watch that department with particular vigilance, and to 
pee to the utmost of his power a civil war from bursting 
forth. 

We have just ordered the minister of war to despatch for 
Marseilles one of the three squadrons of the 18th regiment 
of dragoons destined for Italy. 

The horses which you have sent to the Directory are 
arrived. 

REVEILLERE-LEPAUX. 


The Executive Directory to General Bonaparte. 

Paris, 14 Thermidor, year 4 [August 1, 1796]. 
We have received, citizen-general, the letter which you 
have written to us fromm Castiglione the 4th of Thermidor, 
in which you mention the insurrection of the inhabitants of 
Reggio, and the dispositions of the people subject to the 
dukes of Parma and Modena. Circumstances and the 
friendship existing between the French Republic and the 
court of Spain might require some concessions to be granted 
at the general peace to the Duke of Parma, whose aggran- 
dizement in Italy would be advantageous to France in 

several political respects. 
REVEILLERE-LEPAUX. 


“The Executive Directory to General Bonaparte. 
Paris, 14 Thermidor, year 4 [August 1, 1796]. 


We have paid, citizen-general, particular attention to that 
one of your last despatches which relates to Leghorn. We 


| 
; 
| 
| 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 253 


persist in the determination which has hitherto governed 
our conduct in regard to the d-duchy of Tuscany, and 
we have seen with pain, in the measures pursued by our 
commissioners, a forgetfulness of our political principles in 
regard to that power. Without ceasing to proceed towards 
our goal—the crippling of the English in the Mediterra- 
nean, by closing the ports against them, and bringing back 
Corsica under the laws of the Republic, by favour of the 
occupation of Leghorn—we will not make any attack at 
this moment on the independence of Tuscany, or perform 
any acts of gecesi in its territory. e defer, till 
more favourable circumstances, the grievances which must 
arise for us from the partiality of the grand-duke to the 
English ; accordingly, we recommend to our commissioners 
to employ the forms which neutrality requires, and to con- — 
sult previously with you on the resolutions which appear 
useful to them, abstaining, however, from every thing that 
would tend to usurp the rights of the Tuscan government. 
It is necessary, without giving umbrage to it, and without 
affecting the exercise of authority, to husband the advan- 
tages of the Republic, whose interests this system ‘will 
favour. 

M. Corsini has transmitted to us a memorial containing 
the grievances of his court: we have thought it right to 
accede to his demand to revoke the resolution concerning 
persons of English extraction, while rejecting his other 


Bera, 
he administrative operations at Leghorn likewise engage 
our solicjtude ; and our formal intention is to establish the 
rule of security, good order, and integrity there. We 
earnestly call the attention of our commissioners to this im- 
portant object. 

REVEILLERE-LEPAUX. 


The Executive Directory to General Bonaparte. 


Paris, 14 Thermidor, year 4 [August 1, 1796]. 
The observations contained, citizen-general, in your letter 
concerning the State of Venice, have appeared to us ex- 
tremely judicious. The Directory authorises you to take 
all the measures that you have proposed till the military 
events, the happy issue of which we are awaiting, determine 
In a positive manner our conduct in regard to that power. 


254 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


As for the remonstrances of the Grison Leagues, the 
course which you have taken likewise deserves the approba- 
tion of the Directory, being conformable with its preceding 
instructions. It is useful to profit by the need they have of 
the corn of the Milanese to ascertain their disposition, — 

The constitutional act forbids us to authorise the use you 
propose to make of a corps of 800 Swiss pensioners. 

REVEILLERE-LEPAUX. — 


To General Bonaparte. 


Head-quarters, Poli, 11 Thermidor, year 4 [July 29, 1796]. _ 

I am just come from Rivoli: the fire has ceased ; we still — 
hold the position of Campo-Orongo—heights behind Riyoli. 
Our troops are harassed ; they are absolutely knocked up ; 
they have fought above fifty different actions. I never saw 
the Austrians fight so furiously ; they were all drank with 
brandy. Our troops, en with empty bellies, fought 
with surprising co . If yousend me a reinforcement 
of 7 or 8000 men, I almost promise you to re-oceupy la 
Corona to-morrow; but we want fresh troops. Let me — 
have news of you, general ; I have had none to-day: I am 
impatient to hear from you. 

have just sent to ascertain whether the enemy is in the 
environs of the Chiusa. I shall sleep at the bridge, Pigeon 
and Victor at Rivoli. Joubert is ilk 
MASSENA. 


To General Bonaparte. % ; 


Head-quarters, Pieverono, 11 Thermidor, year 4 [July 29, 1796). 

I certainly expected to find the troops which arrived 
yesterday from Vicenza diminished in number. You will 
see, citizen-general, that, after all, it will be but a recon- 
naissance : that we shall know. To-day all precautions are 
taken ; strong reconnaissances started in the night, to push 
very forward on all the roads leading from the enemy, and 
assuredly, if we are to be attacked, it will not be at Vicenza 
only that the movement will take place, but along our whole 
line. Health and friendship. 

MASSENA. 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 255 


To General Bonaparte. 


Venice, 12 Thermidor, year 4 [July 30, 1796]. 

Citizen-general, according to a letter, which I have re- 
ceived from Bolzano, 7 the 27th July, there have 
through that part, since the preceding letter, 120 artillery- 
men, "5000 infantry, and 4000 cavalry, all these opus 
coming from the Rhine. The same letter adds that, on the 
25th, the Austrian troops put themselyes in motion to the 
number of 30,000, taking different directions, namely those 
of Val Isella, Salto, Alla, Guiducasio, and Brescia. It also 
gives me to understand that there are movements towards 
Munich, for my man asks if it would be advisable for him 
to go thither, 

Sther advices from Vicenza, dated July 18, assure me that 
the number of the Austrian troops arrived in the environs 
of that city does not exceed 3000, composed of Hulans, 
hussars, and infantry. Those which are posted at the 
Campo Marzo are provided with two pieces of cannon, one 
poo ona hill on the other side of the river, and one on the 

erona road, Health and fraternity, 

LALLEMANT, 


To General Bonaparte. 


Rome, 12 Thermidor, year 4 [July 31, 1796]. 

Citizen general-in-chief, I arrived here the day before 
yesterday. I delivered your letters to M. Azara and to 
cardinal Zelada. M. Azara presented me this morning to 
the pope, by whom I have been very well received. Citizen 
Miot and his secretary of legation set out this evening for 
Florence. The scientific men and artists arrived. this 
morning. Here I am installed with those who ought to 
assist in the work ; we will endeavour to do it well. 

Citizen Miot has spared nothing to inform you by couriers 
of what is doing. Five millions are on the road to Imola: 
I shall hasten the second remittance. 

Agreeably to your instructions, I applied to the governor 
of Ancona for an order to receive the garrison which you 
are tosend: I was told that this order was given, and that 
commissioners from you had already come to Ancona, and 
taken cognizance of the state of things. 

An English frigate is blockading this port. This system 


256 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


of blockade pursued by the English at Leghorn and other 
places is designed to distress the people, by causing a want 
of work, and exciting them by despair to revolt against us. _ 

You know that there are fifty thousand pounds of powder 
ready to be delivered here for the army. I am going to 
have it tried by citizens Monge and Berthollet; we ought 
to know whether it is good: soon afterwards we will send 
it off to you by Pistoia and Modena. I will give notice of 
it to the French comandant at Bologna, who can send 
national guards to escort and take it wherever you please. 

I have requested citizen Miot to communicate to me 
your answers, which may serve me here for ulterior in- 
structions. ( 

I have not yet said any thing about the article concernin 
the contribution of Ravenna, because I have been en 
with more urgent matters. I shall immediately have the 
necessary interview upon that article with M. Azara. 

They wish to wait here for the answer from Imola con- 
cerning the manner in which the delivery of the first five 
millions will be effected, before forwarding the second in- 
stalment. It is found very difficult to collect this second 
sum, which, besides, will be behind-hand : I shall be press- 
ing. People must be aware that the Directory will not turn 
its attention to the definitive peace, till the conditions of the 
armistice are fulfilled. They must, therefore, bestir them- 
selves here, mab my their extreme disposition to 
‘tardiness in every thing. We shall fall to work to-morrow 
with the scientific men and artists to decide upon the ob- 
jects to be demanded in kind. I shall give you an account 
of every thing, after I have learned from Miot what answer 
you have given to all his propositions. 

CACAULT. 


To General Bonaparte. 


Head-quarters, Roverbello, 13 Thermidor, year 4 [July 31, 1796]. 
My troops arrived here this morning, at three o'clock, 
after marching two nights and a day. "They are going to 
Castellaro. T observe to you that I have but the 4th 
demi-brigade and the 51st, forming part of General Kil- 
maine’s division. I have also a few cavalry and eleven 
pieces of light artillery, far too many for so few infantry. - 
On the arrival of General Kilmaine, I went to see him, 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 257 


in order to concert with him for the good of the service. 
I have agreed with him that he should place a demi-brigade’ 
between Roverbello and Castellaro, to cover Mantua, and to ° 
be able to afford each other mutual assistance ; for it is 
fourteen miles from Castellaro to Roverbello. You see that 
I am lonely enough, and without hope of any succour ; but, 
the greater the danger, the greater firmness we must show. 
Rely upon my zeal and my activity. 

I beg you to let me know upon what point I am to effect 
my retreat, in case I am forced ; for I am not aware of your 
intentions or of the position of the army. All your orders 
have been executed. In those which you have given me on 
the subject of the retreat, I have not been at all annoyed. 

AUGEREAU. 


To General Bonaparte. 


Head-quarters, Milan, 13 Thermidor, year 4 [July 31, 1796}. 

I am now persuaded that the enemy have taken Brescia. 
I am setting off for Cassano, to make the necessary recon- 
naissances myself, and I will acquaint you with what I have 
learned. So far, notwithstanding the usual exaggerations, 
nothing leads me to believe that the corps of the enemy 
which has come to Brescia is considerable. We have some 
convoys on the road, that fell back to Cassano, which will be 
the principal object of my examination. 

They are working hard in execution of your orders con- 
cerning the castle of Milan. It will be supplied with pro- 
visions to-morrow, and I will endeavour to asi your inten- 
tions. As soon as the communication is re-established, or 
as soon as you point me out another, I will send you the 
detachments of cavalry which are daily equipping and the 
other convoys distined for the head-quarters. 

SAHUQUET. 


To General Bonaparte. 


Lonado, 14 Thermidor, year 4 [August 1, 1796]. 
General Massena has not arrived here, as he sent me 
word ; having no news of Sauret, I could neither march upon 
Brescia nor follow up the victory. I learn this moment that 
General Sauret, after taking Salo, has retired upon Desen- 
sano, and know not what to make of it. General Massena 
VOL, I. 8 


258 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


is about to rejoin me. We shall act together, agreeably to 
the instructions which I have received tots you. iY 
The battle of Lonado was terrible ; and I can assure you 
the enemy has been so mauled that he will not forget it: 
he has left above 1000 muskets, lost a great many men, 
and gone off in the greatest confusion. Wehave taken 300 
prisoners. Had we been stronger, or only fresher, we should 


not have stopped there. Due 


PS. The enemy is guarding the bridge of St. Mark; 1 
am told that he has 5000 men in Brescia, and nearly the 
like number before the place ; nothing positive: if we may 
believe the prisoners, we had to do yesterday with 8 or 
9000 infantry and 800 horse. 

M. Bataglia, proveditor of Brescia, lets you-know that he 
is here. He. knows nothing about the positions and strength 
of the enemy; or, at least, he says nothing precise or 
positive. 


To General Bonaparte. 


16 Thermidor, year 4 [August 3, 1796]. _ 

I have learned with pain that you are displeased because 
I did not keep Salo after I had taken it. You will recol- 
lect, general, that you were for a moment undecided whether 
we should go. You afterwards decided that, if it were only 
to deliver General Guyeux and his demi-brigade, we ought 
to go; but you gave meno orders to remain there. General 
Despinois took a different course, which greatly embarrassed 
me, when I began my attack and saw that he did not come. 
Had he apprized me of it, I would have detached a column, 
which would have entered by the Brescia gate; and, by 
means of this mancuvre, I should have made prisoners of 
the whole garrison and of the Nentanadtepencaan command- 
ing there, and taken fifteen pieces of artillery parked at the 
camp of Tormini. 

General Despinois says that he corresponded with 
me. I have received but one letter from him at four in the 
afternoon, when I was falling back to reach the heights in 
front of Desensano, having seen a great number of barks 
full of troops upon the lake and the general with them. 
I was afraid that they were coming to land near Desensano, 
to cut off my retreat. 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 259 


On arriving at Lonado, Generals Massena, Despinois, 
and I, consulted together in the presence of General St. 
Hilaire. There was a question ee returning to Salo. 
The general asked how long it would take to get there; I 
replied that it would not take above four hours; that, 
according to caleulations, I could have arrived there by five 
o'clock in the evening ; that they had but to decide and I 
would march immediately. General Massena was of opi- 
nion that it would be rather late. It was decided that the 
three divisions should march in column to the bridge of 
St. Mark, and that, if the enemy opposed our — the 
eavalry should ford and each horseman take a volunteer 
behind him. I marched, and had nearly reached Brescia, 
when I received orders to fall back; I then marched for 
Salo. At the bridge of St. Mark, I allowed the troops to 
rest for a moment. General Pigeon, who followed me, sent 
me an orderly to let me know that he was making his 
retreat upon Brescia, the enemy coming in force from 
Gavardo. I drew up my division in order of battle; I 
immediately sent twenty Pe chasseurs to reconnoitre the 
Gavardo road, where I ordered two pieces of cannon to be 
placed. I detached tirailleurs in front till the return of the 
chasseurs. The officer commanding the reconnaissance 
made me a report of his mission ; he had seen nothing, and 
I resumed my march. General Massena sent me an 
orderly, who told me from him that I ought to make all 
the infantry advance upon Lonado. I was approaching it, 
when I met General Massena, who expressed his astonish- 
ment to find me there: I replied that it was only in 
consequence of his own advice, when he told me that the 
orderly had made a mistake, and that this disposition related 
only to the remainder of General Pigeon’s troops. I then 
fell back to regain the Salo road. You see, general, that, 
but for these unlucky accidents, I should have arrived in 
good time.. I was then obliged to relinquish the command 
to the general of brigade Guyeux, having had my leg 
erushed : making a charge at the head of the 24th regi- 
ment of chasseurs, we passed along a very narrow road, 
where I was pressed by the squadron, and my leg swelled 
to such a prodigious size that I could neither walk nor 
ride. I have transmitted to you the details of my expedi- 
tion, fearing that you had not received them. 

I had about 1500 infantry and 90 horse chasseurs, and, 

82 


260 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


notwithstanding the superiority of the enemy, whose force 
amounted to 3500 infantry and 400 hussars, or dragoons, 
having cannon, I made 90 prisoners, among whom were 
three captains and a sub-lieutenant. I took two pieces of 
cannon and two pair of colours of the regiment of Pro- 
vence, and I delivered the 27th demi-brigade, General 
Guyeux, General Rusea, and his aide-de-camp, who were 
prisoners. 

The chief of brigade Desaix, commanding the Allobroges, 
has distinguished himself. He entered the town twice at 
the head of the carabineers of the division, and received a 
ball in the shoulder. Notwithstanding his wound; he has 
never quitted the corps. 


SAURET. 


To General Bonaparte. 
Head-quarters, Castiglione di Stiviere, 
16 Thermidor, year 4 [August 3, 1796]. 

The enemy is completely beaten ; 3000 prisoners, cannon, 
and ammunition, are the fruits of this victory, The three 
arms fought well; each has done its duty. We have to 
regret the death of some brave men: General Beyrand was 
killed on the field of battle, General Robert wounded ; the 
chief of brigade Pourailler is likewise killed and several 
brave chiefs of battalion. 

The enemy received reinforcements several times; the 
fight was most bloody: I estimate the loss of the enemy at 
7000 men. Your aide-de-camp Marmont conducted him- 
self to admiration during the whole engagement: he has 
displayed great military talents. I beg you to send me 
General St. Hilaire to command the 4th demi-brigade, and 
likewise the chief of brigade Lannes, who has the brevet 
for taking the command of it; otherwise those brave 
trogps are undone. You will endeavour also to send me a 
general of brigade to command the 51st. We must strive 
to eens by this victory. I will send you the cireumstan- 
tial report relative to the affair of to-day, in which I shall 
solicit of you promotion for the officers who have distin- 
guished themselves. ‘Aucdeaa ume 

PS. Not having officers enough, I have retained the 
aide-de-camp of General St. Hilaire. 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 261 


To General Bonaparte. 
Head-quarters, Castiglione di Stiviere, 
16 Thermidor, year 4 [August 3, 1796]. 

I inform you, general, that the enemy has taken positions 
by the side of us, that is to say, as far as we could pursue 
him: the darkness put an end to our engagement. At 
night-fall, precisely at the moment when I was making dis- 
positions, 200 hussars appeared upon our rear, and 
approached to within pistol-shot of the town: at the same 
moment the whole park of artillery was put to the rout, 
and struck terror into the minds of the soldiers, who ran 
away as fast as they could. Fortunately, we succeeded in 
rallying some of them to serve to guard us. 

The troops before us amount to 20,000 infantry. For 
my part, I have computed them at 15,000, ae all 
reports agree in the first statement. You see, general, that 
I shall be attacked to-morrow morning by fresh troops and 
far superior in number. Our soldiers are harassed with 
fatigue and destitute of provisions. If you do not send 
me troops, it is impossible for me to resist, willing as the 
troops may be to fight. The cavalry has suffered severely, 
considering its small number. I have not an officer; they 
are all killed or wounded. We fought sixteen hours in a 
parched plain, where there was not a drop of water. The 
soldiers have suffered much. 

I beg you to tell me what I have to do, in case I should 
be obliged to retreat, and to what point I am to proceed 
with my troops. An immediate answer. 

AUGEREAU. 


To General Bonaparte. 


Lonado, 16 Thermidor, year 4 [August 3, 1796}. 

I have this instant received a letter from General Rampon, 
who tells me that General Guyeux is blocking up the enemy 
in Salo, and that he has already taken so many prisoners that 
he has not men sufficient to guard them, He declares that 
the enemy is in complete rout, and desires me to march to 
him with my division. General Rampon, having opened 
the letter to me, set out immediately, to proceed to his 
assistance. 

I am afraid that this precipitate movement will cause me to 


262 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


have some alerte in the night. Finding myself weakened by 
four battalions, I am resolved to make my troops fall back to 
Lonado and to leave no posts but on the heights of De- 
sengano. To-morrow morning by daybreak at Salo, if 
there is nothing new. 
There is still a firing of small arms towards Castillon. © 
MASSENA. 


To General Guillaume [Commandant of Peschiera). 


Head-quarters, Castiglione, 16 Thermidor, year 4 [Aug. 3, 1796]. 

You ought to have witnessed the battles fought yester- 
day and the preceding days: we have taken 20,000 men, 
and killed a great number. The enemy’s army is totally 
broken up, and to-morrow we shall be within your walls. 
Meanwhile, let what will happen, hold out to the last 
extremity. The breach made, show the greatest firmness. 
Health, esteem, and glory. 
3 BoNAPARTE, 


To General Guillaume. 


Salo, 17 Thermidor, year 4 [August 4, 1796]. © 

The most complete victory has crowned this day: the 
enemy has at length given up to us all his positions, which 
he made in vain the most desperate efforts to defend. 
General Massena will give you an account of the attack 
that we made this morning with such brilliant success. 

The state of things has not permitted me, since my 
coming to this division, to give you any account of the 
operations concerted with Gasirel Despinois. This divi- 
sion has hitherto had too much to do to make itself master 
of all the positions which could alone enable it to protect 
the movements of General Despinois, of whom we have no 
intelligence. Now that the communications are more free, 
I have strongly bed General Guyeux, who had no 
instructions nor any idea of your plans, to make a movement 
to-morrow, for the purpose of putting into that operation 
all the unity that it requires aid seconding the attempts of 
General Despinois upon the rock of Amfoux. 

The enemy is so closely pressed in this quarter, where 
we have cut him off from all retreat towards the lake, that 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 263 


he cannot escape a total loss; for he is between this divi- 
sion, that of General Despinois, and Brescia. 

I wrote to you yesterday, citizen-general, how grieved I 
was on reaching the column of Salo, to find it in all 
respects so unfit to concur on that same day in the object 
which its march was designed to fulfil. General Guyeux 
was ignorant of everything, even to the course that he had 
to take. At length, all was repaired and placed on such a 
footing that something may now be undertaken in that 
quarter. 

I am only afraid that the delay has given a good deal of 
uneasiness to General Despinois, who has thus far been se- 
parated from us. Believe, citizen-general, in my entire 
devotedness and in the triumph of the-arms of the 
Republic. Sr. Himalre. 


To General Bonaparte. 


Brescia, 17 Thermidor, year 4 [August 4, 1796]. 

According to the instructions given me for the attack of 
Gavardo, I marched with the first battalion of the 11th 
demi-brigade to the heights of this village, passing by the 
left of Picton. This position, occupied by the enemy, de- 
fended the village of Gavardo. 

The impetuosity with which the enemy was charged by 
the battalion obliged him to fall back into the village, 
where, supported by several pieces of artillery, he was like- 
wise forced. One of their pieces and above 150 prisoners 
were already in our power ; we were masters of the village 
of Gayardo and the bridge, and the retreat of the troops 
who were attacked by est Despinois was ay cut 
off: to no purpose two squadrons, which escorted the 
artillery and baggage, charged in the village ; our troops, 
iu ambush on all sides, forced them to fall back upon Picton. 
To decide the victory, nothing more was required but to 
force him in this village ; but I soon judged that the troops 
of General Despinois had been repulsed, on seeing two 
enemy's columns advancing directly upon me, The fire of 
these two brought back to the charge that which had 
retreated upon Salo. In a moment, we were surrounded on 
all sides. The first battalion of the 11th demi-brigade 
here deserved the warmest praise. The only way I had 
left to preserve these excellent troops for the Republic was 


264 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES, 


to charge the enemy’s column with the bayonet ; I had no 

reat difficulty to persuade the brave fellows to second my 

esign, and well did they keep the oath which they made 
me, to conquer or die. The charge beaten, a most vehement 
fire soon opened us a passage, which afforded us the facility 
to gain the mountains by which we effected our retreat. 
It was not till we had marched more than thirty miles upon 
horrible roads that we arrived at Rezato, where we learned 
that General Despinois had retired to Brescia. 

We were obliged to abandon the prisoners we had at first 
made. In our different attacks the enemy has had an 
infinite number killed and wounded, and among them 
several officers of distinction. We have brought in fifty 
prisoners taken during our retreat. Our loss in killed and 
prisoners is about sixty men. Mi 

Ill health, added to a forced march, made on foot, obliges 
me, to my great regret, to keep my bed. Health and respect. 

DALLEMAGNE, 


To General Bonaparte. 


Head-quarters, Brescia, 17 Thermidor, year 4 [August 4, 1796]. 

I address to you annexed the extract of a letter from 
my secretary, who, on the 15th of this month, saw Casal- 
Maggior in full revolt. Murder, robbery, plunder, outrages 
of all kinds, have been committed by a furious multitude. 
I am in, according to all appearances, for five horses stolen, 
all my baggage, consisting of linen, clothes, books, maps, 
memorials, and military correspondence, carriage, waggon, 
everything valuable and useful that I possessed; and my 
aides-de-camp are in nearly the same condition. I have no 
doubt that you will signally avenge the outrage offered to 
the Republic by these villains. In this assurance, I solicit of 
you a particular reparation, proportioned, if it be possible, 
to the loss that I have sustained; I say, if it be possible, 
for nobody can restore to me the fruit of several years’ 
researches. I rely, in this matter, on your severe equity. 

Health and respect. 

DEsPINOIS. 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 265 


To General ‘Bonaparte. 


Brescia, 17 Thermidor, year 4 [August 4, 1796]. 

Had nothing but daring been needed yesterday, we should 
no doubt have triumphed: I have sought the enemy and 
attacked him without hesitation. What more could I do? 
The arms that ought to have seconded the head failed me 
when I wanted them; and, on this point, I should betray 
my duty, were I not to tell you the whole truth: there is 
no good, no resource to be hoped from the eighth brigade ; 
it is so infected with cowardice, that, on the firing of a 
single musket by one of our sentinels, this morning, at an 
Austrian prisoner who had appeared on the road, half the 
corps was already in flight. We, General Bertin and I, 
‘ad, all the brave, join to beseech you to put this corps in 
its place, or at least to spare us the evident risk of being 
dishonoured with it, and of being prevented from justifying 

our confidence. At any rate, the division of which you 
ave given me the command cannot exist in the state of 
disorganization in which it is at present. It is in want of 
everything, and not a creature to furnish it with supplies, 
no commissary of war, no agent, not even a medical officer 
and an hospital for the wounded. It is always the ease that, 
when a prey to distresses, and suffering all sorts of priva- 
tions, the soldier is disheartened ; and it is this mischievous 
impression too that we ought to hasten to destroy. 
he Adjutant-General Herbin found nothing but rocks at 
Santo-Osseto ; no provisions either behind or before, unless 
indeed you proceed a great distance further. This consi- 
deration and the loneliness of his position induced me to 
recall him to Nave, where he remains posted till fresh 
orders. 

I shall send this evening, unless contrary dispositions be 
directed by you, the third battalion of the 11th to occupy 
Rezato and the gorges of Irle and Massaro: by these means 
I shall cover Brescia, and secure, as much as possible, all 
the communications of your left. It is painful and grievous 
to me to remain in some sort a spectator of your successes ; 
but, when one does enterprise, there ought to be at least an 
appearance of success, and here I have it not. The woful 
experience that we had yesterday takes from me the very 
hope of it. 

Send me, I beg of you, in all possible cases, infantry 


266 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES, 


cartridges and field-pieces with their ammunition. We are 
reduced to ten cartridges per man, and at Brescia there is 
but a'small stock, destined exclusively for the garrison of 
the castle. Health and respect. 

DEsPINOIS. 


To General Bonaparte. 


Caliverge, 17 Thermidor, year 4 [August 14, 1796]. © 

I have the honour to inform you that, last night, after 
the return of my aide-de-camp, whom you had ordered to 
proceed to Gavardo, and who was unable to reach that 
place, because it is occupied by the enemy, I sent immedi~ 
ately a confidential man, who has always served me well, to 


ascertain the force of the enemy, both infantry, cavalry, and. 


artillery. He has reported to me that it is about 5 or 6000 
men ; the infantry is in the town, the cavalry outside ; and 
four small pieces of cannon are placed about a mile from 
Gavardo, on the right. He was stopped at the first post, 
which is of seven men, five infantry and two cavalry: at a 
little distance from this first, there is another of about 200 
infantry and 100 cavalry. He was conducted to the general, 
and asked whence he came; he said from Pont St. Mark, 
and added that he came several times a week to Gavardo 
and its environs, to buy oats and other produce in which he 
dealt. When questioned if there were many French to- 
wards Pont St. Mark and Lonado, he replied that he saw 
some of them every day, but could not tell their number. 

The road which he took to go thither runs before Pont 
St. Mark, coming from Brescia: thus, I should think, 
general, if you should march troops to that quarter, it 
might be advisable to send one column by this road and one 
by that running from Brescia by way of Rezato to Gavardo. 
Artillery may be taken thither by both routes. 

If Cheadeal Shi. yen is at Salo, he might come thither by 
the Termini road, passing through Villa Nova, detaching a 
column, and making it cross by the bridge of Termini or 
that of Villa Nova: this column would pass through Supra 
Ponte; then the enemy would have no sort of retreat. 

This man left Gavardo at ten this morning, and was con- 
ducted back by two Hulans to the first post, having a guide 
with him. Health and consideration. SAURET. 


5 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 267 


To General Bonaparte. 


Salo, 18 Thermidor, year 4 [August 5, 1796]. 

The troops under my command are scouring the moun- 
tains in the environs of Salo, and bringing in Austrian 
prisoners every moment: to-day the number is 200, one of 
them a captain ; these, added to 1510 whom we had taken 
in the fights of the 16th and 17th, form a total of 1710, 
including a general and several officers. We took also 26 
caissons or carriages, most of them full of ammunition, one 
twelve-pounder, one five, and one three. A twelve-pounder 
has just been discovered on the road to the camp of La 
Corona at Sabio; I have ordered it to be taken to Salo: there 
is a great quantity of muskets which the 9 threw away 
upon the mountains when betaking himself to flight ; I have 
had them collected and brought hither. His retreat is di- 
rected upon Anfo, which is occupied at this moment by his 
wrecks. 

The inhabitants of Salo and also of the neighbouring 
villages have expressed to us the greatest attachment for 
the French Republic; on returning into their territory, 
everybody hailed our approach ; the doors of houses which 
had before been closed on account of the misconduct of the 
Austrians, who plundered them all the time they continued 
there, were instantly thrown open with the greatest joys and 
the inhabitants themselves were anxious to afford all pos- 
sible accommodations to the troops that I command. Several 
had concealed our sick officers, and paid them all the atten- 
tions that humanity requires. Health and respect. 

GUYEUX. 

PS. One hundred more prisoners have just arrived. At 
Villa Nova and Gavardo there are 150 wounded, whom I 
shall have taken to the rear as soon as | can. 

I am just informed that there have been found two four- 
pounders, the carriages of which have been burned. These 
pieces were hid in ditches on the heights of Villa Nova. 


To General Bonaparte. 


Cremona, 18 Thermidor, year 4 [August 5, 1796]. 
Having thoroughly ascertained, general, that it was im- 
possible for me to follow the movement of the division ordered 


268 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


by your letter of the 17th, at eight in the morning, I had 
myself set down at Cremona, and shall push on to Placentia, 
where I shall try to recover my health and strength. Health 
and respect. 

SERRURIER, 


To General Bonaparte. 


Monte Chiaro, 18 Thermidor, year 4 [August 5, 1796]. 
The total exhaustion of my strength prevents me, my 
dear general, from joining you and sharing your glory. 
Fever and pains have so reduced me that I cannot hold 
myself upright, much less sita horse. Iam going to Brescia 
in quest of relief. With rest and bark, I hope to rejoin 
you mis 
I am told that I have lost my horses and my equipages. 
I lent one to General St. Hilaire, who asked me for it in 
your name, to make an excursion, and has not sent it back. 
I have but two left. Health and friendship. 
KILMAINE, 


To General Bonaparte. 


Cavriana, 18 Thermidor, year 4 [August 5, 1796]. 
We have pursued the enemy beyond Cavriana; we are 
collecting the stragglers, and the number of the prisoners is 
increasing every moment. They abandon in their flight 
arms, baggage, and ammunition of all kinds ; it is the most 
complete rout, and I think there is occasion to profit by it. I 
am going to march upon Peschiera with the 5th demi- 
brigade. Send us, if possible, some bread, or let us know, 
at least, where to get it. ; 
Part of the enemy are retiring upon Peschiera, part upon 
Mantua. 
DEsPINOIS. 


To General Bonaparte. 


Rome, 19 Thermidor, year 4 [August 6, 1796]. 
Since the evacuation of Verona and Ferrara, the most silly 
and malicious reports are circulated against us. This weak 
and timid government lends an ear to all sorts of lies. It 
has despatched Monsignor Lagreca, vice-legate of Ferrara, 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 269 


to be near that legation, as if the Austrians were about to 
arrive there. ’ 

I have written to M. Azara a letter, of which I send you 
a.copy annexed. He has just delivered it to the Roman 
government. It will make you me ey et with the way in 
which I shall here follow up the affair which you have en- 
trusted to me. 

The pope has conceived apprehensions for the safety of 
the convoy of the 5,000,000 sent off for Imola: he is afraid 
that the enemy may come and carry off that money. A very 

lite communication informs me of the alarm he is in. 
Fo will see by the annexed copy of my answer to M. 
Azara what explanation I have thought it right to give on 
this subject. 

There is talk of a plan concerted between Vienna and 
Naples, according to which the troops of the King of the 
Two Sicilies are to advance to Ferrara, to give a hand to 
the Austrians. It is said that the English are offering a 
subsidy to set the army of Naples in motion. It is every- 
where asserted in Rome that the siege of Mantua is raised, 
and that the besieging army, all sick, has retired to Cremona. 
This is the land of fables. I shall occupy myself solely 
in extracting from it the advantages which your victories 
have ensured, and which they will maintain. 

CAcAULt. 


To General Bonaparte. 


Head-quarters, Salo, 20 Thermidor, year 4 [August 7, 1796]. 

I have the honour to inform you that the two colours 
which I took from the enemy were carried on the 21st by 
two chasseurs of the 24th regiment to Castiglione: the re- 
ceipt was even i ly by an adjunct [adjoint] under the 
route of the orderlies sent for the two chasseurs who 
carried them, and who told me that they had delivered them, 
at the staff; to a citizen of middling size, with a pale face, 
and a coat embroidered at the pockets. Health and con- 
sideration. SAvRET. 


To General Bonaparte. 


Brescia, 21 Thermidor, year 4 [August 8, 1796]. 
Take my life, general, or give me back my honour ; I do 
not deserve to lose it. I am overwhelmed with grief. Re- 


270 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES, 


ceiving no consolatory answer from you, I here subjoin the 
motives which determined me to that retreat which I was 
far from. considering as dishonourable. View them, I beg of 
you, as the strictest truth ; and, besides, it will be easy to 
convince yourself on the subject by my demi-brigade. 

If you wish to be informed of my military, moral, and 
political conduct, during the four years that I have been 
general, nothing will be so easy for me, not only by the 
officers under whom I have served, but also by the troops 
that have been under my command, and you have a great 
many of them in your army. If you wish to go back still 
further, even for the thirty-one years that I have been in 
the service, I could do that too. 

Deign to take into consideration my unhappy position. I 
depend upon your justice. Health and fraternity. 

VALETTE. 


To General Bonaparte. 


Salo, 21 Thermidor, year 4 [August 7, 1796]. 

T am afraid that you have not received my letter dated 
the 18th Thermidor, since the orderly who carried it has 
not returned: I told you in it that the enemy was rallying 
his wrecks at Anfo. I have searched all the mountains 
about Salo; 200 prisoners have been picked up; these, 
added to the 1510, from the fights of the 16th and 17th, 
furnish a total of 1710, including one general and several 
officers. In those actions, 26 caissons or carriages, most of 
them loaded with ammunition, fell into our hands. I have 
had all the muskets collected which the enemy threw away 
in his rout. Six hundred were brought to me yesterday, 
and have been delivered to the commandant of the artillery. 
Health and respect. 

GUYEUX. 


To General Bonaparte. 


Head-quarters, Salo, 21 Thermidor, year 4 [August 8, 1796]. 

T have the honour to inform you that, General Massena 
having withdrawn the third battalion of the 11th demi- 
brigade of the division which I command, I have only three 
demi-brigades left, forming at most 1800 men, and 80 horse 
chasseurs of the 24th regiment. It is very difficult to 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 271 


fulfil pi views with so small a force. I cannot. put’ troops 
into Gavardo, and your intentions were that [ should oc- 
cupy Santo-Osseto and Nave, since it is the road through 
the valley of Sabia to Brescia. Health and consideration. 
SAURET. 


To General Bonaparte. 


Verona, 22 Thermidor, year 4. [August 9, 1796]. 
You will find annexed, general, copies of two letters, one 
from General Beaumont, containing some particulars con- 
cerning the position of the enemy, which I think of suffi- 
cient interest to transmit to you; and the other from the 
general of brigade Robert, who, after being wounded in the 
affair of Castiglione de Stiviere, learned that his baggage, 
constituting ail his resources, had been taken by the enemy. 
The merit of that general and his unfortunate situation 
must interest every man of feeling. I flatter myself, there- 
fore, that you will grant this brave officer the relief which 

he has a right to expect from the public gratitude. 
AUGEREAU. 


To General Bonaparte. 


Verona, 22 Thermidor, year 4 [August 9, 1796]. 

If the troops marching for Mantua had arrived before 
the place a little earlier, we should perhaps have still re- 
covered part of our means: so much is certain that the 
trench nearest to the place was not entirely filled till three 
days back, and that nothing had yet been done to destroy 
the incendiary batteries. It ayers that the garrison is 
rather stronger than it was: I judge by the manner in 
which it spreads itself over the country: the corps which 
you have sent thither must act cautiously. Iam just told 
that it consists of no more than 2700 men, and that Ge- 
neral Fiorella had resigned his command on account of 
illness. Unluckily, accidents delay our march upon the 
place; besides, I confess that 2700 might be sufficient for 
one side of the place, but not for two; and yet nothing can 
be done, without a corps against the citadel and another 
between Pradella and Ceresa. 

If, instead of a simple blockade, it were thought fit to add 
a bombardment, this operation would require only two addi- 


272 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


tional battalions to be placed in the quarter of St. George, 
and I think that it might cause the gates to be opened to. 
us much sooner than if we were to wait to starve them out: 
in the city. It remains then to be ascertained if the artil-: 
lery can draw twelve or fifteen mortars well provisioned 
from the fortresses of Milan, Tortona, and Alexandria, and 
contrive to make the bombs explode; for it is a fact that 
most of them did not explode in Mantua, 

If, instead of twelve or fifteen mortars, the artillery could 
procure us thirty pieces of large calibre, we would then 
make the attack by main force from the entrenchments, and 
we should have the place in ten days: only it would be 
requisite to add a good demi-brigade to the blockading 
troops. If one considers of what importance Mantua is to 
us, one cannot but regret that Murat did not attack that. 
entrenched camp, as it had been planned. Mantua is neces- 
sary if one would remain peaceful possessor of Italy ; it is 
more than that when one designs to march into the Tyrol. 
For the rest, I do not think that with reinforcements of 
fewer than 15,000 men you could undertake to form your 
junction with the armies of the Rhine. We must have, in 
the present state, a force before Mantua, another disposable 
one to extinguish the petty eonflagrations to which your 
absence may give rise, and, lastly, an army very prepon- 
derant in force to that of the enemy, because it will be 
weakened at every step, in traversing a barbarous country, 
while theirs will recruit itself with all those people seasoned 
to war, who will flee before you.. The possession of all Italy. 
is too great an advantage to the French Republic to be 
risked without important motives. To return to Mantua, 
the whole reduces itself to these questions: 1, if we can 
have thirty pieces of large calibre, supplied with five or six. 
hundred rounds; 2, if, not. having those, we can procure 
twelve mortars, with five hundred bombs each ; but, in any 
case, 2700 men are not sufficient to keep within bounds on 
two points a garrison that has been renewed and is stronger 
than the former. Ca ikeecoue. 

PS. It is said, general, that Wurmser has not got 
enough, and that he is disposed to have another taste: 
General Augereau will finish him; but perhaps there will 
be need for abridge to communicate with Massena, or, better 
still, to take the position which you have pointed out to 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES: 273 


me behind the Adige. It seems to me that, if we were 
masters of Trent, the enemy could be only on one of the 
banks of the Adige ; and that to keep him in awe we should 
have no need to scatter our forces: what I am advancing 
is but an idea thrown out ; Iam not sufficiently acquainted 
with the country to affirm this. 


To General Bonaparte. 


Head-quarters, Proverano, 23 Thermidor, year 4 [August 10, 1796]. 
Nothing new, general. According to the report which I 
have had, the enemy has five battalions at La Corona: he 
is establishing batteries there, and making a great many 
entrenchments ; he has, besides, three battalions in the 
gorge of Preaboco. 

y duty et me to report to you the officers who 
haye distinguished themselves in the different affairs that 
have taken place between the 11th and the 20th. Generals 
Victor, Joubert, Pigeon, and Rampon, have exhibited great 
capacity and bravery. The adjutants-general Monnier and 
Chabran marched at the head of the columns to Lonado, and 
their example contributed not a little to the great advan- 
tages gained by my division. Citizens Somet, Degiovanni, 
Ducos, and Reille, appeared at the head of their columns 
with great intrepidity. I solicit promotion for these offi- 
cers; they have many titles to it. The chief of battalion 
Charlot, commanding the brave 32nd demi-brigade, deserves 
also the rank of chief of brigade, which he filled tempo- 
rarily. This officer is full of intelligence and valour, and 
deserves that one should take some pains for his promotion. 
I shall transmit to you shortly the names of the other 
brave officers who have distinguished themselves, persuaded 
that you will study, as usual, to do them justice. 

MASSENA. 


To General Bonaparte. 


Rome, 23 Thermidor, year 4 [August 10, 1796]. 
Accept the congratulations which I address to you, in 
the transport of my joy, upon the decisive victory which 
you gained on the 16th instant. In rendering the greatest 
and most important service to the Republic, you have saved 
Italy from the disasters into which the disputed war which 
VOL. I. T 


Sa _ 
: a 

« 

- 


the Germans wished to keep up would have plunged that 
fine country. 

The dawn of the first successes of the Germans had 
heated to frenzy the lively imaginations of the Italians. — It 
was believed that we were ruined, because so the furious 
agents of London and Naples gave out. It had been con- 
certed between Vienna aid Naples that the King of the Two 
Sicilies should push forward his army, to give a hand to 
the Imperialists. The pope was to be compelled to break 
the armistice, and all the princes of Italy to furnish a con- 
tingent, to assist in driving us beyond the Alps. 

he court of Rome, intimidated, and prompt to believe 
absurdities that are to its taste, resolved, without speaking to 
M. d’Azara, to send the vice-legate of Ferrara, Honsignor 
della Greca, to resume his post and to re-establish the 
papal authority, the moment the French have evacuated 
that duchy. I am assured that the Cardinal Mattei, 
Archbishop of Ferrara, made attempts to induee the muni- 
cipality of that city to renounce the oath of fidelity to the 
Republic. 

he imbecility of the great, and the passion with which 
they are inflamed against us, have inspired the emissaries , 
of our enemies scattered among the people with the teme- 
rity to insult grievously the two young Frenchmen, secre- 
taries of the commission of the arts, and even to put their 
lives in peril. I send you annexed a copy of the account 
which they have drawn up of what they have had to endure, 
and I send you also a copy of my official letter on this sub- 
ject, which j addressed to M. d’Azara, that he might give 
it his support, as he has done, with the Roman government, 
which is now, after your decisive victory, anxious to satisfy 
us 


274 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES, 


There is a million tournois in gold rods, out of what is 
ready to be despatched from Rome, and they are striving to 
increase that sum, to furnish the second contribution al- 
ready due; but, before forwarding this convoy, I wished 
that the first 5,000,000 should have arrived and been re- 
ceived, as citizen Miot was to have concerted, that I might 
be able to govern myself in the direction of the second con- 
voy with the hae certainty. 

The pope has just appointed Cardinal Zelada, who was 
doing nothing whatever, secretary of state. We are 
weathering a sort of storm raised by extravagant ideas of 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 275 


your defeats. The government is desirous to fulfil the 
armistice: it is determined to do so faithfully ; but habi- 
tual incapacity and indolence, which keep all here in a 
state of torpor, will not stir without being ed. — 
_ I inform the commissaire ordonnateur Dennié of what 
concerns him. 

I beg you, general, to accept the homage of my admi- 
ration and attachment. 

CACAvLtT. 


To the General Chief of the Staff. 


Head-quarters, Brescia, 24 Thermidor, year 4 [August 11, 1796]. 
You will be pleased to send off a patrol of fifteen men 
on horseback to arrest the Abbé Zerbi at Poncino, and to 
earry him to the prison of Milan. 
BONAPARTE. 


To the General-in-Chief. 
Head-quarters, Salo, 24 Thermidor, year 4 [August 11, 1796]. 
According to your orders, I am not to leave Salo with 
the division which I command, until replaced by two bat- 
talions of the 85th demi-brigade: they are not yet arrived. 
It is utterly impossible that I can be at Salo by seven in 
the morning, and it is now five. Satids 


PS. I have the honour to inform you that I have at 
most 3000 men in my division. 


To M. the Chevalier d Azara at Rome. 


Head-quarters, Brescia, 25 Thermidor, year 4 [August 12, 1796). 

I have received several letters from you, sir, which cir- 
cumstances and my engagements have prevented me from 
answering so promptly as I should have wished. 

Cacault will deliver to you the two authentic papers 
which you have sent me with a letter from the suaniietpalsty 
of Ferrara. You will there see that it is a settled affair. 

I am assured that the court of Rome has insisted on 
your proving that France has been erected into a republic. 


‘Lam told. that at Rome no more benedictions are given to 


Ferrarese and Bolognese, but plenty to the people of Lugo. 
T2 


276 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


Add to this the legate sent to Ferrara, and the postpone- 
ment of the execution of the armistice, and the king, your 
master, will be convinced of the bad faith of a government 
whose imbecility equals its weakness. nat 

M. Capelletti a aeare very ill at Bologna: it. is for 
you, sir, to set him to rights ; I shall be sorry. to be obliged 
to drive him out of the city. It is as well that I should 
not know what he is, what he is about, and what he pre- 
tends to do. 

His Royal Highness the Duke of Parma has behaved to- 
wards the French army with the utmost frankness and the 
most sincere sentiments of friendship. 

I beg you, sir, to believe, &e., 
Bonaparte, 


To Citizen Cacault at Rome. 


Head-quarters, Brescia, 25 Thermidor, year 4 [August 12, 1796]. 

The pope has sent a cardinal legate to Ferrara, at the 
time when he thought, no doubt, that the French were un- 
done—is this conformable with the treaty of armistice which 
we have signed? The citizens of Ferrara haye refused to 
receive him. I have just given orders to this cardinal to 
repair immediately to head-quarters. 

You will find annexed a letter from the municipality of 
Ferrara, which appears to agree with M. d’Azara; that 
affair, therefore, is settled. I send you, in consequence, 
the two authentic papers which the minister had transmitted 
to me. 

The first convoy of money is not yet arrived: every 
thing goes on very slowly. It appears that there is great in- 
sincerity. Be vigilant and give me information. Send trusty 
men to learn what is doing in Naples, and what was done 

‘there during our military operations. You will find 
annexed accounts and addresses, which will please you and 
make you acquainted with what is passing. 

BonaPARTE. 


To His Royal Highness the Grand Duke of Tuscany. 


Head-quarters, Brescia, 25 Thermidor, year 4 [August 12, 1796]. 
I have received the letter dated the 13th of July, with 
which your Royal Highness has honoured me. It did not 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES: 277 


reach me till very late, which, added to the numerous 
events that have recently passed, has delayed my answer. 

The government has Madrid with the greatest pain the 
occupation of Porto Ferrajo by the English. It would have 
been so easy for your Highness to defend that place ; it 
would have been so advantageous to you to retain posses- 
sion of that important portion of your territories, that one 
is obliged to think that the treachery of your governor, like 
that 2 Sorat has caused an-event.as disagreeable to 
France as to your own subjects. 

~The Executive Directory would, no doubt, be authorized 
to seize, by way of reprisal, territories of your Royal High- 
ness on the continent ; but, adhering to sentiments of mode- 
ration, the French government will not make change or 
alteration of ‘any kind in the neutrality and good harmony 
which prevail between it and your Royal Highness. 

I am with sentiments of esteem, &c., 
BONAPARTE. 


To Citizen Miot. 


Head-quarters, Brescia, 24 Thermidor, year 4 [August 12, 1796.] 

I have received your different letters, my dear minister ; 
you will find annexed several copies of the narrative you 
desired. The emperor is said to be at the point of death. 
Try to see some one who can inform you of the moment 
when it is likely to happen. 

You must Be aware how important this is, and how 
essential it is that I should be apprized of the moment when 
the grand-duke is to set out for eins, 

Send by a courier the annexed papers to General Vaubois 
and citizen Cacault. Let me hear from you with your 
usual punctuality. It is to the interest of the government 
that nothing should be done in Tuscany to indispose the 
grand-duke ; so, maintain the neutrality. 
Bon APARTE, 


To the Senate of Bologna. 


Head-quarters, Brescia, 25 Thermidor, year 4 [August 12, 1796]. 
I learn, gentlemen, that the ex-Jesuits, the priests, and 
the monks, are disturbing the public tranquillity. Let 
them know that, while the French Republic protects reli- 


278 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 

rion and its ministers, it is inexorable towards those who; 
Eciaitting their profession, intermeddle in public or civil 
affairs. Inform the heads of the different religions that, on 
the first complaint brought to me against the monks, I will 
make the whole convent responsible ; I will expel them from 
the city, and confiscate their property for the benefit of the 
poor. ; BONAPARTE. 


To the Executive Directory. 


Head-quarters, Brescia, 26 Thermidor, year 4 [August 13, 1796]. 

The enemy, after his retreat, occupied in force La Corona 
and Monte Baldo: it appeared to be his intention to main- 
tain himself there. Massena marched thither on the 24th 
Thermidor, made himself master of Monte Baldo, La 
Corona, and Preabolo, and took seven pieces of cannon 
and 400 prisoners. He highly praises the 38th demi-brigade 
of light infantry, his aide-de-camp Rey, and his adjutant- 
general Chabran. 

On the 25th, I ordered General Sauret and general of 
brigade St. Hilaire to proceed to the Rocca d’Anfo, where 
the enemy showed a disposition to make a stand. This 
operation was successful: we forced the Rocea d’Anfo, fell 
in with the enemy at Lodrono: after a slight action, we 
took the baggage, six Wy of cannon, and 1100 prisoners. 

Augereau has passed the Adige, driven the enemy upon 
Roveredo, and taken some hundred prisoners. The enemy 
has 4000 sick in Mantua; in this month the environs of 
that city are pestilential, and all I do is to place there 
camps of observation to keep the garrison within bounds. 

If a division of the army of the Rhine can come and take 
position at Inspruck, and throw the enemy upon the right, I 
will march to Trieste, blow up its port, and sack the city. 

If the army of the Sambre and Meuse reaches the 
Danube, and that of the Rhine can be in force at Inspruck, 
I will march for Vienna by the Trieste road, and then we 
shall have time to carry off the immense resources which that 
place contains. 

The first plan may be executed immediately; for the 
second there would be required a good battle, to scatter 
Prince Charles as I have scattered Wurmser, and then 
all march to Vienna. The heat is excessive. I have 
15,000 sick ; few, very few, deaths. 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 279 


_I am waiting for the succours which you promise me: 
there has yet arrived next to nothing. 
; BoNaAPARTE. 


To the Executive Directory. 


_ Head-quarters, Brescia, 26 Thermidor, year 4 [August 13, 1796], 

I have received with gratitude, citizens directors, the 
new testimony of esteem which you have given me by your 
letter of the 13th Thermidor. I know not why the jour- 
nalists should bear me a grudge. They have attacked me 
at the same time as the Austrians. You have crushed 
them by the publication of your letter. 

I have completely beaten the Austrians; thus, to this 
hour, these double attempts of our enemies have proved 
unsuccessful. 

BONAPARTE. 


To the Executive Directory. 


Head-quarters, Brescia, 26 Thermidor, year 4 [August 13, 1796]. 

The jewels and diamonds which the army sent to Genoa, 
which were since on the road for Paris, but directed to turn 
back to Genoa, must be worth at least two or three million ; 
yet no more than 400,000 francs was offered for them. in 
Genoa. I think that it would be advantageous to the Re- 

ublic that these valuable articles should te conveyed to 

aris. The great number of foreigners in that capital will 
render the sale of those things more productive; besides, I 
am told that Flachat and Co. are to have them for 400,000 
francs. This would be a ruinous business for the govern- 
ment. 

I had caused the property of the Neapolitans at Leghorn 
to be sequestrated. The commissioner of the government, 
as the consul writes to me, has had the sequestration taken 
off: yet that would have been a good article of the treaty 
of peace. That court of Naples behaves ill: the Neapoli- 
tans who are here behaved very ill during our military 
events, and I think that it would be very dangerous to allow 
them to remain here. Is M. Pignatelli in Paris? Are 
the negociations for peace begun? If not, I think that 
ote have aright to sequestrate this cavalry. There are 200 

orses. 


280 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


- It is said that the ici of Naples is advancing into the 
territory of the pope.. I have had it signified to him that, 
if he advanced into the dominions of his Holiness, the 
armistice should be null, and that I would march to cover 
Rome. 

The court of Rome, believing that the army was undone, 
had already sent a legate to Ferrara. The municipality 
and the guard of that city have behaved well, and refused 
to receive him. Ihave just ordered the cardinal to come 
to my head-quarters. 
' BonaPaRTR. 


To the Executive Directory. 


Head-quarters, Brescia, 26 Thermidor, year 4 [August 13, 1796}. 

I think it useful, citizens directors, to give you m 
opinion of the generals employed in this army. You will 
see that there are very few who can be of service to me. 

BERTHIER: talents, courage, character—every thing in 
his favour. 

AUGEREAU : a great deal of character, courage, firmness, 
activity, habit of war; is beloved by the soldiers, lucky in 
his operations. 

MASSENA : active, indefatigable, daring; has quickness 
of apprehension and promptness in decision. 

SERRURIER: fights like a soldier, takes nothing upon 
himself, firm, has not a very good opinion of his troops ; isill. 

Despinois: soft, without activity, without daring, has 
not fighting habits, is not liked by the soldiers, does not 
fight at their head; has, for the rest, auteur, intelligence, 
and sound political principles: fit to command in the 
interior. 

SAURET: good, very good soldier, but not enlightened 
enough to be general; not lucky. 

ABATUCCI: not fit to command fifty men. 

GARNIER, MEUNIER, CASABIANCA: incapable, not fit to 
command a battalion in so active and so serious a war as this. 

MAcquartT: a brave man, no talents, fiery. 

GAUTHIER : fit for an office [bureau]; never was engaged 
in war. 

VAUBOIS and SAHUGUET were employed in the fortresses ; 
I have transferred them to the army: I shall learn to 
appreciate them; they have both acquitted themselves 


| 


_LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 281 


extremely well of the commissions that I have hitherto 
given them ; but the example of General DEsPINOIS, who was 
all right at Milan, and ik asthag at the head of his division, 
orders me to judge of men by their actions. 
BONAPARTE. 


The Executive Directory to General Bonaparte. 


Paris, 25 Thermidor, year 4 [August 12, 1796]. 

Scarcely were we informed, citizen-general, of the events 
which you report to us in your letter of the 15th, when 
news arrived of the battle of Castiglione. The circum- 
stances which preceded that victory render it still more 
memorable and dear to the Republic, and we consider it as 
-one of the most decisive of fem which the brave army 
under your command has gained in the course of the 
campaign. 

In the interval that elapsed between the arrival of the two 
couriers, we doubted not for a moment the return of 
.Fortune in favour of the Republican arms, and our con- 
fidence never ceased to rest upon the talent and valour 
which conduct them. 

We have seen with satisfaction the resolution which you 
have rapidly taken to raise the siege of Mantua, in order 
to collect your forces. The moments were precious, and 
you have skilfully ag their importance. Let us 
profit by experience, the result of which seemed likely to 
prove disastrous to us, and which is itself a signal advan- 
tage. Let us relinquish the plan of reducing Mantua by a 
regular siege, and leave its garrison to be extinguished by 
diseases which must be making great ravages among them, 
to judge from their effects on the besieging troops. You 
are engaged in a new campaign, in which the Republican army 
has taken as decisive an offensive as when it drove the enemy 
from the Apennines into the Tyrol. He is increased by 
some reinforcements, but those which you are successively 
receiving, and the irreparable losses which he has just 
sustained, afford you great means of fighting with the advan- 
tages of a vigorous offensive. 

Our intention is, no doubt, conformable with your views. 
Go, fulfil it; carry the conquests of the Republic to Ins- 
pruck, reducing the army of Wurmser to fugitive wrecks, 
which have Austria alone to rally in. To second this plan, 


282 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


‘we have ordered General Moreau, who, according to the 
last reports, has pushed Prince Charles nearly to Donau- 
werth, to oceupy by his right the line of Inspruck at Ingol- 
stadt. This movement tends to cut off the communication 
between the imperial armies of Italy and Germany, and to 
facilitate your march upon the Inn. Meanwhile, General 
Kleber, who commands ad interim the army of the Sambre 
and Meuse, the general-in-chief of which is ill, is to direct his 
course for Ratisbon, after he has dispersed the corps of 
General Wartensleben, who is opposed to him, and inferior 
in foree. 

The surprise which has taken place at Salo has, no doubt, 
fixed your attention, for the purpose of preventing the dan- 
gers of negligence and indolence in the service. This event 
was for a moment too serious not to demand a severe ex- 
ample of the faults to which it may beowing. We request 
you to give us an account of it. 

You will think, no doubt, that it is useful to profit by 
the new impression of fear and admiration produced in 
Italy by the recent successes of the Republic, to commence 
the political operations concerning Genoa and Venice. We 
have not yet fixed the moment for them, and we still leave 
you to do so, persuaded that you will have the skill to seize 
the most favourable. 

The levy of the contributions also ought, if possible, to 
acquire new activity, as also the remittance to France of 
what is not necessary for the maintenance of the army. 

We are informed that the military are yielding, with an 
alarming facility, particularly st; Milan; to the affected 
kindness of the inhabitants, who seek to circumvent and 
corrupt, in the bosom of pleasure, that purity of the repub- 
lican spirit which ought to animate them. General Despi- 
nois does not appear to be exempt from reproach on this 
subject. Recall them, citizen-general, to the severity of 
principles, and rigidly repress the te reese of them, 
We even authorize you to turn out of the army, at the 
same time reporting to us, all the officers or military em- 
ployés who might tend to disorganize it by so dangerous a 
conduct. 

REVEILLERE-LEPAUX. 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 283 


The Executive Directory to the Commander-in-Chief of the 
Army of Italy. 

Paris, 25 Thermidor, year 4 [August 12, 1796]. 
You will find annexed, citizen-general, a report of the 
commissioner of the Directory to the municipal adminis- 
tration of the canton of Mont Louis, concerning the out- 
rages perpetrated by several of the men of the 7th battalion 
of Paris, on their passage through that commune to join 
the army of Italy. You will there see that several volun- 
teers have committed acts of violence inst the citizens, 
and fired upon the national guard and the commissioner of 
the Directory. The want of means for seizing the delin- 
quents on the spot where the offence was committed pre- 
vented their being brought to trial; but the Directory re- 
quests you to let them be sought out, and undergo, by way 
of military police, such punishment as you will think that 

they have deserved. 
REVEILLERE-LEPAUX: 


Resolution of the Directory respecting General Valette. 


Paris, 28 Thermidor, year 4 [August 15, 1796]. 
The Executive Directory resolves that general of brigade 
Valette, suspended provisionally from his functions in the 
army of Italy by the General-in-Chief Bonaparte, and 
charged with cowardice, and with having abandoned the 
post of Castiglione, which was committed to him, shall be 
tried without delay by a council of war. 
The minister of war is charged with the present re- 
solution. 
REVEILLERE-LEPAUX. 


The Executive Directory to the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 


Paris, 28 Thermidor, year 4 [August 15, 1796]. 

Your letter of the 19th, citizen-general, has crowned our 
satisfaction. It seems that if Fortune for a moment placed 
the brave army of Italy in a critical situation, it was only 
to afford it a more signal occasion for developing all its 
courage, and its leaders for employing the most brilliant 
resources of their talents. In our last despatch we ex- 
pressed to you our opinion respecting the bold and skilful 


284 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


course which you had adopted, without hesitation, to raise 
the siege of Mantua, though it was already advanced, and 
to march against an enemy formidable for his strength and 
his offensive position. This profound combination has led 
to victory, and the celerity of your movements has ren- 
dered irreparable the wavering of Wurmser and the fault 
which he committed of dividing his forces on the Lake of 
Garda. 

The plan which you have traced for us, and which is 
connected with that which ought to direct the operations in 
Germany, could not be conceived more seasonably, since it 
is partly executed already by favour of the memorable 
events which have opened to you the gorges of the Tyrol. 
The wrecks of the Austrians will not be able to defend the 
course of the Inn; you will descend it rapidly, while Ge- 
neral Moreau will fs against them, by the prolongation 
of his right, the outlets of the defiles of the mountains 
towards Germany. It would be highly important that you 
should put yourself into direct correspondence with that 
general. According to his last reports, he must have ar- 
rived by this time with his principal forces on the Danube, 
near Donauwerth. 

The army of the Sambre and Meuse is likewise marchin 
from success to success. The corps commanded by Genera 
Wartensleben, which is opposed to it, is, as we had foreseen 
in our last instructions, divided, to cover Bohemia and 
Austria, and thereby favours the execution of our orders, 
according to which General Jourdan ought to direct his 
course upon Ratisbon. We prescribe, in particular, to the 
generals-in-chief of the armies acting in Germany, to let the 
numerous and brilliant actions which they have fought be 
followed by more serious engagements, the results of which 
shall be decisive. It is only by great battles won that the 
will be able to dissolye the Austrian army completely ; and, 
skilful as it may be to fall back from position to position, 
we hope that, as they approach one another, they will force 
it to a general engagement, the issue of which will oblige it 
to ere a great distance to rally. ; 

e request you to let us know if the 6000 men you 
were to receive from the 9th and 10th military divisions 
have arrived. We are already informed that the rein- 
forcements from the Coasts of the Ocean are successively 
joining you. 


| 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 285 


Exert the active vigilance and firmness which charac- 
terize you, in regard to the transmission into the interior of 
the Republic of all the articles that are to be brought from 
Italy. Oblige the employés of all classes to pay strict and 
immediate attention to our orders on all the points that 
concern them. ' 2 

We have just received an account that the department 
of the Maritime Alps is infested by Barbets: these ban- 
ditti, issuing from Piedmont and the Riviera of Genoa, in- 
ereased by deserters, emigrants, and disbanded Sardinian 
soldiers, are daily committing gross outrages on the public 
tranquillity. Deliver, citizen-general, our southern pro- 
vinces from this scourge, which is a usual concomitant of 
wars in Italy, and which it is now urgent to check. 

The promotions which you have solicited of us are already 
granted. The minister of war is charged with the execution 
of the resolution which we have taken in consequence. 

The army of the Alps is in extreme distress. We re- 
quest you to send it the first sums that shall be at your 
disposal to the amount of 300,000 livres. 

REVEILLERE-LEPAUX. 


The Executive Directory to the General in-Chief of the. 
Army of Italy. 

Your despatch of the 21st Thermidor, citizen-general, 
has reached us. It contained the happy news of the raising 
of the siege of Peschiera, that of the relinquishment of the 
line of the Mincio, and intelligence of the retreat of the 
Austrian beyond the Adige. 

To conquer enemies abroad is to crush those at home, 
and the brilliant successes of the army which you command 
give a worthy reply to envy and walignity, which would 
fain have calumniated you, and which are daily striving in 
vain to overturn the constitutional government. 

Honour to the brave men of the army of Italy, who 
fight with such ardour and devotedness, to ensure the inde- 
pendence and peace of the Republic! Honour to the ge- 
neral who leads them with such talent and courage in the 
career of glory ! 

We have ordered the general-in-chief of the army of the 
Rhine and Moselle to despatch a corps of 15,000 men to- 
wards Inspruck, and even towards Brixen. It is for you, 


286 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


citizen-general, to second this movement; your last suc- 
cesses afford you the eamnlelisy to do so; nay, it becomes 
urgent that you should attack the enemy and drive him 
before you. The army of the Archduke Charles, increased 
by some reinforcements from Gallicia and the interior of 
_ Austria, is become so imposing as to attack that com- 

manded by the general-in-chief eee and to fight, be- 
tween Neresheim and Donauwerth, a battle, the success of 
which, for a moment doubtful, was decided in our favour. 
If General Wurmser were to obtain a moment’s rest, he 
might be able to detach some troops, which, joined to the 
forces of the army of the Archduke Charles, would oppose 
the enterprises of the army of the Rhine and Moselle, and 
perhaps fight it with advantage. We think it right to 
refer to our letters of the 25th and 28th Thermidor. 

We have heard with great satisfaction of the proofs of 
attachment to liberty given by the people of Milan, Bo- 
logna, and Ferrara. We recommend to you to cultivate 
with care these happy dispositions. 

We wait with impatience, citizen-general, for tidings of 
your march, of the situation of the army, and of the steps 
which circumstances shall have permitted you to take in 
regard to. the by cay of Venice, in conformity with the 
orders which we have transmitted to you on this head. 

Again we recommend to you to send with as little delay 
as possible the sum of 300,000 francs to the army of the 
Alps. 

. REVEILLERE- LEPAUX. 


To the General-in- Chief. 


Rome, 25 Thermidor, year 4 [August 12, 1796). 

You have saved our lives by your victories of the 16th 
instant. The court of Vienna and the agents of London 
and Naples made sure that thirty battalions, drafted from 
the army of the Rhine, would put yours to the rout, and 
every preparation was made for exterminating it. A sedi- 
tion had been got up against the French even in the little 
port of Civita Vecchia, and two of our seamen were very 
ill used. 

The Roman government, to which you are now giving 
the ton, is doing what it ought to do—punishing the guilty. 

I have complained grievously, as of a step that might be 


‘LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 287 


ealled an infraction of the armistice, of the mission of the 
vice-legate, Monsignor della Greca to Ferrara, as if to 
take possession ; and still more of what Cardinal Mattei, 
archbishop of Ferrara, has done to persuade the munici- 
pality to renounce the oath of fidelity to the Republic, and 
of his temerity in causing the arms of the pope to be set 
up in that conquered country. 

The government is sensible that it was in the wrong. 
The answer given me was plausible enough— that the 
French, in evacuating Ferrara, had spiked their cannon, 
and thrown water upon their powder; they seemed to have 
been afraid that the Austrians would make their appear- 
ance, and so the Roman government conceived that it 
might show itself, without injury to our rights, and for the 
preservation of the interests of the country. 

I am prosecuting the accomplishment of the conditions 
of the armistice which are likely to be of more pressin 
necessity. I am waiting for accounts of the convoy o 
5,000,000, which citizen Miot sent off by way of Imola, 
before I despatch the second contribution and the other 
objects in kind. 

I beg you to accept my devoted attachment. 

CACAULT. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


: Lavenone, 25 Thermidor, year 4 [August 12, 1796]. 

I have received your letter, citizen-general: it cannot 
a * any thing that I have not the greatest desire 
to do. 

We wrote to you yesterday, in concert with General 
Sauret, concerning the position which we are to attack. 
On arriving at Lavenone, we procured more precise reports 
relative to the environs of the position, which is susceptible 
of being turned, in spite of great difficulties. 

I am starting with my column to go round the Rocco 
dAnfo by the left, while General Sauret will attack in 
front, We will inform you immediately of the result of 
our attack. It is impossible to make a diversion on our 
right for want of boats. 

Sr. Hinarre, 


288. LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


To the General-in-Chief. : 
Rome, 25 Thermidor, year 4 [August 12, 1796]. - 

Amidst your astonishing victories, permit the voice of a 
good Spaniard to mingle its applause with that of so many 
others, who proclaim you already the first general of our 
time. Your late actions of themselves have deserved and 
ensured immortality, and I hope that my expressions will 
not be suspected of flattery. 

I thank you for the kindness which you have had to an- 
swer me so graciously ies the affair of the Mesula 
and the San Martina. If I had not been pretty sure of 
the justice of my application, I Would not have importuned 

ou. 
: Baron de Capelletti does not behave perfectly well, I am 
aware ; but it is not my fault. He is only silly, and I be 
a to pardon him, assuring you that the lesson which t 

ave read him to-day is such that henceforth he will not 
give you the slightest cause of complaint. I have commu- 
nicated to citizen Cacault the letter that I am writing to 
him, and he is quite satisfied with it. I have also agreed 
with the same citizen for prescribing to the Spanish Jesuits 
the condition which they are to keep, and for informing the 
senate of Bologna that it must arrange with me all that 
relates to the Spaniards through the medium of Cacault : 
so every thing will go on smoothly. «Capelletti was accre- 
dited to the legates of Bologna, but he cannot be to the new 
senate. He is, however, an officer of the King of Spain, 
to whom different commissions for his service are entrusted, 
and, as such, he is under my orders. 

Thad no hand whatever in the conduct of the court of Rome 
at Ferrara, and was one of the last to hear of it. Citizen 
Cacault has written to you on this subject, at the same 
time sending you a note from the minister of the pope; 
and I should not mention the matter to you if it were not 
intimately connected with our armistice. 

Believe me, general, there has been nothing but ignorance 
in all this, and no malice whatever; and the idea which 
was current that the Austrians were coming to possess 
themselves of Ferrara, upon which they have old claims, 
occasioned the mission of the papal minister, who was sup- 
posed to be capable of preventing the Germans from seizin 
a country abandoned by the French, when the English an 


— 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 289 


their emissaries were everywhere proclaiming that you were 
ruined. If my intercession with you, general, has any in- 
fluence, I beg you to pardon the arcicaihiog whom you have 
ordered. to be apprehended. s 
Citizen Cacault and I agree perfectly well about every- 
thing, particularly about the armistice, and I hope that we 
shall complete the business in spite of the baneful influence 
of our neighbours. Your last declaration to the court of 
Naples will work miracles. 
Accept the congratulations and homage of one who has 
the honour to be, with the greatest iadkianibens monsieur 
le general, your, &c. ; 
THE CHEVALIER D’AZARA. 


To the General-in-Chief. 

‘ ~ Verona, 26 Thermidor, year 4 [August 13, 1796]. 
Having been prevented from accompanying citizen Chas- 
seloup in the mission which you have given him, and being 
prevented, moreover, from sending Miron, for the same 
reason, I have sent the chief of battalion Labadie, citizen 
Pernetti, and other officers who are acquainted with the 
environs of Mantua. I haye the honour to address to you 
their report. The five 32-pounders of Goito were carried 
off by the enemy: we have not been able to learn what be- 
came of those of the batteries of la Favorita, St. George, 
and Ceresa, for the reasons mentioned in the report. 

, LESPINASSE. 


To the General-in-Chief. 

Head-quarters, Verona, 27 Thermidor, year 4 [August 14, 1796]. - 
Here, general, are the dispositions which I propose to 

make, if you adopt them and they accord with yours : 
The corps of my division at Verona occupying the am- 
hitheatre of that place, both for the enemy’s army and 
for the garrison of Mantua, I think it would be essential, in 
order to observe the enemy’s movements on my right and 
left, to detach a corps of 400 men to Porto-Legnago, 300 
to Pesano, and 300 to Busolengo, which would form cross 
patroles, and consequently guard the Adige. I request you 
to let me know if this is conformable with your intentions, 
and -likewise.to communicate to me any change that you 
may think it right to make, and I will execute it forthwith. 

VOL. I. U 


290 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


_ The force of my division is about 6000 men: if I send 
away the 17th demi-brigade, as you desire, that will reduce 
my strength. 

I await your answer to all these observations. Rely 
on my zeal and my activity. nee 


PS. I send you annexed a plan of the line which, I be- 
lieve, the army occupies at this moment. You will 
ceive that, in taking these new positions, my left will find 
itself appuyed on la Corona, and near enough to send forces 
thither; and my left on Porto Legnago, where I shall 
defend the passage of the bridge. 


To the General-in-Chigf. 


Piovesano, 27 Thermidor, year 4 [August 14, 1796}. 


According to the order which I received, general, on the 
25th, I proceeded to Rivoli, and returned the same day 
to Piovesano, to see General Massena; yesterday we ex- 

_amined the banks of the Adige. From the Siega, where 
you begin to enter the valley, to Rivoli and beyond, the 
mountains of the left bank descend almost perpendicularly 
to the river, which renders the establishment of any téte 
de pont impossible, because it could not be supported. With 
the chiefs of battalion Maubert and Carri®re, we examined 
a position a little above the Siega, which was pointed out 
to us by General Massena, but in combining the means of 
defence, we have seen that they would be insufficient on 
account of the nature of the ground. 

Between the Siega and Polo, the right bank, either from 
the difficulty of access, or because it is commanded by the 
left bank, forbids any establishment of a bridge. There is 
therefore no point but Polo, which presents a favourable 
position, and it was there that the last bridge was con- 
structed. 

Ihave sent to Verona for the necessary boats and cor- 
dage, and to Dolce to order down four or five rafts, which 
I am told the enemy has abandoned. 

We have now at Peschiera three demi-galleys, two 
armed on the forecastle with two Austrian 5-pounders, one 
with an 11-pounder ; 


| 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 291 


Two barks, having each a 13-pounder on the forecastle, 
and two Austrian 5-pounders in the stern ; 

Two other barks to be armed, one of which will carry 
an 11-pounder, the other a 13. I have directed the 
carriages to be built at Peschiera. 

The enemy had, during the late affairs, thirteen armed 
barks ; those who have seen them assert that three onl 
carried each a piece of large ealibre ; the ten others, whic 
were not so large, had small guns or musketoons. The 
crews are Slavonians: the barks, it is said, are commanded 
by an English officer. According to the reports made to 
citizen Allemand, the enemy have a flotilla of about thirty 
barks at Riva. 

The extraordi swellings of the river which take place 
in the month «i aptiaoher, and particularly in that of 
October, oblige me to send to Placentia and Pavia an officer 
with a detachment of workmen and seamen, to attend to. the 
safety of the bridge and to direct the maneuvres in times 
of inundation. 

The Italians who were charged with this business are 
presenting without scruple accounts of 12,000 livres French 
money, in which they set themselves down, with their 
friends for salaries of 500 livres per month. I have or- 
dered citizen Duroe to go to Placentia as soon as his health 
permits, not only to verify the account of 12,000 livres, but 
also to make out that of the expenses of the bridge, ever 
since its construction, which expenses ought at least to be 
defrayed out of the contributions. 

Iam ina very ill state of health, general; the officers 
and the principal workmen are ill: I shall nevertheless do 
the impossible to hasten the construction of the bridge 
which you have ordered. 

ANDREOSSI. 


To the General-in-Chief. 

; Head-quarters, Staro, 27 Thermidor, year 4 [August 14, 1796}. 

From all the reports or particulars that I have obtained 
respecting the flight of the wine every thing indicates 
that the army is retreating to Trent. I sent yesterday 
one of my aides-de-camp as a flag of truce; he went six 
leagues without finding a single man of the enemy’s, and 
all the inhabitants assured him that the enemy were re- 

U2 


292 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


treating to Trent: not liking to run after them, he turned 
back, and by the way he fell in with four Austrian com- 
panies escaping from the mountains: he delivered the 
packet to. the officer in command of the troops, and, as it 
was very late, he was obliged to pass the night with them. 
During the night, the commandant of these troops received 
orders to set out and to proceed to Trent. ath 
' I shall send to-morrow to make a reconnaissance for ex- 
ploring the localities of the country: I shall make it push 
on further, especially on my left. 5 ie 
The position which I occupy at this moment is as 
follows : ; , : 
Head-quarters at Staro—Four companies of the 27th 
demi-brigade at Ponte Tassaro—Four companies of the 
39th demi-brigade at Thiarno, on the Riva road, where the 
inhabitants reported to me that the enemy had evacuated 
Riva—Four companies of the 25th at Lodrono and castle 
St. Barbe—First battalion of the 25th at Condino—One 
company of Allobroges at Rocca d’Anfo. es 
I have to lay before you, general, pane of the cavalry 
for the manner in which it has behaved: it vigorously 
charged the. enemy’s infantry ; it made in part all the pri- 
soners, and took six pieces of cannon. If my infantry had 
not been so fatigued, I should have taken the 5000 men 
who were at Lodrono or Staro. This force was commanded 
by Prince Reuss. : 
The Rocca d’Anfo was stormed so expeditiously by our 
brave carabineers, grenadiers, and nS nas that, on 
reaching Staro, where the action took place, the prisoners 
inquired which way I had come, adding it was not possible 
that it could be by the Rocca d’Anfo. i 
The country which we at present occupy affords us no 
ere resources : the inhabitants do their utmost to furnish 
read, wine, and meat, for the subsistence of the division. 
The valley of Ydro is entirely our own. 
SAURET. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Rome, Thermidor 28, year 4 [August 15, 1796). 
There arrived here, yesterday evening, an express sent 
by the governor of Frosinone to the cardinal secretary of 
state, to inform him of the entry of Neapolitan troops into 


x= 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES! 293 


that town of the Ecclesiastical State. The letter intimated 
that only 2000 men had yet arrived, but that other troops 
were to follow this advanced guard. - 
. The Neapolitan commandant, on his entry, caused pro- 
elamations to be publicly read, ordering the troops, in the 
name of his Sicilian Majesty, to observe good order, disci- 
pine: and respect towards the sovereign of the place and 
is subjects. It is not known here what canbe the real 
object of such a surprise; according to all appearances, 
however, there is no question about an occupation of the 
écclesiastical territory, but only a passage of Neapolitan 
troops, which have an ulterior destination. 

The Roman government is preparing to make protests 
and other customary formalities: it is incapable of any 
opposition. 
' The resident of Naples at Venice has despatched to 
Naples a courier, who passed through this city a week ago, 
reporting everywhere that our army was defeated and re- 
treating to Tortona. It may be that, in the first moment, 
when the cabinet of Naples baliaved these false rumours to be 
true, it may have immediately ordered its troops to advance, 
agreeably to what I had told you of the promises of the King 
of Naples to push forward 30,000 men to give a hand to the 
Imperialists. The authentic intelligence of your victory 
eoming afterwards will perhaps produce a change of reso- 
lutions. Our enemies, and especially the English, who are 
friends of the cabinet of Naples, wish to intimidate the 
pope, to prevent him from fulfilling the conditions of the 
armistice. 

They would have the Neapolitan army, which is numer- 
ous, a8 you may ascertain by the table of the military state 
of Italy that I had the honour to send you at the com- 
mencement of the campaign, advance to retake Leghorn 
and to occupy our conquered countries ; they would like at 
least to produce a diversion. When they made sure that 
the thirty battalions brought from the army of the Rhine 
would beat your army, they had concerted a vast plan for 
uniting all the means of Italy and even those of the King 
of Sardinia. 

The English, at least, would now be glad that Neapoli- 
tan troops should go and retake Leghorn, and that a Nea- 
politan army should march to Ferrara and support the 
garrison of Mantua. 


294 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


Naples has threatened the pope, if he delivers to us the 
30,000Tbs. of powder. Its emissaries aré exciting the 
rabble, by which the two secretaries of the commission of 
arts have been insulted ; and I am told that the postillion, 
whom the tribunals of Rome sentenced to death as the 
most guilty in this affair, is now withdrawn, and has taken 
refuge in the Farnese palace, belonging to the King of 
Naples ; but I have no certain proofs of this last fact. , 

It seems difficult to believe that, after the news of your 
victory of the 16th, the court of Naples should venture to 
break the armistice which you have granted it; but it 
seems certain that it would not have failed to do so, if the 
army of Italy had been beaten. 

itd the march of the Neapolitan troops, whose advanced 
guard has entered the papal territory at Frosinone, con- 
tinues ; if the army advances, it willno doubt be to retake 
Leghorn and then proceed for Mantua. I foresee that this 
army will pass through Rome; it has taken the read to 
Frosinone, where there is not the same danger from un- 
wholesome air as by Terracina. 

You may conceive how intimidated the court of Rome 
must be under such circumstances, and that its operations 
in fulfilment of the armistice cannot proceed at the rate I 
wish. I hope that the 5,000,000 sent to Imola will have 
been delivered, agreeably to the arrangements made and the 
directions given by citizen Miot. 

I have the honour to send you a copy of the note which 
I have presented to solicit the pardon of two malefactors 
who had insulted the two secretaries of the commission of 
the arts. I send you also a copy of the sentence given 
with a promptness unexampled, unless in very extraordinary 
cases, and of the answer of the cardinal secretary of state, 
informing me that the pope has granted the pardon which 
I solicited. So long as things can be left in their natural 
state, I shall find myself placed here upon a theatrical stage, 
where it is not very difficult to support the highest charae- 
ters. If the Neapolitan army comes to make a disturbance 
on the stage, I will support to the best of my ability, 
and as far as it is possible, the truth of principles. 

Nothing but a greater and unforeseen force can prevent 
the pope from executing the conditions of the armistice. I 
believe that he would be sincerely glad to be delivered from 
other dangers at this rate. I endeavour to give the govern- 


wy 


LETTERS. AND DESPATCHES. 295 


ment to understand that, after paying this tribute, it may 


. rely on the protection of the army. Here is saa a 


protector more mighty than St. Peter and St. Paul. The 
course of things is in alliance with Rome. It would be 
laughable to see you at one and the same time general of 
the Holy See and of the French Republic. 

I shall be anxious to send you any further news. It 
has appeared to me advisable to send an express to citizen 
Miot with this despatch, and to request him to forward it 
as speedily as possible, with the news and observations 
which he can communicate to you himself. 

Permit me, general, to request you to send the accom- 
panying despatch by one of your couriers to the minister 
Delacroix. 

I beg you to accept my devoted attachment. 

CACAULT. | 


PS. If the Neapolitan advanced guard were destined to 
ass through the Romagna and not through Rome, it would 
ave taken the Aquila road. This army appears to have 

marched without media given orders for preparing quar- 
ters, provisions, &c. : these considerations keep all minds in 
i a 

ou will find annexed the answer of Cardinal Zelada 
to the letter by which you accredited me to this court. 


To Monsieur le Marquis Gherardini. 


Asti, 26 Thermidor, year 4 [August 13, 1796]. 

I have the honour to send to your Excellency, by a ser- 
geant of my regiment, a letter forwarded at the most earnest 
solicitation of the Austrian officers prisoners, whom I saw 
arrive in a most deplorable state at Asti, followed by 2000 
soldiers of different regiments, especially that of Erbach, 
They were conducted by an adjutant of General Bona- 
parte’s, named Forestier, who dined with me, a man of 
good family, young, full of fire, and possessed of a brilliant 
understanding. This officer, who dined with me, appeared 
to take the sufferings of the poor prisoners deeply to heart ; 
and I have no doubt that he will leave nothing untried to 
mitigate their condition till they reach the place of their 
destination. He is most anxious to receive the answer of 


296 LETTERS. AND DESPATCHES. 


your Excellency at Bra, and especially some relief for those 
unfortunate men. ; 
M. Forestier has assured me that the imperial army was 
60,000 strong, when it came to attack that of the — 
lic, which he estimates at no more than 80,000, including 
everything. According to his account, a strong Austrian 
column ran some risk in its retreat beyond the Mincio: he 
admits the extraordinary bravery of the troops, but does 
not bestow the like praise on the skill of your generals; he 
pointed out, to me on the map the blunders committed: 
evertheless, as the siege of Mantua is raised, and almost 
all the cannon have been taken by your army, he thinks 
‘that it will yet require a hard tug to turn it out of Italy: 
“for,” added he, “ if despair had not forced us to fight with 
surprising courage for the preservation of our lives, the 
Republican army would have been destroyed without 
resource.” He believes that M. Wurmser has set out for 
Vienna. Bonaparte killed seven horses in two days; the 
fatigues are excessive: all the French wounded in the 
battle are dying of mortification. I put down all this in 

haste : you know my respectful attachment for you. 
. ZIMMERMANN. _ 


To General Zimmermann. , 
August 14, 1796 [27 Thermidor, year 4]. 
General, I am infinitely thankful for your kindness, and 
touched by the sympathy which you show for our poor 
prisoners. I have directed the sum of 500 francs to be put 
into the hands of your serjeant, which may be of some 
service to the officers for the present. I beg Major Haug- 
witz to send a receipt for it to you, and you will be pleased 
to forward it to me here. 
I beg your pardon for not writing to you myself, but I 
am confined to my bed by indisposition. . 
GHERARDINI. 


PS. I give the packet containing the 500 francs to 
our serjeant Greilinger, and beg you to forward it to Bra, 
ae an account of the expenses which you will have to 
pay on this occasion. ; 


‘LETTERS AND DESPATCHES: 297 


To the General Chief of the Staff. — 

Head-quarters, Brescia, 1 Fructidor, year 4 [August 18, 1796]. 
You will order general of brigade Murat to proceed to 
Casal-Maggior, where he will command a moveable column 
destined to carry into execution the different articles of the 
requisition relative to Casal-Maggior. 

ou will appoint a military commission to pict pant 
him, for the purpose of trying those who have murdered 
Frenchmen, and the authors and instigators of revolt. 

He shall have with him a commissary of war and the 
military agent to levy the contribution of a million. 

He will effect the complete ame he will take care 
to execute in three or four days the different dispositions of 
the proclamation. 

His moveable column shall be composed of one hundred 
men of the 21st regiment of chasseurs, two pieces of light 
artillery, and the 51st demi-brigade. 
BoNAPARTE. 


To the Chief of the Staff. 
Head-quarters, Brescia, 1 Fructidor, year 4 [August 18, 1796]. 

1. The chiefs of corps will transmit to the generals of divi- 
sion under whom they are a note of the absent officers, and 
especially of those who are at Milan, Brescia, and Pla- 
centia. 

2. Those who are at Brescia, Milan, and Placentia, with- 
out leave, and who have been absent more than forty-eight 
hours, shall be immediately displaced by the general of 
division, who will send the note for this purpose to the 
chief of the staff. 

3. The general of division will cause a list to be fur- 
nished him of those who are absent with permission, and 
will revoke the permissions that are not indispensable for 
the service. He will fix in this revocation the day when 
the officer must rejoin his corps, upon pain of dissmissal. 

4. The commandants of Milan, Brescia, and Placentia, 
shall cause it to be published in those cities and posted at the 
gates, that every officer, whoever he be, even though wounded, 
must have his name entered at the staff of the place. 

6. The municipality shall deliver every five days a list of 
the officers lodging in the town, with the day of their arrival. 


298 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


The commandants of the places shall send a duplicate of 
this statement to the general staff. 7 

7. They shall cause all the officers who may be in their 
town without ‘a permission from the chiefs of their corps, 
examined by the general of division, to be arrested. a 

8. Those who have substantial reasons of service to 
authorize their stay in one of the places shall have from the 
staff of the place a billet authorizing them to remain for 
so many days. 

9. Every officer who shall be found in one of these places 
six hours after the expiration of his permission shall be 
arrested, and the circumstance shall reported to the 
general of division under whom his corps is. 
BONAPARTE. 


To General Kellermann. 


Head-quarters, Brescia, 1 Fructidor, year 4 [August 18, 1796]. - 

We are in circumstances, my dear general, in which we 

have the most urgent- need of troops. Disease is daily 

consigning the men to the hospitals. I beg you, therefore, 

not to lose a single moment, and to hasten the march of the 

troops as much as you can. The least delay may be 
dangerous and produce the worst effect. 

urmser is daily receiving new reinforcements. I reckon, 

my dear general, upon your usual zeal, and I beg you to 

accept my thanks for the trouble that you have never 

ceased to take. 


BoNAPARTE. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Rome, 1 Fructidor, year 4 [August 18, 1796]. 

Lhave received the-letter with which you honoured me on 
the 21st Thermidor. I transmitted immediately to the 
court of Naples and that of Rome the two despatches, copies 
of which I send you annexed: nothing could have eome " 
more opportunely to give a little tone to this country and 
to stop and repress the court of Naples. M. Acton must 
have received yesterday evening my letter, delivered, the 
day before yesterday, to the chargé d'affaires of his Sicilian 
Majesty before the departure of the pons. This chargé 
‘affaires ought to have come and paid me a visit, as 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 299 


the diplomatic agents, and even the ambassador of Venice, 


have done, according to the custom of Rome. I observe 
further that I wrote a very polite note to this chargé d’affaires, 
requesting him to transmit my letter to M. Acton, and that 
he had the rudeness not to answer me. If these trifles are 
of any signification, it is because they concur to indicate 
that all those belonging to the court of Naples are fearful of 
— the armistice and foresee the rupture of it. 

our of our seamen are unworthily confined by the 
government at Orbitello. 

Passports to go to Palermo have been refused here to 
Gamelin, a native of that city, son of the consul of France. 
All the petty. cireumstances of this kind serve to strengthen 
the great reasons we have for being persuaded that, if the 
Austrians had beaten you, the Neapolitans would have re- 
peated the perfidy practised upon Latouche, after the con- 
vention signed four years ago in presence of the French 
squadron. 

They write here concerning the German army that the 
Neapolitan cavalry is to join the Austrians. I know how 
little credit such private letters deserve; but the concur- 
rence of indications and proofs ought not to escape us and 
an to me to dennazid your attention. 

ou will observe that, in my letter to M. Acton, I take 
no notice of the entry of the Neapolitans into Ponte Corvo, 
which belongs to the pope; but it is enclosed in the Neapo- 
litan territory towards the frontier, and dependent on the 
papal government of Frosinone. 

he 2,000 Sicilian troops have only entered Ponte Corvo, 
on the road to Rome through Frosinone: but they have 
not arrived at Frosinone, as it was at first believed, and as 
I wrote to you. The thing is the same at bottom. I will 
send you a copy of the protests of the pope against this 
entrance of the Neapolitans into Ponte Corvo; they have 
not been transmitted to,me. 

Apprehensions are felt here of the march of a Neapolitan 
column for the Romagna, the troops having approached 
extremely near to Tronto and Giulianova, confines of the 
papal territory. 

At the same time with my letter M. Acton must have 
received my despatch, sent from this city by an express of 
the resident of Naples at Venice, very different from his 
first which I have mentioned to you, for he says to the person 


800 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES.” 


to whom the packet was addressed in Rome: “The Aus- 
trians are driven into the Tyrol; nothing can withstand 
the French.” This intelligence will frighten M. Acton, 
who is naturally timid, aed wh is aware that these nu- 
merous troops must remain where they are placed as a bug- 
bear, so long as the Austrians shall not have beaten us. 

Up to this moment, I have no tidings that the 2000 
Neapolitan troops have advanced beyond Ponte Corvo, or 
that orders have been given to make any preparation for 
the passage of an army through the Ecclesiastical State. T 
shall look sharp-and inform you promptly of whatever may 
happen. There is now every reason to believe that the 
ne concerted against us are dissolved, and that the 

icilian army, which has had plans taken of all the Bere! 
in the ecclesiastical territory along the borders of Naples, . 
will not dare to pass the frontier. A) Agen 

I am circulating the news of the march of 18,000 men of 
your army for Bologna. a 

The convoy of the 5,000,000 of the first contribution 
must by this time have reached its destination. I have re- 
parr d the commandant of the citadel of Bologna, who was 
preparing to go and receive that money at Imola, to inform 
you, as well as commissary-general Dennié, of the arrival of 
the money at Bologna. 

In three days, citizens Berthollet and Monge will make 
the necessary experiments on the bars fa ees for the pope’s 
second contribution: the amount of the bullion is not more’ 
than 1,000,000 tournois. I am urging them to prepare 
more expeditiously for the entire payment of the 5,000,000 
already in arrear, but I see no speedy and decided term 
with respect to the whole sum: this business I shall en- 
deavour to settle next week. ’ 

The commissioners are now busily engaged with the pope's 
architect in getting the selected articles, of which they have 
delivered a list, ready for packing. : 

I have already observed to you that there are few things 
here directly useful to the army: the contribution must 
therefore be received in kind, in things useful to the manu- 
factures of France, and which the government will be able 
to turn into cash. You know that I have already had 
delivered 50,000Tbs. of alum, which will be conveyed to 
Genoa in neutral ships; the rest will be forwarded by land. 

The new secretary of state, Cardinal Busea, appears to” 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 301 


have activity, and we are making more progress since his 
appointment. The accomplishment of the business is se~ 
verely felt by a country which has been accustomed only to 
hold out its hand and receive. All will be accomplished, I 
hope, notwithstanding the rage of our enemies, who have, 
in this capital of Christendom, much more powerful means 
of intrigue and influence than any where else. ee 

You answer me, on the subject of the manuscripts, that 
the armistice specifies five hundred volumes ; but the Che- 
valier d’Azara has declared to us here, upon his honour, 
that he agreed with you and the commissioners Salicetti and 
Garrau that three Kosased manuscripts only should be 
taken. The commissioner Salicetti has said the same thing 
to the commissioners of the arts, Tinette and Barthelemy ; 
it appears, therefore, to be true that it was verbally agreed 
with M. d’Azara that only three hundred manuscripts should 
be required. 

They will not refuse to give five hundred if you insist 
upon it; but M. d’Azara will receive a mortification, which 
you will probably not think it right to give him, if the thing 

as been A yea upon without your recollecting it, though the 
minister of Spain and the commissioners remember it well. 
There are nearly twenty thousand manuscripts in the Va- 
tican library : if we take the three hundred best, we shall 
have all that are really of any value. Good works are 
printed ; the rest are of no worth but to bibliographers: I 
submit these considerations to you, citizen-general: it is 
necessary that the commissioners should know definitively 
whether they are to take five hundred or three hundred 
manuscripts. 

As the object of my instructions concerning the con- 
tribution of Ravenna would only divert attention from more 
pressing matters, were I to insist on that object at when 

defer the thorough discussion of it. When we have in 
our hands a great part of the things promised, I shall have 
the more force for determining the rest. 

I have not failed to censure severely the orders relative 
to Ferrara, and have informed you what answer was.made 
me. I have a direct correspondence with Bologna and Fer- 
rara, which enables me to loa an eye here upon what con- 
cerns those two provinces. 

I have taken care to intimate to M. d’Azara that M. Ca- 
pelletti, chargé affaires of Spain at Bologna, is a senseless 


302 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


fanatic, whose sentiments are too conformable with those 
that are attributed to the ex-Jesuits, which renders him in- 
capable of managing them well, and must lay you under the 
necessity of sending all the ex-Jesuits out of Bologna. 
M. @Azara, who is an enlightened man, does not remon- 
strate on the subject of your orders for ensuring the i 

uillity of the people: he hopes that the two members of 
the senate who have been sent to you will have obtained 
permission for such of the ex-Jesuits as have been prudent 
to remain: as for the others, they will be placed elsewhere. 

Ever since your great victories, M. d’Azara is as much 
transported with joy as ourselves: he is so mixed in the 
armistice of Rome, that his honour requires it to be fulfilled 
and, in order that the government here may feel obliged to 
him for it, we must keep up a superiority of force in Italy, 
and the independence of Rome must be visibly owing to his 
mediation. Of course, he is certainly for us, and goes hand 
in hand with me in perfect and intimate harmony. 

It is easy to have courage under the egis of your valour 
and of the prodigies achieved by all our armies. He who 
animates me must always exhibit the appearance of impas- 
sibility. Thus it is that, without changing tone or language, 
I transact the affairs with which I ried been charged in 
Italy ever since the beginning of the war. Be pleased to 
consider that there are no means of proceeding fast without 
breaking : we have to do with corpses. 

CACAULT. 


To General Bonaparte. 


Rome, 1 Fructidor, year 4 [August 18, 1796]. 

. Ihave the honour to send you the note received by the 
Chevalier d’A zara from the secretary to the cardinal seeretary 
of state. There are the Neapolitans marching again, it 
seems, for the Romagna. Combine the whole with the 
attack of the English on Leghorn and the entry of the Si- 
cilian troops into Ponte Corvo, and doubt, if you ean, the 
perfidy of the ministry of Naples. Uiaaven 

PS. It is known that there were brought from Naples 
very considerable supplies for the army, which were to have 
enabled it to march he some time in the country, where no 


preparation had been made for it. 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES, 303 


The Secretary of the Cardinal Secretary of State, annexed 
to the preceding. 
Rome, Augyst 18, 1796 [1 Fruetidor, year 4]. 

Your excellency learns to-day, by a letter from Ancona, 
that, on Saturday last, the arms of the King of Naples were 
set up over the door of the consul of his Sicilian majesty, 
though he had been in that city above a year. This took 
place after the arrival of a lieutenant and an ensign, officers 
of his nation, who, after staying a single day, set out for 
Sinigaglia. It is said, also, that intelligence arrived at 
Sinigaglia that 24,000 Neapolitan troops are on the point 
of marching for the Romagna: the route which they are to 
take is not specified. 

Though his excellency conceives that this report is des- 
titute of the characters which might induce a belief in its 
accuracy, still he deems it a duty to communicate it to you, 
that you may point out to him what it would be advisable 
to do, in case they should arrive in those parts. 

He also begs you to give him further intelligence on the 
subject to which the note that you have transmitted to him 
refers, and concerning which he has already collected all 
possible pmsvcemdk sean ye: 

Having executed the orders of his Excellency, I make it 
a duty to testify to your Excellency the respect and grati- 
tude with which I shall be eternally your most obedient 
servant, 

JosEPH EVANGELISTI. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Rome, 2 Fructidor, year 4 [August 19, 1796]. 

I have received the letter with which you have honoured 
me, dated Brescia, 25 Thermidor, with copies of your report 
sent to the Directory of the glorious actions of the 16th and 
following days; I have taken care to make good use of it. 

The summons sent to M, the Cardinal Mattei, Archbishop 
of Ferrara, and the severity exercised against the fanatics 
of Bologna, will produce the best effect. I endeavour to 
support these measures by all the humble means in my 

wer. M. d’Azara concurs in them with all his heart. 

The first convoy of money must now have arrived. You 


804 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 
know that to-morrow we shall assay and pack a sixth mil- 
lion at the Mint. The rest is progressing. = = = 


People here would be glad if it were possible to slip out 
of the conditions of the armistice; but bad faith on the part 
of the government cannot have place, since it has become 
evident that it cannot save itself but by fulfilling hee 

I have the honour to send you annexed a copy of the 
answer which I have received from the secretary of state to 


the assurance which I gave on your that, in case the 


Ecclesiastical State were attacked, a division of the army 
would come to defend it. "gp eee 
If M. Acton answers me, courier by courier, as he ought 
to do, and as he will have time, I shall receive his letter on 
Monday next, in three days. agit: 
I send you annexed a bulletin that has come to me from 
Isola, on the frontier of the kingdom of Naples, on the road 
to Rome. = arid 
I beg you to accept, &e. CACAULT. — 


PS. At the moment of despatching my letter, citizen- 


general, I have received the two notes annexed, from the 
cardinal secretary of state, who begs M. d’Azara and myself 
to use the strongest solicitations to obtain your permission 
for the speedy return of Cardinal Mattei to his see of Fer- 
rara. You see by these notes how warm an interest the 
pope and the secretary of state take in this affair. The 
summons has produced its complete effect. Clemency and 
generosity, in terminating the afar, will produce a new one, 
which cannot but be advantageous to your glory. , 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Rome, 3 Fructidor, year 4 [August 20, 1796]. 

I lately intimated to you that Mr. Windham, minister 
of England at Florence, had arrived here, spreading a report 
that the English were bombarding Leghorn. It is now 
alleged that letters have been received, announcing the 
coming of another army of 30,000 men to Wurmser’s assist- 
ance. There are no lies or intrigues which are not employed 
to mislead the public mind, and to uphold the hope that we 
shall be defeated. rtd 

Mr. Windham is only passing through Rome; he is. pro-- 
ceeding to Naples. The false reports which he has cireu- 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 305 


lated are not the real objects of his journey ; he has intimated 
to a person whom M. Azara and I have known that he is 
going to Naples, to make, in the name of England, the most 
violent reproaches there, because the Sicilian troops have 
not prevented the fulfilment of the armistice with the pope 
by occupying Rome; because the Neapolitan army has not 
come to drive the French from Leghorn; because that 
army is not marching through the Romagna for Lombardy : 
he denied that this is what the court of Naples had pro- 
mised. He adds that this court demanded of England, six 
weeks ago, the same subsidy that was paid to the King of 
Sardinia; that this affair is on the point of being arranged, 
and that an answer to it is expected from London. 

The hope of Mr. Windham and the object of his un- 
expected journey to Naples are to decide that court to execute, 
as far as it is idan the grand plan concerted upon the 
supposition that the Germans would prove the stronger ; 
in your quarter, I am persuaded, that it will not now 
succeed. 

The intelligence received here from the direction of Naples 
is not so threatening and alarming for the Ecclesiastical 
State as it was. Isend you anced a little Italian, bulletin, 
which even alleges that the king has left Lora. 

I have just been attending, with Monge and Berthollet, 
the weighing and vere of the first million, in bars, of 
the second contribution. We have had it cased and sealed up 
together with regular statements. They are at work here 
melting down into bars plate which has arrived for a second 
million. The operation will be finished on the 10th of this 
month, and I calculate on despatching, by the 11th or 12th 
instant, 2,000,000, by the same route to Imola which the 
first convoy took. 

CACAuULt. 


To M. the Prince de Castelcicala, Director of the Foreign 
Affairs of his Sicilian Majesty. 
Rome, 4 Fructidor, year 4 [August 21, 1796. 

Monsieur le Prince, I have received the letter which you 
did me the honour to write me on the 20th of August. I 
shall lose no time in sending it to the general-in-chief, 
Bonaparte, and to the minister for foreign affairs, who will 
lay it before the Directory. 

VOL. I. x 


306 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


The enemies of France, everywhere vanquished, will soon 


leave the agents of the Republic no other duty to perform 
but to reconcile. I shall be too happy, Monsieur le Prince, 
if my good offices can concur in the speedy establishment of 
the definitive between France and your court.. 9 — 

The friendships which I contracted at Naples attach me 
everlastingly to that fine country and to its welfare. I 
think I cannot prove to you the eae one which I desire 
good harmony between the two powers better than by point- 
ing out to you frankly some particulars which are likely to 
give umbrage. nore 

Report speaks of 30,000 Neapolitans, who had been pro- 
mised to be sent to give a hand to the Austrians, if the 
French army had been beaten, and of a combined attack 
upon the French garrison of Leghorn; of a pe for carry- 
ing off our convoy of money on the road to the Rom: ; and 
of a formal opposition of the King of the Two Sicilies to the 

urchase of powder for our army in the Ecclesiastical State. 
Report speaks of a treaty ready to be concluded, in virtue of 
which the court of London is to pay to that of Naples the 
same subsidy that it formerly gave to the King of Sar- 
dinia. 4 

After the vast plan combined on the false supposition 
that our heroes were to be beaten has too generally crumbled 
in pieces, I am grieved to see persons attached to the court 
of Naples explain themselves openly in a manner that is not 
accordant with the armistice. Your party in Rome — 
no longer to be our enemy. M. the Ohevalice Binetti di 
penses himself from the customary attentions towards me, 
and, on the other hand, I learn that Dr. Corona, a subject 
of his Sicilian Majesty’s, has been reprimanded as having 
failed in duty to his sovereign, by visiting the Freneh com- 
missioners who are in Rome. 

A French officer and three seamen have been apprehended 
at Orbitello and treated harshly. The Directory cannot 
fail to be informed of these circumstances, which leads me 
to observe to you that it might be proper to inform M. the 
Prince Belmonte, and to enable him to furnish the requisite 
bg Pome and particulars. 

beg you, Monsieur le Prince, to accept the assurance of 
my sentiments of the highest consideration. 
CacauLt. 


- 
LETTERS AND- DESPATCHES. 307 


To M. the General Acton, first minister of his Sicilian 
Majesty. 


Rome, 4 Fructidor, year 4 [August 21, 1796]. 

I have received the answer of your Excellency, dated the 
20th of August, as wellas thatof M.the Prince Castelcicala. 
I shall send those two letters to the General-in-chief Bona- 
parte, and also to the minister for foreign affairs. Iam 
answering M. the Prince of Castelcicala more at length: he 
will no doubt communicate to you what I have the honour 
to submit to him. 

I seize this opportunity of renewing to your excellency 
the assurance of my respect. 

CACAULT. 


Note of the Commissioners Monge and Berthollet, respecting 
the Powder of the Ecclesiastical State. 


Rome, 5 Fructidor, year 4 [August 22, 1796]. 

Citizen Cacault having requested us to examine the 
qualities of the powder manufactured in the States of the 
pope, we applied for specimens of that powder to M. Salvi, 
the contractor for it: he delivered to us two, one of very 
fine grain, the other of a rather coarser grain, which alone 
appeared to us to be suitable for the use of the musket. 

estitute of all the usual means for proving it, we were 
obliged to have recourse to such as were at our disposal. 
We first inquired the proportions employed: these are 
100tbs. of refined saltpetre, 120Ibs. of charcoal, and 10tbs. of 
sulphur. These proportions are goods and the paste is well 
beaten, so that no fault is to be found with the manner in 
which it is fabricated. 

It was necessary to ascertain the state of the saltpetre 
that enters into the composition. To this end, we dissolved 
a certain quantity of Roman powder, and compared it with 
a solution of French powder, by means of the solution of 
silver. This produced a much more considerable precipitate 
with the solution of the Roman powder than with that of 
France ; which indicates that the saltpetre used here is im- 
perfectly purified, and contains a considerable et ier of 
sea salt. We had the same result with a small quantity of 
yer which was given us. 

he Roman powder, therefore, is prepared with a salt- 
x2 


= 


308 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES, 


ae that contains much marine salt, which is not only 
oreign to its effects, but diminishes the renee of the de- 
tonation, and renders.the powder susceptible of contracting 
damp from the air. ~ : 
aving no instrument for proving the strength of the 
powder, we could not determine to what degree the impurity 
of the saltpetre deteriorates the Roman powder: we only 
perceive that it has an imperfection which cannot but induce 
an apprehension that it has not sufficient strength. 
BERTHOLLET AND MONGE, 
Commissioners of the French Government _ 
for the Arts and Sciences. 


To the General-in-Chief. , 


Head-quarters, Milan, 3 Fructidor, year 4 [August 20, 1796). _ 

You have no need of proofs, I dare say, to convince you 
of the frequent correspondence which exists between the 
courts of Vienna and Turin, and the intrigues of the arch- 
duke in this country; but I think it my duty to commu- 
nicate to you some notes which I have collected, and which 
seem to deserve your credit and perhaps your attention. 

1. The couriers from Vienna to Turin, and vice versa, 
succeed one another without interruption, and all of them 
pass through Bellinzona and Canobio. Might it not be 
possible to carry off one of them from the latter place or 
the environs, to learn what our enemies are concerting ? 

2. One Andriana, innkeeper at Bellinzona,is the con- 
fidant and diplomatic agent of the archduke, to whom he 
takes frequent journeys. 

. 8. On the 27th of Thermidor last, 300 armed Pied- 
montese passed through Canobio, and went on board six 
barks on the lake, which steered for Ossola. 

BaRAGUAY-D HILLIERS. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Head-quarters, Staro, 3 Fructidor, year 4 [August 20, 1796]. 
It was not till yesterday noon, citizen-general, that I 
received your letter of the Ist Fructidor. 
I have te give you an account of the reconnaissance which 
we have made of the roads leading to Riva. 
The shortest of all, which toate to Riva in six hours, is 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 309 


that which, traversing the valley of Ydro, leads to the 
village of Ponale, on the Lake of Garda, where you embark 
for Riva. This road, which has the advan in point of 
time, presents such great difficulties for cavalry and artil- 
lery, that it is passable for a corps of infantry only, and is 
therefore unfit for us, being obliged to take both along 
with us. 

The other road, leading to Riva, after a march of eleven 
hours, is that which, passing from Staro to Thion, and 
thence through Balino and Cavrast, leads straight to Riva: 
this is jiashabe for all arms and for baggage ; only it has 
the inconvenience of two marches, the ce being too 
great for a single march. 

In this case, my opinion is that advantage might be taken 
of both roads, by marching a corps of infantry, which should 
embark at Ponale, and make itself master of Riva, while thé 
division should be proceeding at the same time towards 
Riva through Thion. This double direction would take 
from the enemy all desire to prevent the corps of troops pro- 
ceeding by the longest fost from reaching Riva, since it 
would be already occupied by that which had come by way 
of Ponale. I await your orders therefore. 

You desire me, citizen-general, to keep here three three- 
pounders of the cannon taken from the enemy ; I observe 
to you that I have not been able to keep more than one 
here, because, the horses which I applied for not having 
arrived, I was obliged to send off the others with oxen for 
Salo: I have given orders for them to come baek, but 
we want horses and artillerymen. 

We are still in the greatest distress here for provisions : 
we never receive more than the smaller part of what we 
ought to have, and then nothing but bread. This part of 
the army is totally neglected. 

The execution of your order relative to cartridges causes 
me to have need of 100,000 and 6000 flints, to supply the 
place of those which have been delivered out to make up 
fifty rounds per man. All the flints which were’ here’ in 
reserve have turned out to be pistol-flints. Have the good- 
ness, citizen-general, to give orders that this mistake be not 
again committed. 

SAURET. 


310 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


To the General-in-Chief. : ee 
Polo, 4 Fructidor, year 4 [August 21, 1796]. - 
 L received, general, on the 25th of last month, the order 
to proceed to Rivoli, and in the evening I was with General 
Massena at Provezano. On the 26th, we visited the banks 
of the Adige. I reported to you on the 27th that the site 
of the old bridge was the only one that appeared suitable to 
_us. I cannot tell why my letter has not reached you. 
The bridge will be finished this evening, and would have 
been much sooner, but for the difficulty we have had to pro- 
cure boats ; and this moment I have just sent in search of 
the last. iS Seo 
General Massena desired to have a flying bridge at 
Rivoli for the communication with the Chiusa ; I have had 
it established. Cre 
During the time that the bridge was building, I had six- 
teen pontoons collected and refitted with their beams and 
planks out of wood bop up here and there in the villages 
and the country. The cordage and most of the iron work 
necessary for the mechanism and speedy construction of the 
bridge were not to be found. These boats, decked two and 
two and drawn by horses, might serve to furnish a commu- 
nication at any point you should wish ; in short, they would 
be a disposable bridge, which could be shifted at pleasure. 
The navigation of the Adige being very difficult, on account 
of the rapidity of the current, the sand-banks and the rocks 
which are in its bed, and the hollows which are on its banks, 
it would be necessary to have boatmen of the country: they 
alone can manage boats upon it. I know not whether your 
plans include such a bridge. ' 
ANDREOSSI. 


To the General-in-Chief. 
Rome, 5 Fructidor, year 4 [August 22, 1796]. 

Monsieur le General, I have many thanks to return you 
for the letter which you did me the honour to write, dated 
the ... Fructidor. it contains expressions which, coming 
from a hero like you, are infinitely flattering to my self-love, 
and I account it the most fortunate circumstance of my 
whole life to have deserved your esteem. 

You have good reason to say that everybody’s head is 


ale ee 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 311 


turning round in this part of Italy. I know that friend 
Cacault gives you a regular account of all that is passing at 
Naples, and you may rely on the accuracy of his reports. 
The arming is just what you have been told, and, for some 
months, we have seen the Neapolitan general make more 
movements and choose more encampments than General 
Bonaparte, who is fighting almost every day. 

The object of these movements is in accordance with 
those who are not fond of France: you are aware of that. 
Meanwhile, the Neapolitan troops retain Ponto Corvo, and 
for some days past they have been augmenting their 
number. I am sure that your 10,000 men, led by you 
will accomplish your object: but, as. you have something 
more to do than to conquer, you will attend to everything. 
In going or returning, you will of course visit the Capitol, 
and in that case I hope you will do me the honour to take 
up your quarters at my tig You will certainly be at a 
friend's. 

I cannot give you any precise idea of the infernal intrigue 
which has hitherto thwarted the accomplishment of our 
armistice, and which proceeds from the very quarter to 
which I have been alluding. We have fallen into another 
embarrassment about the peace, which had been begun, 
under bad auspices, to be negociated at Paris, and is to be 
concluded somehow or other in Italy. Friend Cacault, to 
whom I have communicated everything without reserve, 
gives you a full account of the affair: I shall, therefore, 
spare you the repetition. 

I have long been acquainted with the ingratitude of the 
Romans, but, if I do them a benefit in spite of their teeth, 
it is not for their sakes that I do it; I act from far nobler 
principles. Still I have friends among them, who are wor- 
thy of being yours also. 

If Devins succeeds Wurmser, you will have to do with 
an old acquaintance of the army of Italy, and I have no 
doubt that, polite as you are, you will accompany him to 
‘Vienna. 

Accept, general, the homage of him who will be eternally 
your very humble, &c., 

THE CHEVALIER D’AZARA. 


312 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES: 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Head-quarters, Staro, 6 Fructidor, year 4 [August 23, 1796]. 

I have the honour to inform you that I have sent a recon- 
naissance to Thion, where, durmg the last days, an enemy’s 
patrole had made its appearance. I await the return of the 
reconnaissance to inform you of the result. Bi Bane Fhe 

I am informed this morning, by my confidential man, that 
the enemy, to the number of 300, passed the night between 
the 4th and 5th at Riva, and left that place again yesterday 
morning. 

I report to you, general, that ever since the 25th, the 
day of my arrival at Staro, the troops have not been able to 
get more than a quarter of the ration of bread, in spite of all 
the precautions that it has been in my power to take. 
When the convoys are setting out for Salo, five, six thou- 
sand rations of bread are announced, but frequently only half 
the quantity arrives. st 

SAURET. 


To General Bonaparte. 


Venice, 5 Fructidor, year 4 [August 22, 1796]. » 

I received, about six in the evening, the letter which you _ 
wrote me yesterday. I immediately applied for a confer- 
ence with M. Pezaro, and the result of the conversatio: 
which I have just had with him is as follows: Ase” 

I was first asked. whether you wish the articles which 
you mention to me to be procured for you, even in case the 
Sieur Vivanti should continue to supply you, or if you ask 
this government for them only in case that merchant should 
absolutely refuse that service. They propose to request him, 
and flatter themselves that they shall prevail on him, to 
supply you as before; but, be this as it may, even though 
you should desire the articles, independently of the supplies 
of the Sieur Vivanti, nothing shall be left undone to sati 
you. They merely observe that there will be great diffi- 
culty in regard to hay, the crop of which failed this year, 
and nearly an impossibility in regard to bullocks, because 
the epidemic disease, which has prevailed and which still 
prevails in the States of Venice, has destroyed such a 
quantity of these animals, that there are scarcely any left. 

Be pleased then, general, to give me as soon as possible 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 313 


an answer to the question ; after that, I will take care that 
you shall be promptly served ; I will even take care, in the 
mean time, that they shall attend to the measures to be 
taken in any case: and this, moreover, is what I am pro- 
mised by M. Pezaro, who desires also that I should assure 
you anew of the anxiety of the Venetian ee to do 
all that can be agreeable to you and to the French Republic. 
LALLEMANT. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


August 23, 1796 [6 Fructidor, year 4]. 

I transmit, annexed, to your excellency, the account sent 
me by the officer commanding at Limon of the catastrophe 
which happened on the 20th instant to M.the General Du- 
jard, his suite, and his escort. I shall add what I have 
since learned, and which consists in this, that the banditti 
took the carts laden with the gear baggage for a 
convoy of nay He was killed at the first discharge, 
as were likewise Lieutenant-Colonel Bicistrat and a soldier, 
and six wounded, one of whom died a few hours afterwards, 
and another yesterday, here, on his passage. I have had 
another taken to our military hospital, because he could 
scarcely walk. The officers are going to Coni to recruit 
themselves from bruises occasioned by their falls in escaping. 
All the baggage and twenty-two horses have been carried 
off; the prodigious rain that commenced when our detach- 
ment came to the rescue, prevented its going in quest of the 
banditti. I send you also the minutes which the French 
officers have drawn up concerning the circumstances conse- 

uent on the event, and the declaration made by them to 
the officer commanding at Limon relative to his conduct on 
this oceasion. 

Lhave just received a letter from General Macquart, which 
is not perfectly clear. He supposes that the brigands take 
refuge at Entraignes, Vaudier, Limon, and Levernant, and 
alleges that those communes know and ought to apprehend 
them: he requests me to give strict orders on this subject. 
He observes that the Piedmontese are not murdered, and, 
what is still more particular, that the late general’s guide 
told him that the Piedmontese officer at Limon had not sent 
to warn them till after they were slaughtered. Your excel- 
lency will see by the report made to me by this officer at 


314 -LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


Limon, that he could not inform them sooner, and that 
from Limon to the Col de Tende the distance is. wa) 

I shall, nevertheless, make all possible inquiries to 
cover if there are any of these assassins, and to | ) 
secured. The nspden bers: who turned back have assured 
me that they were fired at from the barns above the Li- 
monais, which are notin our territory. This event has 
duced the greatest sensation in the minds of the French, who 
reason upon it, each according to his dispositions towards us. 

These banditti form a very considerable assemblage. 
There are Frenchmen, Nisarda, Corsicans, Genoese, and 
deserters from us. Several of them come at night upon our 
lands, go off to other villages, doing harm to nobody, and — 
paying everywhere for what they want. The communes, 
fearing their vengeance, dare not pursue them: they are 
seen in several villages in the same night, which, comi 
to the ears of the general at Coni, leads him to suspect tha 
they live in those places, or have confederates there. I shall 
send orders to the communes of the mountain, of the Limon 
and the Limonais, to prevent fresh outrages, and a detach- — 
ment to Entraignes to secure the brigands, who are suspeetec 
of stopping there most frequently, and at the same time to 
oppose the smuggling that is carried on there. This 
will attest to the general the reality of the precautions which 
I am taking to second his views against these robbers, and 
I will continue them till the communications are interrupted 
by the snow. Lies 

After the plunder of the last convoy, one of the banditti 
carried his parcel to Brois, and committed it to the eare of 
a working man, a native of Entraignes; the depositary, 
Renti, ran off with the deposit. In the night of the follow- 
ing day, seven other brigands seized Renti, and carried him 
off with his trust, and he has not been heard of since. This 
has struck terror into the villages of the mountain, and they 
dare not make any disclosures. 

De LA FLECHERE, 
Governor of the Province of Coni. 


To the General-in-Chief. - 


Head-quarters, Verona, 6 Fructidor, year 4 [August 23, 1796]. 
Nobody professes more sincerely than myself, general, the 
justice that ought to be rendered to your indefatigable zeal 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 3815 


and your military talents. The esteem which I entertain 
for you, and which all brave men who wish what is right 
share with me, is a just tribute due'to your care and your 
solicitude for the success and glory of the Republic. 

I am well aware that, if things do not go on as the chief, 
you, some others, and myself, desire, it is a misfortune 
which must be attributed to fatality, which puts into armies 
creatures who impose shackles by incapacity, by negligence, 
and whom custom has caused to be thought necessary. 
The 29th demi-brigade has joined my division, which I 
reviewed on the 8rd and 4th instant. Indeed, the con- 
dition of that 29th is pitiable: it has at most a hundred 
bayonets ; it has no clothes, no shoes; I found in it volun- 
teers under arms without any covering but a shirt and 
linen trowsers. These troops must necessarily be armed, 
equipped, and clothed, or lett in the rear, for they cannot 
be brought before the enemy in this state, occasioned by 
the carelessness of the chief. They are, nevertheless, 
soldiers, who, on some occasions, have exhibited proofs of 
bravery and on whom one might rely; which ought to 
stimulate our anxiety to put them in order and render them 
fit to do good service. Make, I beg of you, all the efforts 
you can to this end. 

The rest of the division is going on very well, only that 
some of those who have come Tac from the hospitals are in 
want of arms, and excepting some bayonets lost, some coats 
and pair of shoes which are deficient, and which it is urgent 
to supply. 

Discipline and order are observed in the best possible 
manner. Adieu, my dear general: set everything to 
rights, and let us prosecute our labours: that is what I 
desire. 

AUGEREAU. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Borgo-Forte, 7 Fructidor, year 4 [August 24, 1796]. 
As I dare say your aide-de-camp, citizen Lahoz, will 
have returned to you before you have received the report of 
the divisionary General Sahuguet, I cannot help intimating 
that, up to this time, I have nothing but good news to tell 
you. 


The enemy, after a vigorous resistance, has been completely 


316 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 
beaten at Borgo-Forte. In order to force him at the bri 


of La Roque, it was necessary to exert republican bravery 
the utmost: in consequence, I owe the highest praise to the 
6th battalion of grenadiers, and particularly to the 12th 
demi-brigade of infantry of the line. I must not omit’ to 
mention, citizen-general, the conduct displayed in this affair 
by the officers of the 12th demi-brigade, and particularly by 
the chief of the first battalion Beurnet. The adjutant-maj 
of the 6th battalion of grenadiers was one of the first to 
_foree the barricades of the bridge of La Roque. Citizen 
Lahoz ably seconded me. 0: bbe. mall 
I have, general, to repeat to you my solicitation for the 
rank of chief of battalion for my aide-de-camp Mari 
known for his courage and his activity, and who has given 
fresh proofs of bravery in this little affair. rane 
We have to regret several brave men. The loss of the 
enemy has been considerable, particularly in slain, for our 
troops gave no quarter. : 
I could not, without compromising myself, get into col- 
lision with the troops of the enemy in his line along the 
causeway, where he is said to be in force. I await with 
impatience the junction of the troops of General Sahuguet : 
meanwhile, strong detachments are annoying the enemy on 
the Ceresa road and on the dike. od 


DALLEMAGNE. © 
ry 


To the Chief of the Staff. 

Head-quarters, Milan, 8 Fructidor, year 4 [August 25, 1796]. ~ 

You will be pleased to send orders for assembling in the 
village of Tende a moveable column composed of 50 gen- 
darmes of the department of the Maritime Alps, 50 gen- 
darmes of the department of they Var, 3200 men from 
the division of General Casabiancea, 200 men from Antibes 
and the Marguerite islands, 150 men of the national guard \ 
of the Maritime Alps, 200 men of the national guard of the 
district of Grasse, and two pieces of cannon. ‘she 
This moveable column will be commanded by General 
Casabianea. The military commission which I have ordered 
for trying the Barbets shall meet at the village of Tende: 
it shall be charged to collect all the information that can be 
furnished it by the municipalities and the inhabitants for 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 317 


destroying those assemblages and clearing the department 
of the banditti who infest it. 

The generals, superior officers, soldiers, and commis- 
sion, assembled at Tende, shall be paid half in money and 
half in mandats, like the active army. 

The paymaster of the army shall cause this moveable 
column to be paid by the paymaster of Coni; it shall be 
furnished with provisions by the city of Coni, and have a 
ration of meat, like the rest of the army. 

The villages shall be responsible for the aid they give to 
the villains. 

General Macquart and the Piedmontese general shall be 
apprized of the formation of this moveable column. 

General Macquart shall have orders to concert with 
General Casabianca for sending out on his part strong piquets, 
in order to the rapid destruction of the banditti. 
: BONAPARTE. 


To the Chief of the Staff. 


Head-quarters, Milan, 8 Fructidor, year 4 [August 25, 1796]. 

You will be pleased, citizen-general, to order General 
Gentili to organize in companies all the Corsican refugees 
that are at Leghorn, officers, sub-officers, and soldiers. he 
refugee Corsican generals, the chiefs of brigade or battalion, 
shall each command one of these companies. Muskets 
from those that are in the place shall be distributed among 
them. 

These companies shall do no other service than what is 
connected with the embarkation for Corsica. In case of 
generale or alerte, General Gentili shall take the orders of the 
general of division commanding the place px See: the 
ved which the said companies are to occupy. The captains, 

ieutenants, and sub-lieutenants of these companies shall be 
armed with muskets. 

I leave it to you to make a regulation for determining 
whatever I may not have provided for, that all the Corsican 

gees forming part of the said companies may obtain the 
rations due to their rank without confusion, and that they 
may, in case of need, supply the place at Leghorn of the 
battalion of the 75th demi-brigade, which I have withdrawn 
from that place. 


318 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


You will inform General Gentili that I shall send him 
forthwith instructions concerning the expedition to Corsica. 
The gendarmerie of the 28th division, being iz 
must concur in the duty of the place. You will authorize 
its chiefs to recruit among the Corsican refugees in Leg- 


ome BONAPARTE. _ 


Give orders for 200 men of the battalion of the 12th 
demi-brigade, which is at Milan, to set out early to-morrow 
morning and sapere by the shortest road to Casal Maggior, 
to be under the orders of General Murat, in lieu of the 51st 
demi-brigade. 

Give orders to the 51st demi-brigade to set out, as soon 
as these 200 men have arrived, and proceed to Leghorn by 
the shortest route. nh? 

Give orders for establishing within thrice twenty-four 
hours, in the castle of Pavia, an hospital for venereal cases. 
There shall be kept in the magazine of the castle, five hun- 
dred muskets, with flints, cartridges, &c., for the purpose 
of arming the venereal patients in case of need. 

Give orders to the battalion of the 6th demi-brigade, the 
first that arrives, to leave 200 men in the castle of Pavia. 
As soon as these 200 men shall arrive at Pavia, give orders 
to the 14th demi-brigade to set out for Leghorn by the 
shortest way. Let the 51st demi-brigade and the 14th be 
reviewed at the moment of their departure. 

Order the establishment of an hospital for 500 patients in 
the castle of Milan. My intention is that the men who are 
least ill be selected. Order that there be constantly kept 
in the castle of Milan five hundred muskets, with all that is 
necessary for arming the said patients in case of need. 

BONAPARTE. 


To the General of Division Sauret. 


Head-quarters, Milan, 8 Fructidor, year 4 [August 25, 1796]. 

The consideration of your health has alone induced me to 
give you the command of the reserve, and to supersede you 
in that of the division at present under your orders: hat 
division is, moreover, destined for movements, the rapidity 
of which is incompatible with your present state; but you 
will know how to make yourself useful in the post in whieh 
I am placing you, and which is not less essential: the 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 319 


service which it is to do is not so hard and more adapted to 
your situation. 

The reserve is intended to see the enemy, but it is destined 
to come at him by less difficult roads. The services which 
you have rendered must assure you that this change in- 
volves nothing that ought to affect you; it is absolutely 
foreign to any diminution in the confidence that I owe to 
your bravery and your patriotism. 

Bonaparte. 


To the Executive Directory. * 


Head-quarters, Milan, 8 Fructidor, year 4 [August 25, 1796]. 

1. The division of General Sahuguet is blockading Mantua. 

On the 7th, at three in the morning, we had at once 
attacked the bridge of Governolo and argent to oblige 
the garrison to retire within its walls. After a brisk can- 
nonade, General Sahuguet in person took the bridge of Gover- 
nolo, at the same time that General Dallemagne made 
himself master of Borgo-Forte. The enemy has lost 500 
killed, wounded, and prisoners. The 12th demi-brigade 
and citizen Lahoz distinguished themselves. 

2. The division of General Augereau is at Verona, 

3. That of General Massena is at Riyoli. That. of 
General Sauret, the command of which I have just given to 
General Vaubois, General Sauret being ill, is at Staro. 

It was indispensable to allow the troops a few days’ rest, 
to rally the scattered corps after so violent.a shock, and to 
reorganize the service of the administrations, absolutely 
broken up. Some of those gentlemen ran all the way to 
the Gulf of Spezzia without stopping. 

The commissary of war Salva leaves the army ; panic- 
struck, he beholds enemies everywhere ; he crosses the Po, 
and communicates to all he meets the terrors that bewilder 
him ; he fancies that the Hulans are at his heels. In vain 
he seampers away for two days and two nights; nothing 
can raise his spirits; writing to all quarters, Run for your 
lives ! [Saure qui peut| he arrives within two leagues of 
Genoa, and—dies, in twenty-four hours, of a violent fever, 
in the delirium of which he fancies himself wounded by a 
hundred swords, and still those of the terrible Hulans. No- 
thing equals this cowardice but the bravery of the soldiers. 
Many commissaries of war have not shown more bravery. 


320 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


Such, citizens directors, is the inconvenience of the law 
which requires that the commissaries of war should be 
civil agents, while they need courage and military habits 
to a greater degree than the officers themselves: the cou- 
rage which is necessary for them is wholly moral; it is 
never the fruit of the habit of dangers. I have, therefore, 
felt on this occasion how essential it is to appoint to the 
office of commissaries of war none but men — no served 
in the line for several campaigns and given proofs of co’ i 
Any man who values life J aioe than the catiocal: ict 
ind the esteem of his comrades ought not to form of 
the French army. It is revolting to hear every day the 
persons of the different administrations confessing, and al- 
most boasting of it, that they were afraid. 
We have in the army 15,000 sick; the deaths are not 
above fifteen or twenty a day: but the month of September 
is said to be the time when diseases are most dangerous. 
Up to this moment, there is nothing but slight fevers. I 
have just been inspecting the hospitals of Milan: I am 
highly pleased with them, which is partly owing to the zeal 
and activity of citizen Burisse, principal agent of that 
department. 
have not yet received any troops coming from the 
Ocean: we have only tidings of 3000 men, composing the 
sixth demi-brigade, who are to arrive at Milan on the 15th. 
I hear nothing of any troops of the division of General 
Chateauneuf-Randon: only the 10th demi-brigade of the 
line, 600 strong, has arrived at Nice. 
If the 6000 men of General Chateauneuf-Randon’s whom 
you have promised me, and the 13,000 announced long ago 
from the army of the Ocean, had arrived, my army would 
be almost doubled, and I should have swept the Austrian 
army before me. If these reinforcements arrive in the 
course of the month, we shall continue to find ourselves in a 
respectable position, and capable even of putting an end to 
the extravagance of Naples; but I fear that your orders 
relative to the movement of those troops are badly executed. 
Our demi-galleys have run out of Peschiera, where they 
have taken ten large barks and two pieces of cannon be- 
longing to the enemy. 
very thing here is in a satisfactory position. We are 
waiting for the first tidings of General Moreau before we 
advance into the Tyrol : but, if nothing arrives in a few days, 


oC Ul lc PS ee OS 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 821 


we shall advance provisionally as far as Trent. I am as- 
sured that General Wurmser is recalled and succeeded by 
General Devins.. ; 
The King of Sardinia having disbanded his provincial 
regiments, the Barbets have increased. A cart conveying 
money has been plundered. General Dugard, going to 
Nice, has been killed. I have organized a moveable column 
against the Barbets, with a tribunal to do justice upon them. 
I cannot exercise any sort of influence on the departments 
of the Var and the Rhone. [am at such a distance that 
letters reach me much later than the minister of war. 
BONAPARTE, 


. 


To the General-in- Chief. 


Rome, 8 Fructidor, year 4 [August 25, 1796]. 

I have the honour to send you a copy of what I am 
writing to the commissary-general Dennié, that you may 
see how we stand in regard to the supplies. I will send by 
the first courier a memorial concerning 1400 horses that 
you demand, according to which you will be able to send 
hither or into Romagna the officer whom you may appoint 
to superintend the operation. 

Nothing new at Naples. I have taken measures to be 
informed of what is passing in that quarter, in order to re- 
port to you. 

I send you annexed a copy of the new lamentation of the 
cardinal secretary of state on the subject of the new veniat 
notified to LN La Greea, lately vice-legate of Ferrara. 
This Monsignor La Greca is the son of a merchant of Na- 

les, and does not much interest this country. Cardinal 

Jattei, archbishop of Ferrara, is a Roman prince, of an an- 
cient house, characterless, according to the taste of the Ro- 
‘mans, and generally liked and esteemed both by the pope 
and the public. The justice of the orders that you have 

iven respecting those two prelates is acknowledged: the 

ave been exposed to deserved severities. Now that they 
are walking tolerably straight here, I foresee that the em- 
barrassing prelates will be surrendered to the wishes of his 
Holiness. 

The insurrections planned, to which we should all perhaps 
have fallen victims but for your signal victories, could not 
arise spontaneously from the Italian people, who have 

VOL. I. Y 


$22 ‘LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


shrewdness, and who can see perfectly well, even at Rome, 
the justice of our cause : all was the effect of the instigations 
and maneuvres of the English, Neapolitan, and Imperial 
emissaries. : fy dig 

Several cardinals have distinguished themselves by de- 
claiming and striving to act in that absolute Babel of Rome 
against the French and your operations. _M. the cardinal 
Pignatelli-Monteleone, a Neapolitan, legate of Ferrara, who 
is your prisoner, was one of the warmest in xe old 
pope to despatch the vice-legate, La Greca, from this city. 

. the cardinal Caratfa, another Neapolitan, is one of thé 
greatest hatchers of lies ognirins us. M. the cardinal Borgia, 
a very learned and thought to be a discreet man, rose up 
against us, and published a pamphlet, proving that the eccle- 
siastical canons forbade the pope to furnish powder for the 
use of our army. The cardinal Albani, the eldest member 
of the sacred to whom the ambition of his family at- 
taches to the court of Vienna, is another of those possessed 
zealots who have endeavoured to inflame people's minds 
against us. These gentlemen now appear to be somewhat 
down in the mouth : fear alone can control them. 

The pope, who now sees the consequences, is not. pleased 
with them, but this government knows not how to restrain 
such personages. If you were to desire cardinal Mattei and 
Monsignor La Greca to tell these gentlemen that you shall 
hold them personally responsible for whatever happens in 
Rome, and to tell the pope that if people here fail in obe- 
dience to the sovereign, in what relates to the maintenance 
of good order and justice, you will send him an armed foree, 
I believe that it would produce a very good effect. We 
must allay by fear the bre of the passions before we can 
succeed in conciliating opinions. 

Would you believe that Azara lives here forsaken, and 
that the high company who owe everything to him treat 
him as though he had done them a great disservice ? 

I beg you to accept, &c., 
CAcauLt. 


The Executive Directory to the General-in-Chief. 


Paris, 6 Fructidor, year 4 [August 23, 1796]. 
The last accounts that you have transmitted to us, citizen- 
general, of your military operations prove to us that the 


"7" 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 323 


brave army which you command is daily — the fruits 
of victory, by increasing the distress of its enemy. Ap- 
alled at his defeat, no doubt, he will not dare to venture 


for a long time upon a pitched battle with the rest of his 


forces: it is your business, therefore, to study to destroy 
him in partial and frequent affairs, as you haye done since 
the memorable actions of the 16th and 18th. Pressed on 
his rear by the rapid march of the right wing of the army 
of the Rhine and Moselle, which is advancing upon the Inn, 
it is to be presumed that he will make but a feeble and un- 
certain defence in the Tyrol, and thenceforward your pur- 
suit ought to acquire a new degree of celerity, either for the 
purpose of overtaking the rear-guard and cutting it in pieces, 
or to get to important passes before it, according to occasion 
or the nature of the localities in which you have to deploy 
all the variety of combinations and the resources of art as 
you have already developed them by turns in mountain 
operations and in those of the plain. We have praised the 
boldness of your plan to pounce suddenly upon Trieste, but 
to us the favourable moment does not seem to have yet 
arrived. The reduction of the strength of the army by 
disease, the more than equivocal dispositions of the different 
powers of Italy, and the most pressing interest of all, that of 
dissolving the forces of Austria, by inflicting on them 
reiterated defeats, and thus dealing, as it were, the last blows 
to our continental enemies—all these considerations decide 
us to prescribe to you not to deviate, in the ‘oh ep circum- 
stances, from the plan which has for its object to connect 
your left with the right of General Moreau, and to combine 
your movements in such a manner as to crush Wurmser 
and prince Charles, while General Jourdan will exert his 
utmost efforts to drive Wartensleben into Bohemia, and so 
to reduce his power that he shall be unable either to cover 
that kingdom, or to protect the left bank of the Danube, if 
he should fall back on that side. 

After the three republican armies have executed these 
dispositions in their totality, and the gates of Austria shall 
he opened to them, we authorize you to throw a division 
upon Trieste, in order to destroy its port and its public 
establishments. 

Till then, prudence commands us to defer that enterprise. 
We regret that we cannot give it our immediate assent; but 
the essential’ point is to confirm the conquest of Italy, and 

Y2 


324 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


to deprive the enem ri who has dared once more to dispute it 
with the army under your command, of all hope and all 
means of recovering it. It is, moreover, to be observed that 
the corps which you would direct upon Trieste might be 
compromised on its retreat into Italy in case of a neste 
no very likely thing, it is true. 

We have reesived accounts that the 6,000 men, wihkettt 
General Chateauneuf-Randon had orders to despatch to Italy, 
have long been in motion: inform us of their arrival, as well 
as that of the reinforcements which have been drawn from 
the Coasts of the Ocean. Our intention is to keep the army 
of Italy in such a state of force as shall ensure to it a con- 
stant superiority in all the operations that concern it, either 
by reinforcing it with troops from the interior, or b —_o 
it suecours from the army of the Rhine and Moselle, to 
which we shall send 6,000 men when the communication’ 
between them shall be established : for we repeat to you, we 
must retain, at any rate, our advantages in Italy; it is 
the object to which the thoughts of the government are 
most strongly attached, and which must have the greatest 
influence on the continental peace. 

When the emperor has been forced to aecept the condi- 
tions of that peace necessary to Europe, we shall have to 
decide upon that which it will suit the interests and the 

splendour of the victories of the Republic to impose upon 
ie different States of Italy; and then we shall be a re 
with perfect security, to ‘threaten Rome and Naples, to 
make them accede to our views. 

The diseases which are attacking the garrison of Mantua 
must soon reduce that place and relieve us from the neces- 
sity of observing it, unless at a distance. The health of 
the troops strongly engages our attention, and claims no 
doubt your most assiduous care, merited by the courage and 
the republican fidelity of these brave defenders of the coun- 
try. The sick whose state admits of their removal ought 
to be conveyed, as far as it is practicable, to more wholesome 
situations. REVEILLERE-LEPAUX. 


The Executive Directory to General Bonaparte. 


Paris, 6 Fructidor, year 4 [August 23, 1796]. 
The Directory has received, citizen-general, your letter 
from Brescia of the 27th Thermidor, containing notes re- 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 325 


speeting some generals of the _~— of Italy. The Directory 
has been pleased with it, and shall turn its attention to the 
subject, when you have transmitted further notes, relative 
to the generals of brigade and the adjutant-generals under 
your command. You have forgotten several officers, espe- 
cially General Kilmaine. 

REVEILLERE-LEPAUX. 


The Executive Directory to General Bonaparte. 


Paris, 6 Fructidor, year 4 [August 23, 1796]. ; 

The Directory has received, citizen-general, the letter 
which you have written to it from Brescia, on the 26th ult. 
It gave orders immediately to the minister of the finances to: 
have the jewels, valued at 400,000 livres, but which you 
estimate at 2 or 3,000,000, brought to Paris. The Diree- 
tory is pleased with your vigilance on this essential occasion : 
it teels every day how urgent it is that all the friends of the 
Republic should denounce the numerous abuses which im- 
get the march of its financial operations, and double the 
inconveniences occasioned by a too nee eset administra- 
tion in that important department. The supplies which 
the army of Italy pours into the national treasury are the 
more valuable the more violent the crisis : dite hers con- 
tributed to thwart the plots of our internal enemies. 

We shall continue to recommend to you and to the com-) 
missioners of the government to place at the disposal of the 
minister of the finances all the sums that are not indispen- 
- sable for the different services of the army which you com- 
mand. 

The Directory has been grieved to hear of the removal of. 
the sequestration from the property of the Neapolitans at 
Leghorn: it is a measure to which circumstances forbid us 
to revert at present. The future conduct of the court of 
Naples towards us will determine the ulterior steps that we 
shall have to take. Before the effort of Wurmser on the 
Adige and the Mincio, M. de Belmonte Pignatelli, who is in; 
Paris, strove, by all the means that foreign diplomacy is. 
skilled in employing, to avoid any oceasion for treating 
seriously for peace with the French Republic. Since the 
army of Italy and the talents of its general have conquered 
the audacious Austrian, the conduct of the envoy of Naples 
has totally changed, and he has become as eager for nego~ 


eNET, 


326 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


ciating peace as he appeared at first to be disinclined to do” 
so. It is easy to perceive that the King of the Two Sicilies 
wishes to take adtantake of your removal to a greater dis- 
tance, to conclude, on terms extremely advan us to him, 
a treaty against which his partiality for England and for” 
Austria revolts. It is for you, citizen-general, to inform us 
respecting our real situation in Italy and our angie o8 
position in regard to Naples. What you say on the subject 
of the unfavourable dispositions of the Neapolitans at Brescia, 
and of the danger which there would be in-leaving them 
there, has led us to consider the state of the army of Italy 
with the most serious attention. We have asked ourselves 
if the hottest season of the year, the moment when the 
army has 15,000 sick, the moment, above all, when it is pre- 

aring not only to enter the Tyrol, but.perhaps to throw 
itself upon Trieste, is a favourable period for breaking the 
armistice concluded with Naples. e have thought that 
the hour for that rupture, if it must take place, has not 
arrived, and that it would nevertheless be dangerous to go 
to sleep upon Italian faith, by which we have been so often 
deceived. 

In consequence, citizen-general, we think it right merely 
to recommend to you to keep a vigilant eve upon the Nea- 
politans at Brescia, to scatter them in such a manner as to 
render them less dangerous, to gain some of them, were it 
only to learn all their proceedings, and to be in readiness to 
seize their horses and their arms, in case of necessity. If 
the court of Naples, unfaithful to the armistice, were to show 
itself openly our enemy ; if it were to come forward to meet 
you, or to declare itself anew absolutely in favour of Austria 
and England—then, and in case of an absolutely imminent 
danger, we authorize you, citizen-general, to make yourself 
master of the 200 Neapolitan horse, who are in the rear of 
the army of Italy. 

The Directory approves what you have done in regard to 
the legate sent by the court of Rome to Ferrara. We have 
sent away the envoy of the Prince of Rome, who had been 
despatched to us without any power to treat with the French 
Republic. These i however, do not place us in a hos- 
tile situation in regard to the pope, but they warn us to lose 
no time in extracting from Rome, by taking care to intimi- 
date it as you have done, the contributions of all kinds 
granted to us by the armistice. 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 327. 


It is right, citizen-general, that you should have an eye 
upon what the court of Turin is doing. Its ambassador in 

rance, the Chevalier Revel, a French emigrant, has just 
been sent away by us on account of that quality. We are 
waiting for his successor, This measure makes no change 
in the state of peace in which we are in regard to Piedmont, 
but we know that they rejoiced in that country at the ephe- 
meral successes of Wurmser. , 

It is better to be on one’s guard than to run the risk of 
being deceived. 

REVEILLERE-LEPAUX. 


328 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES.” 2 


PART FOURTH. 


FROM THE BATTLE OF ROVEREDO TO THE RESUMPTION OF | 
HOSTILITIES BY A NEW AUSTRIAN ARMY. 


Po the Executive Directory. 


Head-quarters, Milan, 9 Fructidor, year 4 [August 26, 1796]. 
You will find annexed, citizens-directors, two letters which 
I have received from Corsica. The English are embarking 
all their munitions of war, to remove them to the isle of 
Elba. What is become of the plan which they may have had 
at the time when they believed us to be beaten, of making a 
dash upon Leghorn, as the annexed proclamation would lead 
one to believe ¢ ; 
All the Corsican refugees are already arrived at Leghorn ; 
the commissary Salicetti calculates on starting to-day. 
BONAPARTE. 


To the Executive Directory. 


Head-quarters, Milan, 9 Fructidor, year 4 [August 26, 1796]. 

I have made a beginning of the negociations at Venice. 
I have demanded of them provisions for the supply of the 
army. You will find annexed a copy of the letter to citizen 
Lallemant. As soon as I have swept the Tyrol, negocia- 
tions conformable to your orders shall be commenced; at 
the present moment they would not succeed ; those people 
have a powerful navy, and are sheltered from all insult in 
their capital ; it may even prove extremely difficult to put 
the property of the English and the emperor under seques- 
tration. 

I have sent for citizen Faypoult to Milan. We have 
agreed upon the preparatory measures to be taken for the 
execution of your instructions relative to Genoa. 

At the same moment that we shall be at Trent, the army 
of the Rhine will be at Inspruck, and that part of the corps 
of troops coming to me from La Vendée reaches Tortona, L 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES: 329 


shall proceed in person to Genoa, and ‘your decree shall be 
executed in its full tenour. 

As for the Grand-duke of Tuscany, we must continue to 
dissemble with him. I have made a change of troops in the 
fortress of Leghorn, to put out calculators as to their num- 
ber, and to make a movement in the interior of Italy for 
the purpose of accrediting the reports that I get circulated 
with a view to overawe the populace of Rome and the Nea- 
politans. 

BONAPARTE: 


To the Executive Directory. 


Head-quarters, Milan, 9 Fructidor, year 4 [August 26, 1796]. 

The King of Naples, at the head of 24,000 men, which 
in reality may not exceed 15,000, has advanced into the 
territories of the pope, threatening to march to Rome and 
thence come and join Wurmeer, or proceed to Leghorn, in 
order to drive us, in concert with the English, from that 
place. Rome was in alarm, and the cabinet of his Holiness 
in the greatest consternation. 

I have written to citizen Cacault to soothe the court of 
Rome, and to signify to that of Naples that, if the King of 
the Two Sicilies advanced into the territories of Rome, I 
should consider the armistice as null, and march a division 
of my army to cover Rome. Citizen Cacault assures me, 
without being certain of it, that the King of Naples has de- 
sisted from his enterprise, and that he has himself returned 
to Naples. That court is perfidious and stupid. I am of 
opinion that, if M. Pignatelli has not yet arrived in Paris, 
it would be proper to sequestrate the 2000 cavalry that we 
have in depot, to seize all the goods that are at Leghorn, to 
draw up a strong manifesto, exposing the bad faith of the 
court of Naples, particularly of Acton ; the moment it is 
threatened it will become humble and submissive. I have 
written to M. d’Azara at Rome; I have told him that, if 
the court of Naples, in contempt of the armistice, again offers 
to enter the lists, I engage, before the face of Europe, to 
march against the poeteutod 70,000 men, with 6000 grena- 


‘diers, 4000 cavalry, and 50 pieces of cannon. The fine 


season is advancing: six weeks hence I hope the greatest 
part of our sick will be cured. When the succours that you 
announce to me arrive, I shall be able at-once to carry on 


330° LETTERS AND DESPATCHES.,° 


the siege of Mantua, and to overawe the Neapolitans and the 
Austrians. ekg ed 

The court of Rome, during our disasters, behaved no_ 
better than the others: it had sent a legate to Ferrara ; I or-. 
dered him to be seized and detain him an hostage at Brescia ;_ 
it is cardinal Mattei. The vice-legate, named Greca, had 
escaped, and was. not more than two hours’ distance from 
Rome; I sent him an order to come to Milan, and he came. 
As he is less culpable, I shall dismiss him after keeping 
him here for a few days. 

Many reports are circulated respecting the King of Sar- 
dinia, but 1 think they are all unfounded. He has sold his 
artillery equipage, disbanded his provincial regiments, and 
is endeavouring to recruit, because he would rather have 
foreign troops than native regiments, on which he cannot 
much rely. It would be well if the journalists would be 
pleased not to publish such absurdities as they are daily 
circulating concerning him.» There are petty paragraphs, 
dashed off from sheer rumour, without any ill intention, 
which do us more harm and make us more enemies than 
a contribution, from which we should derive advantage. 
Perhaps it might be useful if an offtcial journal were to 
insert an article contradicting these absurd and ridiculous 
reports. BONAPARTE. 


To Citizen Miot, Minister of the Republic at Florence. 
Head-quarters, Milan, 9 Fructidor, year 4 [August 26, 1796]. 

I have received all your letters. There are at Leghorn 
2500 men of the 75th demi-brigade and 600 Corsican re- 
fugees, whom I am organizing into companies. I am send- 
ing the 15th and the 14th demi-brigades: make yourself 


easy. 
Dissemble with the grand-duke ; if he behaves ill, he 

shall pay all at once: people of that sort are not much to 

be feared. Bonaparte. 


To the Chief of the Staff. 


Head-quarters, Brescia, 13 Fructidor, year 4 [August 30, 1796). 
It frequently happens that deficiency of the means of 
conveyance prevents the soldier from receiving his ration of 
bread of twenty-four ounces, and he gets no more than 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES: 331 


twelve: it is but just, when this happens, to indemnify him 
by giving him an equivalent in money. In consequence, 
the general-in-chief orders that, in this case, there shall be 
given him one sou and a half per twelve ounces. The in- 
spector of provisions of the division must give a certificate, 
which shall be examined [vis/] by the commissary of war, 
the chief of the staff of the division, and the general com- 
manding the camp. The commissaire ordonnateur, at the 
end of the decade, shall present the certificate to the commis- 
sary-general, who shall cause it to be paid. 
Bonaparte. 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Rome, 12 Fructidor, year 4 [August 30, 1796]. 

I have received the two letters from Milan, of the Sth of 
this month, with which you have honoured me. 

I have the honour to send you the answer of the cardinal 
secretary of state, to the demand of a supply of a thousand 
bullocks for the army. Orders are given for them to be de- 
livered as fast as possible, and I have sent the commandant of 
the citadel of Bologna a letter from myself, specifying the 

ersons who will be legitimately charged with the said bul- 
aed and to give a receipt for them on account of the contri- 
bution in kind. 

I had the honour to inform you before that orders had 
been given by the pope for admitting the French garrison 
into Ancona, on the terms of the armistice, and that you 
could, therefore, send the garrison whenever you pleased. I 
send you annexed the pope’s order which you wish to have ; 
it is signed by the cardinal secretary of state, in the usual 
form, the most authentic and the only one customary here. 

All that results from the note sent to Ancona, to the 
secretary of state, in which you have observed that the 
consul of his Sicilian majesty had placed the arms: of his 
master over his door, is that the court of Naples now thinks 
fit to have at that, port a regular consul, to whom it gives a 
somewhat higher character to support, conceiving that at 
the present time it has more need to be apprized of what is 
passing in that quarter. 

The Prince de Belmonte has found himself in Paris, like 
M. Petracchi, without sufficient powers for signing the pre- 
liminaries which haye been communicated to Saas He has, 


332 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


therefore sent off a courier to his court, which I believe to 
be now much frightened : it keeps up its stern and martial 
countenance. M. the Prince of Castelcicala has not answered 
my second letter, and I hear that his chargé d’affaires has 
orders not to receive any letters that I may send to him nnd 
his court. 

All the solicitude, all the vigilance, all the efforts of M. 
Acton are principally employed i in preventing all communi- 
eation of Neapolitans with foreigners, so that it is very’ 
difficult for me to te correct information relative to the 
state of his army. I shall send you the bulletins as fast as 
I receive them. 

Your letter to M. Azara will be read and shown about’: 
copies of it will probably reach Naples, and they will greatly 
rejoice the public. 

I have answered the municipality of Ferrara and the 
senate of Bologna, on the subject of the alarm which they’ 
felt, but which was unfounded, that the pope had given 
orders for de riving them of the spiritual graces. I have: 
also explained to the senate of Bologna how . had arranged 
with M. Azara to prevent both M. - Capelletti and the ex- 
Jesuits from giving it the least annoyance. 

The effect of the pardon solicited for two wretches ina 
been better than if we had left them in the galleys, where 
they already were ; but I have made them sensible here that: 
you a ead me for it. If you did but know this beggarly 
- pulation, and how I am beset all day long by mendicants ! 

here is nothing dangerous here but the emissaries of the 
coalition, especially the English and the Neapolitans. 

We are now proceeding tolerably well towards the execu- 
tion of the armistice; but here are new incidents — 
of which you are apparently informed. 

A fresh courier from M. Petracchi, minister of the pope 
in Paris, arrived here yesterday, bringing me the decree of 
the Directory, a copy of which you will find annexed. 

I have acquainted you with the difficulty which has arisen 
upon the first article of the treaty ; I send you annexed a 
copy of that article. The congregation of the cardinals sum-) 
moned by his Holiness to give e him their opinions, both upon 
the first article of the treaty and the new incident of the 
decree of the Directory, has judged that, on the first point, 
the article could not in conscience be admitted without some. 
reserves for the conservation of the faith. For the rest, it 


Pee o | ee | 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 333 


has decided that the pope should send to the commissioners 
of the Executive Directory, Salicetti and Garrau, a pleni- 
potentiary to obtain peace. M. Azara has been requested 
to accompany this new minister, and consented. A courier 
will set off immediately to seek out the commissioners and 
to inquire to what place Monseigneur Caleppi is to repair 
with M. Azara. 

The pope weeps ; but neither he nor his council can yet 
bring themselves to listen to the opinion of the divines 
whom I mentioned to you, or to the more solid reasons 
which M. Azara and I have given to make them compre- 
hend that the article referred only to temporal matters. 

As for the armistice, there is no backwardness about its 
fulfilment. The more important affair of the definitive treaty 
is now under consideration: this leaves no opportunity to 
negociate here for the purpose of inducing the pope to take 
the measures which you suggest in regard to constitutional 
priests. I imagine that the Directory means to send to the 
commissioners a treaty ready to sign without rejoinder. 

j ACAULT. 


Ti he Prince Castelcicala to Citizen Cacault. 


I have received, sir, the letter which you have been 
pleased to address to me on the 22nd instant, in answer to 
that which, by command of his Sicilian majesty, I had the 
honour to write to you on the 20th of the same month. 
The king, who has read the contents, has seen with sur- 
prise the reports circulated respecting the march of his 
troops, since all these rumours were entirely overthrown and 
demolished by the declaration which I made to you in my 
preceding letter, that the troops of his majesty would not 
pass the limits of this kingdom unless foreign troops entered 
the territories of the pope and directed their march against 
us. Precautions and measures of safety and foresight can- 


~ not be absolutely neglected by his majesty ; but the king 


will scrupulously observe the armistice, sincerely desiring 
the return of good harmony ; and in consequence of this 
very sincere disposition on his part, he will always employ 
such becoming and suitable means as can contribute to 
manifest the truth of this assertion. 

I have the honour to transmit to you a summary of the 
facts concerning the detention of the officer and three French 


334 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


seamen whom you mentioned in your letter, and you will 
there observe the regularity of the conduct of the Neapolitan 
- commandant. , Aue 

THE PRINCE DE CASTELCICALA. — 


Citizen Cacault to the Prince de Castelcicala. 

Rome, 14 Fructidor, year 4 [August 31, 1796). 
I have received the letter which you did me the honour 
to write to me on the 29th of August. The general-in- 
chief Bonaparte had been irritated by a concurrence of the 
circumstances and reports which I specified to you; but, 
having received a copy of your letter and of General Acton’s 
dated the 20th of August, he now sends me word that he 
has no further doubt of the observance of the armistice, the 

execution of which he also will faithfully uphold. : 
I have referred the affair of the four Frenchinee detained 
at Orbitello to the consul-general at Leghorn, Belleville, 
that he may settle it with the consul of his Sicilian majesty. 
I shall transmit to him oy the summary which you have 
been pleased to send me. I shall also address a copy of 
that paper to the captain of La i who is at Civita 
Vecchia, that both may be informed of the decision of the 

king, who sets at liberty the officer and the three seamen. 
As nobody desires more sincerely than myself the speedy 
re-establishment of peace, you will always find me disposed 
to promote a good understanding, and to give you proof, 
monsieur le prince, of the sentiments of the highest con- 
sideration. 


CACAULT. — 


To General Bonaparte. 


Verona, 14 Fructidor, year 4 [August 31, 1796]. 

I perceive, general, and I am even certain that the Vene- 
tians, so far from meaning to observe neutrality in regard to 
us, are preparing and secretly fomenting—the nobles and the 
riests in “Se CER of hostility against us: I can no 
onger doubt it, since hostilities are already commencing. One 
of my patroles cannot go a league from its camp, without 
being attacked and fired at by the peasants, who assemble 
in arms at the sound of the alarm-bell. Several volunteers 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 335 


have already been murdered, and I have not been able to 
discover the culprits and to bring them to justice. The po- 
desta of Verona, on my complaint, expressed great anxiety 
to put a stop to these outrages, which will have mischievous 
consequences, and affects to be taking a great deal of trouble ; 
but, in fact, not a criminal has yet been apprehended. I 
can hardly believe that the Venetian government. suffers 
itself to be deceived on this point, and is ignorant of the 
source whence such outrages proceed. 

Does ‘it favour the Austrians in tacitly approving these 
hostile insurrections? I cannot help thinking so; and this 
must be cleared up as speedily as possible. 

At two o'clock this morning, my advanced post of cavalry 
was attacked by an advanced guard of enemy’s hussars on 
the Vicenza road: a few a = were exchanged, and 
the arrival of a strong patrole of ours forced the enemy to 
retreat ; he was about 100 strong—horse. According to 
certain intelligence, these troops were directed to our ad- 
vanced posts by nobles of the country: some of these latter 
have gone so far, to my knowledge, as to give money to our 
grenadiers and volunteers for the purpose of enticing them 
into insubordination and disorder ; which, I hope, will never 
happen, for I make them observe the strictest discipline. 
There is one noble in particular, whose name I:have, that 
pwaiens to get rid of the generals by laying ambuscades 
or them ; in short, the emperor and our French emigrants 
have all this country in their favour: I am sure of it. 

It is high time, general, 'to ascertain at once ‘the inten- 
tions of the government of Venice : let it tell us whether 
we are at war or at peace with it. Till we receive an an- 
swer to this question, I will do my best to protect this side 
of the army, and to maintain safety and order among the 
troops that I command. 

AUGEREAU. 


To the Chief of the Staff. 


Pinvenzano, 15 Fructidor, year 4 [September 1, 1796]. 
The bad weather which we have had for some days has 
obliged General Pigeon to order down the posts from Monte 
Baldo. If the weather changes, I shall direct him to send 
them up again. 
The soldiers suffer cruelly ; two-thirds of my division, at 


336 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


least, are in want of coats, waistcoats, breeches, shirts, 
and absolutely barefoot. This deficiency of clothing give 
us a great many sick, and will give us a great many 
if people never do anything but promise without sendin 
necessaries. nag 
I give you notice, general, that, if the movement of t! 
general-in-chief takes place, the soldiers whom I comm 
cannot march in any way whatever ; it is physically im 
sible, unless one would choose to leave half of them half 
way. I have no hesitation to tell you that, if the s 
attentions are not paid to my division as to the others, 
will give in my resignation and renounce the professi 
Let it not be piippoaed that I am swayed by ill-humour ; 
is as a free man and fond of what is right that I thus ex- _ 
press myself. ° « ina 
I have long been applying at Verona for flour, for the 
purpose of setting to work the ovens that are within reach 
of my division. I know not from what diabolical speeula- 
tion it is that they will never send anything but br ad ah 
ready baked at Verona, which, when it arrives here, is always 
seid at least two-thirds of it. When liquids are sent 
to us, it is always in musty casks; and, before they are 
landed and delivered at the magazine, half the quantity is 
always gone. ty 
I have written to the commissary ; I have stationed an 
officer of my staff at Verona; but, for all that, things do 
not go on as they ought to do. If you talk to the commis-— 
saries and the agents, they tell you that a much greater 
quantity of provisions is sent off than is wanted for the di- 
vision ; but they are well aware, from the letters which I 
have written them, that half and more is not fit to be re- 
ceived. Let the general-in-chief give orders that this shall 
be no longer the case. Health and fraternity. a Fes 
MASSENA. 


The Executive Directory to General Bonaparte. — = 
Paris, 17 Fructidor, year 4 [September 3, 1796]. 
The Directory has received, citizen-general, your de- 
spatches of the 9th of this month. The statement of the 
strength of the army which you command, rendered inactive 
at this moment by sickness, and the account you give of the 
delay alpha doll in their march by the reinforeements 


SS a 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 337 


destined for you, have deeply affected it. It is writing anew 
and in the most imperative manner, on this latter subject, 
to Generals Kellermann and Chateauneuf-Randon ; it never- 
theless observes that your preceding letters and those of its 
commissioners mentioned that the troops despatched from 
the Coasts of the Ocean were arriving successively at Milan. 

Important as it may be to follow up the enemy after his 
defeat, still we admit the necessity of, the delay which you 
have thought it right to interpose before you enter the 
Tyrol. The nature of the ground, the particular knowledge 
of it possessed by the Austrians, who, though beaten and 
considerably weakened, yet dared to resist in new positions, 
and the internal situation of Italy, are, on this head, so 
many motives which we can appreciate. But the time be- _ 
stowed on these, necessary precautions ought to ensure 
greater activity in the ulterior operations; and we think 
that you will be forthwith at Trent, and very soon either at 
Brixen or at Inspruck, according as circumstances shall 
decide you. 

The passage of the Lech by the army of the Rhine and Mo- 
selle, the direction of its right upon the rear of the Austrian 
army, and the retreat of Prince Charles upon the Iser, add 
new confidence to the security which we share with you 
respecting the sequel of your movements, and which arises 
from your multiplied victories, the- influence of which can- 
not fail to be decisive in favour of the Republic, since the 
distress of the court of Vienna and the humiliation of its 
defeats have not yet touched it sufficiently to make it sin- 
cerely desirous of putting an end to the war. The more 
obstinate and the more haughty it is, the more terrible let 
us be, and let us redouble our energy to close the campai 
with new successes, without compromising most especially 
those which we have already won. 

We approve the vigour of your threats in regard to 
Naples, and we authorize you to carry them into effect, if 
that court resumes a hostile attitude towards France. We 
wish to be accurately informed of what has passed, and 
what motive the King of Naples now alleges for his move- 
ment upon Rome. ‘ 

We continue to reserve for the most favourable moment 
the execution of our views respecting the: powers of Italy: 
with which we have interests to discuss; the most essential: 
point now is to ensure our triumphs. 

VOL, I. Z 


338 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. - 
Though at a distance from the parts where the Barbets = 


carry on their pillage, do not lose sight of those obseure 
and dangerous enemies: orders emanating from you will 
have more effect than any that can be issued without your _ 
sony, gees in repressing that evil, which is spreading in 
seve 


departments. ee a? 
The laws relative to the organization of commissaries of = 
war, so far from authorizing pusillanimity, prescribe tothem, _ 
on the contrary, a courage equal to that of the defenders « 
the country. One of our decrees orders, moreover, tl 
some of them shall always be attached to the troops, even in — 
presence of the enemy, and that such as should be cowardly — 
enough to quit the post of honour, of danger, shall be 
brought to trial. e request you, citizen-general, to let 
that decree be laid before you, and to provide for its rigid 
execution. ; ; - i ey 
We request you also to inform us of eve i relating : 
to the coauiiiin that. is about’to. be scones Fe Corsica, 
and to second with all your means the zeal of citizen Salicetti, 
and the daring of the refugees of that island. 
L. M. REVEILLERE-LepAux, President. - 


To the Executive Directory. 


Head-quarters, Trent, 20 Fructidor, year 4 [September 6, 1796]. 
We have nothing to do, citizens directors, if we would 
rofit by our present position, than to march upon Trieste. 
We shall be at Botzen as soon as the army of the Rhine 
shall have advanced upon Inspruck, but this plan which we 
are adopting, and which would have been good in the month 
of June, is good for nothing at the end of September: the 
snow will soon re-establish the barriers of nature: the cold 
is already becoming severe; the enemy who has felt it has 
thrown himself upon the Brenta to cover Trieste. I am 
marching to-day along the Brenta to attack the enemy at 
Bassano, or to cut off his rear, if he makes a movement upon 
Verona. You are aware that it is impossible for me to en- 
tangle myself in the mountains of the Tyrol, when the whole 
hostile army is at Bassano, and threatens my flank and 
my rear. Arrived at Bassano, I shall beat the en : 
how then would you have me drive him before me and strive 
to take Trieste from him? On the day that I should beat 
the enemy at Bassano, and the army of the Rhine be at 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 339 


Inspruck, the 4000 men left of the division which guarded 
Trent would retire by Brixen and Lintz upon the Friule ; 
then the communication with the army of the Rhine will be 
truly established, and I shall have flung back the enemy be- 
yond Trieste, an essential point, whence the enemy’s army 
derives its supplies. Then, according to the nature of cir- 
eumstances, [ shall stay at Trieste, or return to the Adige. 
After destroying that port, and according to the nature of 
events, I will dictate to the Venetians the laws which you 
have sent me in your ulterior instructions. Then again it 
will be easy, if the reinforcements from General Chateau- 
neuf-Randon arrive, and if you take care that I am furnished 
with 10,000 men of the army of the Alps, to send a good 
army to Naples. Lastly, citizens-directors, do you not 
choose this winter to have the war carried into the heart of 
na Let us carry it into the Friule. 

he army of the Rhine, oceupying Inspruck, guards my 
left flank : a month hence the snow and ice will do that for 
it, and it will be able to return to the Danube. You are 
better aware, no doubt, than I am what an effect the taking 
of Trieste would produce upon Constantinople, Hungary, 
and all Italy. At any rate, citizens-directors, on the 22nd 
I shall be at Bassano. If the enemy waits for me, there 
will be a battle that will decide the fate of this whole coun- 
try; if the enemy falls back again upon Trieste, I will do 
what military circumstances shall cause me to judge most 
suitable ; but I shall await your orders to know whether I 
am or am not to dash upon Trieste. ‘ 

I think that it might be necessary to form at Milan three 
battalions of Milanese, which would serve to reinforce 
the army blockading Mantua. If you adopt the plan of 
going to Trieste, I beg you to let me know in what manner 
you wish me to conduct myself towards that city, in case it 
should be thought proper to evacuate it some time after- 
wards. 

BONAPARTE. 


The Executive Directory to the General-in-Chief. 


Paris, 23 Fructidor, year 4 [September 9, 1796]. 
In Germany, citizen-general, there have occurred some 
events, which, without compromising thus far the successes 


‘which the Republic has obtained, require, nevertheless, a 


Z 2 


340 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES: pee 


new degree of energy for executing the new dispositions that: 
have ordered. The army of the Sambre and Meuse, attacl 
suddenly by Prince Charles, who has sone General W 
tensleben a reinforcement from Bavaria, has been ob 
though without any serious battle, to fall back upon the — 
Rednitz and successively upon the Lahn. : cy ee 
This situation, which might be attended with disastrous — 
consequences, if we were not to thwart the design of the — 
enemy by a prompt and bold measure, has decided us to — 
direct General Moreau to march immediately with the 
reatest part of his force, between the Rednitz and the ‘ 
pper Neckar to attack Prince Charles, who will be at- 
tacked in front at the same time by General Beurnonyille, — 
who is bringing from the army of the North to that o 
Sambre oak Meuse a reinforcement of which he will 
the command. General Jourdan, having need of rest, oer i *. 
from that to the army of the North. General Moreau willesta- __ 
blish in Bavaria, before he leaves it, a defensive, sufficiently — 
strong to cover the Lech, and to curb such enemies as there 
are in this part of the theatre of the war. But, to acecom- 
plish this object which is essential, it is necessary that you — 
should bitikly oceupy the Austrians in the Tyrol, whomight 
carry succours into Bavaria, as they have already done, — 
according to the reports which have reached us, in order to 
find themselves in force on the right of their line of opera 
tions. We think, therefore, that you ought to act in such 
a manner as to march with rapidity upon Inspruck, and 
threaten to make an irruption into Bavaria. Avoid seatter- 
ing the troops as much as the nature of the gree hae 
cep that nothing may be left to chance in that diffieult 
ind of operations which you will have to execute. You 
will be deeply sensible that present circumstances are of the = 
highest importance, and that it is incumbent on us to deploy __ 
all our means and i aston to combine the employment of 


them along the whole line occupied by our acting armies. 


This concert alone can restore the offensive to us at all 
eco and we hope that the manceuvre of Prince Charles, 
ortunate for a moment, will draw upon his army terrible 
strokes, by inducing him to try anew the fortune of battles. 

We transmit to you a copy of the last report of General 
Jourdan. ea 

In this despatch, citizen-general, we confine ourselyes to K, 
the subject of the movement which we prescribe to the brave = 


¢ 
c 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 341 


army of Italy and its able general, to operate immediately 
in the Tyrol. 
We refer to our preceding letters for all that relates to 
the other affairs of the command that is entrusted to you. 
L. M. REVEILLERE-LEPAUX. 


To General Bonaparte. — 


Head-quarters, Marseilles, 23 Fructidor, year 4 [September 9, 1796]. 

The eighth division is stripped of general officers. Till 
the minister has supplied the places of those whom he has 
taken from me, I have thought it right to keep temporarily 
General of brigade Verné, wiioed health prevents him from 
returning so soon to the army. I have owe him the com- 
mand of the department of the Lower Alps: I shall inform 
the minister of this arrangement. According to the state- 
ments of situation addressed to the staff, you will see that I 
have not 6000 men for the four departments of the eighth 
division. Agreeably to your orders, I have despatched fifty 
gendarmes of the department of the Var, and I cannot sup- 
ply their place without great inconvenience. Marseilles 
must be disgarnished, and I have not a hundred disposable 
horses ; but Toulon and the department of the Var can no 
longer furnish the service of the ordonnances for the escort 
of the mails. , 

The Executive Directory had given me an order to keep 
a complete squadron of the 18th regiment of dragoons on 
its passage. In consequence of the state of that corps, which 
left 150 hore at Liurbone, and 30 at Nimes, which Ge- 
neral Chateauneuf-Randon took it upon him to retain, I was 
obliged to limit the number that I kept to 55 mounted dra- 
goons, 25 for the department of Vaucluse and 30 for Mar- 
seilles. The chief of brigade leaves me 17 ailing horses and 
55 dismounted men, whom I hope to remount, as I have 
received advice that some horses are coming from the inte- 
rior to the depot. The rest of this regiment, reduced to 
ik nothing, will set out on the 25th for Italy. 

I have learned, general, that it is your intention to take 
the grenadiers from me : in the state in which these depart- 
ments are, that measure might be attended with the most 
disastrous consequences. The fire is smouldering under the 
ashes ; agitators, enemies by interest and character to 


342 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES, 


every government that strives to establish the sy 
laws, are daily hatching new plots. The rem 
constituted authorities pronounced by the Legis 
cannot fail to occasion violent’ movements, if there is 
hand a force sufficiently imposing to prevent them. In | 
uarters, the dangerous party is armed; it forms assel 
blages and commits acts of violence; deserters, men W 
have taken the benefit of amnesties, who occupy civil po 
enrol the persons liable to the requisition and the vagabo 
of all countries. I have presented to the government 
picture of my position, and I am soliciting from it sucee 
of all kinds. ‘Till they arrive, I cannot strip myself of 
few troops I have, without perilling the public weal. T 
is not all: all the military administrations are crampe 
the want of funds. Four days after my arrival, the 
would have been without bread, had not I overstepped 1 oh 
powers, and insisted on emptying all the chests, taking upon 
myself personal pr i ) joe 
The agents-in-chief of the victualling section, of milita 
transports, of forage, of hospitals, &c., are with the army, 
and take no heed of this division, with the supply of which 
they are charged. The pay of the different corps was several — 
months in arrear. Such is the state of the division, the 
command of which has, for my sins, been committed to me. 
I dare say that this picture, equally true and alarming, has _ 
been kept out of your sight. You are gaining victories’ 
over the foreign enemy; I congratulate you uponthem with —__ 
all my heart ; but this is not sufficient for the happiness of = 
the country: you must ensure order and tranquillity at = 
home, and you will then have all the kinds of gloryte which = 
a republican hero ought to aspire. See what you can do 
to assist us. Health and fraternity ! nie 
. The General of Division, — 
WILLOT. = 


Nae | 


Poieg 

! 

Head-quarters, Bassano, 23 Fructidor, year 4 [September 9, 1796]. _ 
You are aware, general, how brilliant the conduct of the 
4th demi-brigade of infantry of the line has always been: <g 
you witnessed its exploits in the actions of the 21st and 22nd i>: 
of this month. That intrepidity which characterizes it is + 


To General Bonaparte. 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 343 


at owing to the example of the brave officers who com- 
mand it; among these the following have particularly dis- 
tinguished themselves, and I solicit for them well-merited 
promotion. 

I solicit the rank of general of brigade for the chief of 
brigade Lannes, who in this army as in that of the Eastern 
Pyrenees has never ceased to exhibit the most signal proofs 
of valour, and who in the last affair took two colours from 
the enemy ; : 

That of chief of brigade, commanding the 4th demi-bri- 
gade, for the chief of battalion, brother of that officer: he 
has rendered the most important services, and combines the 
most useful talents with the greatest courage. He was 
wounded in the battle of Ceva, and again yesterday: this 
misfortune, which gives him a claim to the public > 
will not prevent him from appearing again in a short time 
at the head of his brave comrades. 

Lastly, [desire that citizens Cassan and -Gros, captains 
of Hamers equally commendable. for their bravery, their 
zeal, and their morality, be promoted to the rank of chiefs 
. of battalion. 

I hope, general, that you will be pleased to transmit these 
applications to the Executive Directory, on whose justice I 
rely in this matter, as much as upon yours. 

AUGEREAU. 


To General Bonaparte. 


Head-quarters, Guisenfeld, 23 Fructidor, year 4 (September 9, 1796). 

I have received, citizen-general, your letter of the 14th of 
this month. I was ready to attempt the attack of the gorges 
of the Tyrol; the Lech and the Iser were forced, which gave 
us excellent debouchés upon Inspruck ; but the army of the 
Sambre and Meuse, having almost reached Ratisbon, has 
been repulsed successively to Bamberg — it is even said to 
Wurtzburg: which obliges me to change my direction. The 
enemy, who has not been able to withstand us at this point, 
ae the field only by strong parties of cavalry on our 
flanks and our rear, which sometimes — us. 

I dare not commit to paper my present plan, apprehensive 
lest this courier should fall into the hands of the enemy : 
as soon as it is determined upon, I will communicate it to 
you. 


‘sincerely that more favourable circumstances may 


344 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES: 


Our advanced posts oceupy Neuburg and Neuste 
army is encamped at Guisenfeld; Ferino’s corps occu 
Mosburg, Franken, and Munich ; the right is at the sour 
of the Lech towards Kempten and Schongau. r Iw 


me to second your operations. sade inne 
The General-in-Chief of the Army of the Rhine, 
‘ Mo 


PS. General Reynier sends you, in a few words in cip! 
what we are going to do. i 

—— re 
To General Bonaparte. 


; 26 Fructidor, year 4 [September 12, 1796] 
We had proceeded, aecording to your instructions, te 
bridge of Castellara on the 25th Fructidor ; the length 
the march prevented our arrival before eight or nine in 
evening. We had found at Bigarello about 60 hussa x 
the garrison of Mantua, whom we pursued, but in vain: we 
had but one horse. he a. 
No sooner had we made our first establishments on the 
Molinella, about three or four hundred fathoms in advance 
of Castellara on the Porto-Legnago road, when the advanced _ 
— of Wurmeer arrived from the opposite direction. A 


x 


ew musket shots of our advanced sentinels and the tramp — 
of horses made us believe so; the signal of the cannon fired 
at Mantua on the return of the hussars into that place,and 
several times repeated, left us no doubt. Joy at stopping ie 
Wurmser gave new strength to our weary soldiers, and the 
destruction of the brick bridge and the making of fortifi- 
cations to mask the avenues were accomplished with enthu- 
siasm by the army of Italy. at 
During our march, on arriving at Bigarello, we had left 
General Pelletier with 600 men at the point where the road 
which our column had followed joins the high road from = 
Mantua to Castellara: by abattis which were ordered about 
a thousand toises farther on, towards Mantua, and by _ 
breaking down two bridges, he was to cover us from all 
possible efforts of the garrison : we had moreover left about 
two miles in rear, at the Due Castelli, 200 men, who 
were to break up the roads and to destroy the bridges in the 
direction of Mantua. = 
All that we now had to do was to cover ourselves against 


A edad) - 2 
oan zi 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 345 


Wurmser: we sent to break down the bridge of Sorgate, 
over the Tione, about 1500 toises from Castellara, which 
bridge is situated on a high road, which comes from No- 
gara and at the distance of about two miles leads to Cas- 
tellara. 

All our men were engaged in these occupations, which 
were most urgent, when a patrole, sent off in the morning 
of the 26th by this bridge of Sorgate, informed us that it 
had been to a great distance, without finding any Austrian 
post; and even ten chasseurs, who had been despatched 
towards Villa Impenta, assured us that they had seen a 
great number of Hulans. In their report, they confounded 
the three rivers which are on that side; we, nevertheless, 
marched off 200 men whom we meant to send to the bridge 
of Villa Impenta, in order to afford ourselves the means of 
slipping to our right : the 200 men returned before they had 
gone a quarter of a league. The movement of Wurmser 
was then clear. 

We had endeavoured to collect all possible information 
hs ane: the road from Villa Impenta to Roneo-Ferraro, 
and we still suspected there was a debouché for an Austrian 
army there: we resolved mene Ns 3 to reconnoitre Ronco- 
Ferraro; we had yet but glimpses of projects. Some chas- 
seurs started, and, to avoid the loss of time between the 
report of the scouts and the orders to be given for turnin 
them to the best possible account, we pushed forward with 
the utmost despatch 80 men of the ateranisod guard upon 
that road. A quarter of an hour afterwards, when another 
detachment of 100 men was about to push forward to sup- 
port or follow them, our chasseurs returned at a gallop upon 
the road; and our 80 men came back in haste and in dis- 
order through the fields and the lateral vineyards. 

There is a second road, which parts from the Castellara 
road at the bridge of La Molinella, about 250 toises from 
the road of which I have been speaking, towards our left — 
in the position which we were now obliged to take— and 
which runs and branches off towards the right hand road, 
about 2000 fathoms further. We soon learned that our 
little post pushed forward on this road, fell back also in dis- 
order. - Our enemies, masters of the angle of the two roads, 
advanced upon us by both routes; they had filled the inter- 
mediate ground with tirailleurs, and a fire of small arms 
commenced on all sides. 


7... 


346 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


Our troops were scattered: several detachments were 
occupied in covering the working parties at the different and 
very distant bridges. The 200 men at the bridge of La 
Molinella were not disposable; 500 were still at Bigarello, 
200 at the Due Castell. If the enemy were to pass by 
one of these roads, he would cut our line, but the confidence 
and the courage of the troops did not allow us to be for a 
moment uneasy respecting our position. 

We collected the troops that we had left. St. Hilaire 
pushed forward by the left hand road. Beaumont en- 
deavoured to make his way over the broken ground in the 
centre, and Charton proceeded along the right hand road, 
but with so few men that each of them had really nothing 
but tirailleurs. I learned in a moment that Charton had been 
killed by a discharge of grape. I ordered Beaumont, who 
was proceeding to this right hand road to cheer the troops 
whom the ravage of the grape-shot had daunted, to be called 
back. One piece of light artillery was taken to each of the 
roads, and a great number of horses of the enemy’s cuirassiers 
were killed. They fell back: our troops then advanced, but 
presently it was their turn to fall back. There were several 
such alternations from three in the afternoon, when the action 
commenced, to seven in the evening. I sent successively 
reinforcements of twenty-five or thirty men on either side, 
in proportion as the return of detachments strengthened 
my reserve. 

Thus Wurmser appeared to be kept in check by our 
advanced posts, which were supported: the enemy must 
have supposed that we were in foree in the village. General 
Kilmaine’s colunm, which arrived at ten o'clock. the pre- 
ceding night and started in the morning according to fresh 
orders, must have misled the enemy ; he imagined that we 
were 10,000 men, as I was told; the truth is that the 
troops opposed to him were under 1000. . 

But it was not without loss that our brave fellows thus 
baffled Wurmser, reinforeed by part of the garrison of 
Mantua: we had at least 300 men killed or wounded, in- 
cluding those of the 12th demi-brigade of light infantry, 
with the chief of brigade Dugoulot at their head. He was 
ordered with 250 men to throw himself upon the right flank 
of the enemy’s cavalry; this detachment ventured impru- 
dently into a plain, of which Dugoulot, wounded, was no 
longer master: it would have charged the squadrons of the 


be 


ae oS aes 


7 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 347 


cuirassiers which were there, but it was erushed by that 
cavalry. All that were not killed are prisoners; and I 
hope Dragons is among the number. 

On the other hand, the ground which the enemy occu- 
pied is strewed with carcases of men and horses. We have 
taken but eight prisoners: forty chasseurs whom I had 
could not pursue the enemy when he retreated. 

General Kilmaine, who arrived at nine in the evening, 
gave me fifty horse, who pushed on for three or four miles, 
that is to say to Ronco-Ferraro, before which the enemy 
bivouacked. 

I received at the same hour a letter from Murat, in- 
forming me of the arrival of the advanced guard of our army 
at Nogaro; and I immediately apprized him that I should 
return to my post agreeably to your instructions. It was 
agreed with General Kilmaine that he should endeavour to 
retain for our army the passage by Castellaro, or the enemy 
_ come and occupy my position, for the purpose of 
defending it against our army which was coming in pursuit 
of him. I set out at ten in the evening, and arrived at 
Goito, bringing all back in the best order. 

It is not without reason that I have every where said we 
instead of Z. All the measures that I took were assented 
to or dictated by Generals Beaumont and St. Hilaire, by 
the brave Charton before his death, and by the brave and 
honest Abbé, whom I charged from the commencement with 
all the details of the division, who escaped twenty times the 
grape of the right and of the left, and who is, as I am told, 
a lieutenant in I know not what demi-brigade. 

Motdier, chief of battalion of engineers; N...., quarter- 
master of the 1st regiment of light artillery, who commanded 
the howitzer on the left and had six horses killed by the 
grape-shot ; N...., chief of battalion of the 19th infantry ; 
the thousand men who were in the fight, whose names I 
should be glad to know, have all done wonders. 

I beg your permission to keep with me Razout, Charton’s 
aide-de-camp, and Gardeur, formerly aide-de-camp of General 
Causse, who have rendered the greatest services. I am 
obliged also to name to you Croisier and Cabanes, both cap- 
tains in the 25th chasseurs, who have executed the recon- 
naissances with which I charged them with the utmost pos- 
sible intelligence. SAHUGUET. 


348 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


To the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 


Head-quarters, Porto Legnago, 
27 Fructidor, year 4 [September 13, 1796). 
During the ever active and uninterrupted campaigns of 
four years, I have been struggling with the inconveniences 
ofa shattered constitution. I did hope that  palliatives 
would bring me to the moment when ips would permit me 
to think of repose: the fatigues of the last march have 
overthrown that hope, and I find myself assailed by so many 


complaints at once that I am compelled to renounce for a 


time the continuance of my service. The piles cbsolutely 
forbid riding ; almost universal rheumatic pains, and my 
chest, which has been long affected, have thrown me into a 
state that is almost intolerable. It is painful for me thus 
to leave the work of war incomplete at the moment when it 
is terminating, but it is consolatory to my heart to have 
worn out my faculties, ruined my health, destroyed my con- 
stitution, in serving my country. Nobody has served it 
with greater zeal, or has with greater regret found himself 
compelled to suspend his labours. I hope, general, that 
you are plore 9 of all this. 

I leave the command of the division to the general of 
brigade Bon ; but I engage to send you an officer who will 
have your confidence. That general of brigade who would 
be qualified to command it is of the shortest standing, and 
that would not do. 

I am going to Brescia or Milan, whence, if I can recruit 
myself, I will return and resume my functions as soon as. 
possible. 

AUGEREAU. 


To General Bonaparte. 


Trent, lst complementary day, year 4 [September 17, 1796]. 

I have been at Trent, my dear general, for these two 
hours, and shall return to my post immediately. We have 
repulsed the enemy this morning, and taken a hundred and 
odd prisoners. ‘This little affair over, I am come to Trent 
to make the council, heretofore aulic, take the oath authen- | 
tically. 

By the 7th article of the order which you have left at 
Trent, one Lingui Cheluzzi, a Tuscan, finds himself in the 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 349 


redicament to be obliged to quit Trent in twenty-four 

ours. He appears to be regretted by the municipality and 
by the inhabitants; but he calls the council, or part of the 
council, raseals; is he right? I know nothing about it. 

It has appeared to me that the best understanding does 
not prevail between the council and the municipality. I 
have ordered the commandant of the place to watch the 
conduct of both narrowly, in order to discover in which 
confidence may be put. \ will acquaint you with all that 
I discover. 1 cannot help following the 7th article of your 
order; but if Lingui Cheluzzi, whom you are acquainted 
with, deserves an exception, you will be pleased to let me 
know. 

V AUBOIS, 


To General Bonaparte. 


Paris, 3rd complementary day, year 4 [September 19, 1796]. 
We awaited, my dear general, with an impatience which 
you may easily imagine, the result of the action for which 
ou had prepared us by your preceding courier. We have 
just received your last accounts, and, though accustomed to 
the most extraordinary things on your part, our hopes have 
been surpassed by the victory of Bassano. What glory 
for you, immortal Bonaparte! What a blow for proud 
Austria! She would not raise her head after it, if all our 
armies were as successful as that of Italy; but the mise- 
rable retreat of Jourdan disconcerts all our plans. The 
army of the Rhine and Moselle, which was going to give 
you the hand, has found itself compromised, ye J cut off, 
obliged to fall back precipitately to defend its flank, and it 
will require all the skill of Moreau to get it out of the 
scrape. However, Beurnonville, who succeeds Jourdan, is 
coming with a considerable reinforcement; he is about to 
resume the offensive, and I hope that the end of all this 

will be the general diseomfiture of Prince Charles's army. 
From this nothing less will result than that we shall be 
deprived of the resources of Bavaria, that your left is no 
longer supported, that we shall have great difficulty to send 
ou suecours equivalent to the column that should have 
Joined you by way of Inspruck. It is in your energy then 
that we shall find new means. Push on to Trieste, if you 
think that your right is safe, and are easy about your rear ; 


350 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES: 


raise heavy contributions in the Friule, and threaten the 
—— with the destruction of his only port if he does not 
make haste to accept peace: but it must come to that if he 
is obstinate. Recollect that, as soon as winter-quarters are 
taken on the Rhine, he will have a great disposable force, 
which he will not fail to employ against you, and that this: 
is one reason for not involving ast 9 without being 
certain of the gorges of the Tyrol. 
Carnot. 


To His Majesty the King of Sardinia. 


Head-quarters, Milan, 

. 5th complementary day, year 4 [September 21, 1796]. 

The officers appointed by your Majesty to command in 
the part of your dominions that has been restored to you ) 
view, if not with pleasure, at least with indifference, the ; 
murders and robberies committed against the French. 4 

By the treaty of peace concluded between your Majesty 
and the French Republic, the Republic was to continue to : 
oceupy that part of the territories which had been given u 
to the army = the treaty of armistice. _ Conceiving that 
should do something agreeable to your Majesty, I restored 
to you not only the civil government but also the military 

overnment, with the special clause that the roads should 
guarded, and that even our convoys should be escorted 
by your troops. 

I therefore request that your Majesty will be pleased 
to order a corps of respectable troops to be kept in the vil- 
lages of Limon and Limonais, which should send out ‘ 
patroles as far as Lacas, escorting convoys, and taking all 
necessary measures for making that road safe, as well as 
Vadier, and generally in all the districts bordering on De- 
mont, forming the communication between Coni and Bar- 
celonetta. 

I likewise request of your Majesty that the five persons 
who have been apprehended at Borgo-San-Dalmazzo by 
the French, may be delivered into the hands of the military 
commandant at Coni. 

I beg of you also to give orders to your different gover- 
nors to exert themselves heartily for the apprehension of 

~ the banditti wherevér they are found. 
Independently of the interest of humanity and justice, 


| 


t 


‘LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 351 


your Majesty will give, by this conduct, a proof of your 
sincerity, and contribute to extinguish those germs of dis- 
cord, ss tie would ultimately spread into the heart of your 
Majesty’s territories. 

BonaPArTE. 


To the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the King of Sardinia. 


Head-quarters, Milan, 
5th complementary day, year 4 [September 21,1796]. 

I am no diplomatist, sir, I am a soldier: you will for- 

give my frankness. In different parts of his Majesty’s 

ominions, the French are murdered, robbed. By the 
treaty of peace, the king, who is bound to grant us a pas- 
sage through his territories, ought to make it safe for us ; 
and it is to this end alone that, contrary to the tenour of 
the treaty of peace, I have taken it upon myself to restore 
to his Majesty not only the civil government but likewise 
the military government in that part of his dominions 
which has been restored to him by the Republic. At Viné, 
at Limon, before the face of the garrison of Demont, and 
that of the corps of troops commanded by M. Fanchar at 
Borgo-San-Dalmazzo, outrages are daily committed which 
appear to be not merely tolerated but even encouraged by 
the government. 

I shall therefore request of you a simple explanation. 

1. Ought not the king to be expected to indemnify and 
make good the losses sustained in consequence of crimes 
committed in his territories against the French, when those 
crimes are committed in broad day, and by paid bodies of 
two or three hundred persons? 

2. Is the king, with 25,000 men whom he has under 
arms, strong enough to quell banditti in his dominions and 
to enforce respect for the laws of justice, of humanity, and | 
of treaties ? 

People judge of men, sir, by their actions alone: the in- 
fegrity of the king is universally known ; yet one is almost 
forced to think that there are political reasons which cause 
atrocities so revolting to be encouraged or at least tolerated. 

I have written to his Majesty himself; I request you to 
present. my letter to him. The French government will 
never do any thing openly or secretly tending to destroy or 
to weaken the effect of the king’s government upon his 


ae. eee 


352 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


subjects ; you are aware, nevertheless, that this would be not 
less easy ‘than successful. The very day that you sincerely 
set about destroying the banditti who infest our communi- 
cation between Coni and Barcelonetta, they will cease to 
exist. I beg you to believe me, &c. BONAPARTE. - 


To General Bonaparte. 
Head-quarters, Pavia, 
5th complementary day, year 4 [September 21, 1796]. 

Lam writing you to- eg a military and a political letter. 

I have made the council of Trent take the oath; it has 
done so with a good grace; and received it from the other 
subordinate authorities. There is a strongly marked and 
malignant division between the inhabitants, and it cannot 
but. a d to public disturbances. Who is right? who is 
wrong? This is what I cannot yet form any sound judg- 
ment upon. The podesta, gearing whom I wrote to 

ou, sides with the municipality ; but he is obliged to leave 

rent: I await your answer on that subject. He has a 
great many partisans among the people; that tells in re 

avour. ; 

The council has for one of its members a certain count, 
whom I somewhat mistrust: but there are other memberss 
and one in particular, who are reputed to have been fond 
of our revolution ever since its birth: all these members 
were, nevertheless, nominated by the prince-bishop, and the 
municipality by the people. 

One observation has been made to me by divers inhabitants, 
whom I believe to be well disposed: they see with pain 
that the council has no authority above it: they dread 
tyranny, and are apprehensive that the spirit of party will 
direct their determinations, 

They would wish you to nominate three persons who 
have your confidence, of whose way of rep you are 
sure, and who will attend to their business. mit their 
wishes to you. V AUBOIS. 


To the General-in- Chief. 


Rome, | Vendemiaire, year 5 [September 22, 1796]. 
I have the honour to send (he annexed a copy of the 
letter which I transmitted yesterday to the secretary of state. 


i 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 353 


Some pees doubt the authenticity of the letter of the 
King of Naples to the pope, a copy of which I sent you; 
however, it is not formally contradicted. I am left here 
without any person to write to me, or to give me any hint 
about it. I should be glad to have a word from you. 

It seems to me that the pope cannot get out of trouble 
without sending a cardi ambassador to Paris to sign 
everything. He is very loth to come to this determina- 
tion. 

If the 2,000,000 which were despatched hence three 
weeks ago have not arrived at Imola or Bologna, their pro- 
gress must have been delayed. 

I beg you, citizen-general-in-chief, to accept my attach- 


cee CACAULT. 


PS. I have this moment received the accompanying 
bulletin, which reports a movement of Neapolitan troops 
that have already arrived at Ripatransone, in the ecclesias- 
tical territory, marching towards Ancona. I cannot think 
that at this moment the government of Venice dare enter 
into a league with the emperor, the pope, and the King of 
Naples; yet that is what people talk of. The fools call 
this league “ the last resource of Italy.” 

I have sent to ask the pope’s secretary for foreign affairs’ 
whether he had received any intelligence of this movement 
of the Neapolitans, as he cannot fail to have done, if it is 
true. The answer this moment aril new on that 
subject. Perhaps accounts may be received by and by. 


To General Bonaparte. 


Verona, 1 Vendemiaire, year 5 (September 22, 1796). 

It is a long time, general, since I had the honour to 
write to you concerning the very suspicious conduct of the 
cabinet of Turin towards the French mk mar I dare say 
that at this moment you are thoroughly informed of the 
maneuvres of that cabinet, and of the real aim proposed to 
themselves by the ministers of Vienna and England re- 
siding at Turin. 

The circumstances daily occurring are so many motives 
for leading one to presume that this king will not keep the 
peace any longer than the force which has compelled him 

¥OU;-1. AA 


354 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


to make it shall exist. Here are some of them extracted 
from the report dated the 30th Fructidor last. 

The club of the aristocrats meeting at Turin in the house 
of Sales is still conspiring inst our patriots and the 
invincible army of Italy. In Piedmont there has been or- 
ganized a Vendée of 1600 men, half in the valley of Aosta, 
and half on the Col de Tende. Their principal object is to 
slaughter our brave brothers in arms in detail. For some 
days past, they have been murdering all who pass, and the 
assassins have the temerity to come to Turin to sell the 
arms and clothes of the unfortunate victims. 

The chiefs of these banditti are the Marquis Caluso and 
M. Genosio, a clerk in the great Tobacco office. The ban- 
ditti are paid by the king at the rate of 20 sous Fe day. 
To arm these scoundrels, stores have been taken from the 
royal arsenals, and in no small quantity. 

Four companies of free chasseurs of the night patrol have 
been dissolved for the purpose of being incorporated in this: 
band. Letters have been sent all over the country de- 
claring that all the French are infected with the plague and 
ought to be put to death; otherwise Piedmont will be 
ruined. These letters were despatched by the club at the 
time of the last affair which the French had with the Aus- 
trians. The Duke de Chablais said on this occasion: “ If 
the French have been successful this time, they will not be 
so a second.” 

Not an emigrant has yet left Piedmont, and they inso- 
lently wear there all the devices of royalty. Giraud, Cheva- 
lier Rousset, Rotondo, and several others, imprisoned for 
their political opinions, are still languishing in fetters. 

The Austrian prisoners, whom the French send through 
Piedmont on their way to France, are seduced by agents 
paid by the government, who conceal them from the French 
escort, and then send them to the Swiss regiments in the 
pay of the tyrant. Pico. 


To the General-in- Chief. 


Verona, 1 Vendemiaire, year 5 [September 22, 1796]. 
Till now, nobody has been stirring to pick up information 
towards the Friule: I have placed a man at Udine to give 


us intelligence of the movements of the enemy. 


1 A Piedmontese, employed as a secret agent. 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 355 


The man whom I sent to Mantua entered the place, and 
reports to me that the whole of the enemy’s troops in that 
quarter amount to 15,000 infantry and 6500 cavalry, of 
whom 6 or 7000 are sick. There are four military hos- 
pitals: one in the convent of Santa Barbara, near the gate 
of St. George’; another at Santo Spirito, a convent of re- 
formed ; a third at Santa Catarina—last two near the Ceresa 
gate; the fourth and last at Santo Barnaba, near the Pus- 
terla gate. 

There are three hay-magazines : one in the palace of the 
Marquis Lanzoni; a second in the Domismondi palace— 
both situated in the street of Santo Christophoro ; and the 
third, which is the largest, at la Trinita, nearly in the 
centre of the city. These magazines are almost empty ; 
forage is expected to arrive by the Po, and they will en- 
deavour to introduce it by the Ceresa gate. At St. Gervais, 
in the Gonzaga palace, near the Molina gate, there is a 
magazine of oats tolerably well provided. 

There are also two powder-magazines in the city: one is 
in the church of Santo Sebastiano, near the Pusterla gate, 
and the other in the church of Santo Nicolo, between the 
Ceresa gate and the Catena gate. The latter is the more 
considerable. 

It has been observed to me that the post of Rivalta, by 
which the spies coming from the Tyrol introduce themselves - 
into Mantua, ought to be guarded. 

Pico. 


To General Bonaparte. 


Verona, 2 Vendemiaire, year 5 [September 23, 1796]. 

I inform you, citizen-general, that, in the evening of the 
day before yesterday, the 2000 men who were at Pordenone 
arrived at Sacile. A corps of 200 infantry and 100 cavalry 
has also arrived at Porto Buffole, and a third detachment 
has proceeded to Molta. 

Pico. 


To General Bonaparte. 


Verona, 3 Vendemiaire, year 5 [September 24, 1796]. _ 

The enemy have advanced from Sacile to Treviso: from 

that place they sent two corps, one to Castel Franco, 
AA2 


356 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES, 


! which has sent patroles to Citadella and to the environs of 
F Bassano ; the other to Novale, which has detached patroles 
to Padua and the environs. 

I am assured that the whole army of 23,000 men, which 
is to keep on the defensive on the side towards Trieste, has 
received orders to act in concert with that which is in the - 
environs of Bolzano, and which may be about 12,000 strong. 
The first is commanded by General Colli, the second by 
General Loudon. 

One Nicolino, an innkeeper in Brescia, who has a brother 
in the Berchini hussars, has written to me, applying for pay- 
ment of, Istly, 490 franes in money, axponbath by your order 
for secret correspondence in that quarter, a note of which 
I sent you some time since; 2ndly, 12 sequins, which he 
says he laid out at the time of the discovery, ten or twelve 
days ago, of the pharmacie of the Austrians, which was 
concealed in the custom-house of Brescia. 


—_ 2. 


__.  ¢s 


Pico. 


To General Bonaparte. : 


Rome, 3 Vendemiaire, year 5 [September 24, 1796), 

The reply of the commissioner Salicetti, who sends me 
word that, all things considered, he thinks that the com- 
missioners of the arts had better return to Florence, deter- 
mined them to set out yesterday evening. I have written 
to the cardinal secretary of state to apprise him that the > 
commissioners were going to make an excursion in Tuscany, & 
which would be no detriment whatever to the operations 4 
agreed on for the armistice. I send you herewith the an- 
swer made me by Cardinal Busca in sending their passport, 
and his reply to my preceding notes. 

I called upon him this morning to have a fuller verbal 
explanation with him. This Milanese cardinal, having his 
fortune at Milan, is imbued, it is true, with the spirit that 
animates the congregations and the pope, but he is aware 
that he must keep terms with us: hence I have no reason 
but to speak well of him at present. The result of our a 
conversation is, that the Roman and papal government, 
which, in fact, is preserved as much as possible by the pro- 
posed treaty, seems to his holiness and to all the cardinals 
to be destroyed and annihilated, if they accept such con- 
ditions, Accordingly, the court of Rome is determined, 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 357 


without hope of return, to persist in the refusal to sign, 
notified at Florence by M. Caleppi. 

As it is asserted here that the Directory has notified to 
M. Pieracchi that, if the pope did not sign the conditions, 
every thing would be upon a war footing again, the govern- 
ment is directing its whole attention to defensive measures, 
seeking to arm a great number of men and to make 
alliances. 

It is alleged to be too clear and too manifest that France 
must treat this country in a hostile manner, otherwise the 
pope will, in spite of the armistice, refuse to deliver the pro- 
mised contributions. In consequence, the cardinal secre- 
tary of state has signified to me verbally that the execution 
of the armistice, in so far as relates to the delivery of the 
Ae eS of art and of the contributions, was suspended; 

ut that, for the rest, one may be sure that the pope will 
not break the treaty by any hostility. 

I have yeiseivot dark enough that he was ready to 
notify to me in writing this suspension of the execution of 
the armistice and its motives, hoping that in consequence I 
should decide upon retiring to Florence, until the definitive 
solution of the difficulties. 

Notwithstanding the sternness of my behaviour, which, 
in reality, cannot give rise to any suspicion of understand- 
ing with what is here called our party, and which I am not 
acquainted with, our enemies, who can find nothing else to 
allege against me, are alarmed at the danger of my stay at 
Rome, as if I were a person to excite disturbances, like a 
harebrained enthusiast. Hence, out of stupidity, and not 
to be annoyed by the sight of any Frenchman here, the 
pope and his ministers would be glad to see me set. off. 

he cattle, selected by the commissioners for rsa 
the breeds in France, yet remain to be sent off: they wil 
start to-morrow for Bologna. 

Though I know full well and officially that the produc- 
tions of art will not be despatched, I shall let the ecommis- 
sioners, whose labours are not yet interrupted, proceed with 
packing the statues in cases, and with the construction of - 
carriages for transporting them; and, without contrary 
orders, I shall remain as long as I can to observe Naples 
and this country, but it cannot be for any long time. I see 
no hope of inducing the pope to sign the proposed treaty, 
or even to negociate with submission for the mitigation of 


358 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


certain articles: he is so dragooned that he is really to be 

itied. 
4 The secretary of state assured me that he had no intel- 
ligence that the Neapolitan troops had advanced into the 
Ecclesiastical State, that he was merely informed of the 
army of Naples, which is on the frontier. ’ 

It is true that the court of Naples has ordered a decla- 
ration to be made here, that the negociation with the French 
Republic forbade it to engage at the present moment against 
it. That court is sending to Rome the Marquis del Vasto, 
grand-master of the king’s household, to make proposals for 
treating. He is expected every moment. 

The exasperation of minds in all the tyrannies and aris- 
tocracies of Italy against our power, dominant and extorting 
in proportion, renders it necessary to have forces decisive 
and to be relied on. More than 16,000,000 inhabitants 
might rise at once against us; it is this that is contem- 


_ plated—it is this that is hoped. 


I delivered to the commissioners, on their departure for 
Florence, all the very detailed maps of the kingdom of 
Naples as yet engraved from Zanoni’s surveys. This col- 
lection they will forward to you from Florence as soon as 
possible. 

CACAULT. 


PS. They are raising a great outery here on account of 
the ransom demanded for Cardinal Mattei. 


The Executive Directory to the General-in-Chief Bonaparte, 
commanding the Army of Italy. 


Paris, 4th complementary day, year 4 [September 20, 1796]. 

The army which you command, citizen-general, has 
completely justified our hopes in the course of this cam- 
paign ; but it seems to have surpassed them by the new 
successes which you have reported to us. The result of the 
actions of the 21st and the 22d Fructidor is as glorious as it 
is unparalleled, and, if Wurmser should even contrive to 
escape from your pursuit with his wretched wrecks, which 
is not probable, we must consider the discomfiture of his 
army as entire, and the conquest of Italy-as irrevocable. 

Let the republican army, citizen-general, enjoy the prize 
that is justly reserved for it by the public gratitude and 


— 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 359 


esteem, after such signal triumphs: express to it our par- 
ticular satisfaction; and accept yourself the astoeeehed 
part of it which is your due. 

. Among the measures which we have adopted for the pur- 
pose of following up our advantages, and rendering them 
decisive in favour of the Republic, whose interests all tend 
to peace, the first is, to signify to the emperor, that, unless 
he consents to send immediately to Paris an envoy fur- 
nished with powers to enter into negociation, you will de- 
stroy his port of Trieste and all his establishments on the 
Adriatic g . As soon as the fate of Wurmser and his 
last division is decided, you will send a despatch to Vienna 
to make this notification, and you will march upon Trieste, 
ready to execute a threat, justified by the laws of war and 
the obstinacy of a haughty house, which dares attempt 
every thing against the Republic, and sports with its 
sincerity. 

During this movement you will continue to effect the 
dispersion of the remnant of the Austrians scattered in the 
Tyrol; you will establish a safe communication between 
the army of the Rhine and Moselle; and you will impose 
heavy contributions wherever the French arms penetrate. 

It is to be presumed that, when you are at a distance 
from the Milanese, such of the inhabitants of the interior 
of Italy as are ill-affected towards us will seize the oppor- 
tunity to foment new revolts. Repress beforehand the ex- 
plosion of their perfidious designs, by giving the generals, 
to whom you commit the safety of the troops and of the 
countries which they occupy, precise orders, and by speci- 
fying to them the salutary measures which they will have 
to take according to circumstances. 

As to the political situation of Italy, one principal ob- 
servation fixes our attention, and ought to direct your con-~ 
duct in regard to the different States or towns which may 
desire to give themselves a government, which is that peace, 
our highest wish, may depend on the lot of the Milanese, 
and that it behoves us to husband the means of exchange, 
in order to consolidate the union of certain parts of the 
territory of the Republic. It is, therefore, essential not to 
favour indiscreetly political innovations detrimental to the 
conclusion of peace and to the corroboration of our liberty. 

The moment appears to have at length arrived for aon 
tising Venice by the measures which we have already pre- 


360 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


scribed to you, and the execution of which a prudent caution 
has induced us to defer. Lay due stress on the legitimacy 
of your pretensions ; use conciliatory forms as far as they 
are capable of accomplishing your object ; and then, if it be 
necessary, let the means of victory follow proceedings con- 
formable to the neutrality which we wish to maintain with 
that State, after the just satisfaction that we have a right 
to require of it. 
L. M. ReEvEILLERE-LEP AUX, 
President. 


To the General-in- Chief Bonaparte. 


Paris, 4th complementary day, year 4 [September 20, 1796]. 

We approve, citizen-general, the a which you 
make us to accede to the wishes of the Milanese, which is 
desirous of forming battalions to be employed in the blockade 
of Mantua, since you find in it no inconveniences in a 
military point of view; but, in adopting this measure, it is 
essential to observe that our laws do not allew us to intro- 
duce foreign corps into our armies: so the battalions of the 
Milanese shall be considered as distinct troops from those 
of the Republic, and which have a common enemy to com- 
bat, though on this head nothing shall be stipulated with 
the Milanese. 

A consideration has been submitted to us, respecting 
which we wish to have your opinion. While you are pro- 
secuting the plan of operations, which we have chalked out 
in our first despatch of this day, is it not dangerous to leave 
the Piedmontese troops in superiority of force in Italy ; 
and would it not be advisable to induce the King of Sar- 
dinia, by the concession of some advantages, to send 15,000 
men to march in concert with the army which you com- 
mand ? 

We do not presume that the King of Sardinia will readily 
acquiesce in this proposal: whatever may be the acknow- 
ledged honour of the French nation, he will be afraid to 
strip his territories of troops, and ed deliver them 
up defenceless to his allies, whom perhaps he still dreads. 

Be this as it may, notwithstanding the inconveniences 
which we imagine that we can perceive, we authorize you to 
treat on this subject with the court of Turin, if you see any 
advantage in it, and to give it all the guarantees necessary 


als “ie oe i 


aw 


\ 
} 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 361 


for its safety. If this negociation comes to nothing, it will 
be very useful to make sure of the disarming of Piedmont, 
as it 5 i been stipulated in the treaty of peace, in order 
that you may not leave behind you any subject of uneasiness 
that might distract your movements. 

The same attention ought to be paid to the court of 
Naples: at the present moment we can only watch it and 
control it at.a distance. Our most important object is to 
strike at the house of Austria, and to march upon Trieste. 
Fix a short time for the answer of the court of Vienna to 
your declaration, in order not to lose time, which the ap- 
proach of the bad season renders more valuable. 

We have received from citizen Salicetti intelligence of 
happy augury for the success of our designs respecting 
Corsica. 

L. M. REvEILLERE-LEPAUX, 
President. - 


The Executive Directory to the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 


Paris, 4th complementary day, year 4 [September 20, 1796]. 

We have received, citizen-general, a remonstrance sent 
from Mondovi, the value of which you are much more 
capable of appreciating than we. The complaint is that, in 
spite of the amnesty, the Piedmontese patriots, who have 
declared in favour of France, are still persecuted by the 
Sardinian government, and among others by one Moschetti. 
It is alleged that the line of demarcation which determines 
the Piedmontese possessions that our troops are to occupy 
till the peace, is frequently broken, and that, ever since the 
month of Messidor, there have been Sardinian troops at 
Mondovi. Complaints are most especially made of the ex- 
treme licentiousness practised with impunity by our soldiers 
and by some of their officers in those parts of the con- 
quered countries in which they are distributed. It is 
added, that an inevitable consequence of this relaxation of 
discipline is, that the inhabitants, victims of the excesses 
of their conquerors, are continually murdering those on 
whom they cannot otherwise revenge themselves. Perhaps 
there may be exaggeration in these complaints ; but several 
particular fate vbewe already proved that they are not 
without foundation. The Directory, citizen-general, be- 
seeches you, therefore, to give all the orders necessary for 


362 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


putting a stop to these horrible acts of vengeance, and above 
all for preventing the cause of them. All the officers under 
your command ought to be worthy of the signal successes 
which you are continually obtaining over the enemy; and 
we know that you will not allow men who dishonour the 
Republic to remain in the army, when its triumphs, owing 
to your talents and its valour, so highly exalt its glory. 
L. M. REVEILLERE-LEPAUX, 
President. 


The Executive Directory to the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 


Paris, 4 Vendemiaire, year 5 [September 25, 1796]. 
We awaited with confidence, citizen-general, the tidings 
which you had announced to us by the courier. who pre- 
ceded him of the 30th Fructidor, and they were, in eet. 
very satisfactory, though the success which yn report to 
us was not so complete as we had a right to hope from the 
precision and the boldness of your dispositions. The defeat 
of Wurmser under the walls of Mantua has avenged the 
brave army of Italy for his escape from its pursuit at the 
passage of the Adige and the Brenta, and all that it has left 
to do to crown its glory is to bring that place under the 
power of the Republic, with the wrecks of the Austrian arm 
shut upin it. To accomplish this object, not only is it 
necessary not to leave any thing to chance, but the recent 
events that have occurred in Germany command us to set 
every thing at work to prevent the arrival of the troops 
which the Austrians might send to the relief of Mantua. 
How important soever may be the operation which we have 
ip upon Trieste, it is still more essential to consoli- 
ate the conquest of Italy by the reduction of the first of 
those two places, and we recommend to you to employ all 
your means to that end, with the boldness and activity 
which direct all your enterprises. Certainly, it were to be 
wished that your march upon Trieste could be effected at 
the same time, and it is to be feared that the season will not 
permit you to undertake it till Mantua has surrendered ; but 
we repeat that we think that we ought to sacrifice this 
advantage to the necessity of closing the door of Italy against 
the Austrian reinforcements, and remaining masters of it at 
the end of the campaign. 
We are fully persuaded that you feel all the force of our 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 363 


motives in not leaving any thing to the chances of fortune. 
Tt is in Italy that we must indemnify ourselves for our re- 
verses in Germany, and force the emperor to peace: it is, 
therefore, necessary to render our military position there 
impregnable. 
ithout analyzing here the causes of the checks in 
Germany, we shall merely inform you that the army of the 
Sambre and Meuse has successively abandoned the Bednitz, 
the Mayn, and the Lahn, and that it has fallen back, part 
upon Dusseldorf, part behind the Rhine. General Beurnon- 
ville, who had assumed the command, and reinforced it 
with a considerable corps from that of the North, announces 
that he is about to. move it forward, and we hope that he 
will march with sufficient celerity to prevent the greater 
art of the enemy’s forces from falling upon the army of the 
hine and Moselle, and obliging that to retreat too. In 
the contrary supposition, it is to be concluded that the 
enemy will afterwards march reinforcements into the Tyrol ; 
and it is this consideration which induces us to desire you 
to regard the reduction of Mantua as an object to which 
you ought to sacrifice at this moment every other operation. 

The dislike of the Germans to our troops, occasioned by 
indiscipline, and the consequences that have resulted from 
it, give us a new and a melancholy warning how fatal to the 
glory of an army is laxity in the exercise of military au- 
thority, from rank to rank, and how important it is to gain 
the inhabitants of the theatre of war by the maintenance of 
good order. 

But it is not enough for us to prevent their becoming our 
enemies ; we must render them such towards their old 
government, and sow the ‘seeds of insurrection even in the 
countries to which our armies have not yet penetrated. 
This observation applies particularly to Hungary, where 
political principles, deep-rooted among the higher and lower 
nobility and the different classes of the people, render the 
Austrian yoke more heavy. Circulate there, in the native 
language, proclamations the energy of which shall awaken 
the pride of the Hungarians and their ancient hatred of 
their oppressors. The fame of your successes and of French 
honour will beget a confidence in your promises, and per- 
haps excite in “hee a desire to reconquer their independence : 
the court of Vienna, at least, will be alarmed, and the re- 


364 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


sources of all kinds which it derives from that kingdom 
will diminish in proportion to its fears. 

We are going to receive with lively satisfaction the 
eolours which aide-de-camp Marmont has brought, and we pro- 
pose to grant to the brave men who have lately distinguished 
themselves the rewards which you have solicited for them. 
We request you to express to the army, and particularly to 
the general officers and others who have been wounded, the 
satisfaction which we have received from their devotedness. 

L. M. REVEILLERE-LEPAUX, 
President. 


The Executive Directory to the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 


Paris, 6 Vendemiaire, year 5 [September 26, 1796]. 

We think it useful to transmit to you, citizen-general, 
by an extraordinary courier, a letter which we have just 
received from the general-in-chief, Moreau: it will make 

ou acquainted with the position in which the army of the 

hine and Moselle is at this moment. We hope that 
it will maintain itself on the banks of the Danube till that 
of the Sambre and Meuse can resume the offensive, and, 
aided by the efforts which this latter will immediately make, 
it shall again advance to the banks of the Lech, and even 
to those of the Iser, for the purpose of taking its winter- 
quarters there. 

In this state of things we fear that the enemy, quitting 
the army of the Sambre and Meuse, may for a moment 
bring to bear some force against that of the Rhine and 
Moselle, in order to mask with the greater certainty a 
movement, the object of which would be to make a dash 
upon you with all the disposable troops, to oblige you to 
raise the siege of Mantua; and we think it useful to recom- 
mend to you to guard with care the debouchés of the Tyrol, 
at the same time levying in that country all the contribu- 
tions you can, till the bad season intercepts them and forbids 
any enterprise against you from that side. The attention 
of Austria is almost exclusively turned to Mantua. That 
city, which the court of Vienna considers as the last bulwark 
of Italy, contains the wrecks of General Wurmser’s army, 
and it is to be presumed that the emperor will make every 
effort to relieve it. 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES: 365 


Strive then, citizen-general, to finish this campaign in Italy 
with the reduction of that place, to which the fate of this 
peninsula is in some measure attached. Continue to cor- 
respond frequently with the general-in-chief Moreau, that 
the harmony of your movements may awe the enemies of the 
Republic, whom the conquest of Italy has astonished, and 
who will find themselves compelled to think seriously of - 
—— when they shall be certain that this country, de- 
ended by talent, courage, and strength, cannot be wrun 
from us, and that the brave army of Italy and its chief, 
who have conquered, leave them no hope of recovering it. 

The last sums sent to the army of the Alps were 
absorbed immediately, and part has been employed for 
absolutely indispensable expenses incurred for the con- 
duct of numerous prisoners of war taken by the army of 
Italy. 

iy is with regret that we inform you, citizen-general, that 
it is impossible for the national treasury to supply the 
irk wants of the army of the Alps; which the slight 
aid sent by you has not yet been able to place in a satisfac- 
tory situation. We recommend to you to consider this 
army as forming in some measure part of that which is 
under your orders, and we request you to provide for all its 
necessities, concerting with the general-in-chief who com- 
mands it. Your zeal is known to us, and we know that it 
is sufficient to point out to you the way to be useful to 
your country, to be persuaded that you will be eager to 
pursue it. 

L. M. REVEILLERE- LEPAUX, President. 


The Executive Directory to the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 


Paris, 8 Vendemiaire, year 5 [September 29, 1796]. 

Our commissioners with the army of Italy have reported 
to us, citizen-general, the refusal given on the part of the 
pope to accept the conditions of peace that we have sub- 
mitted to him. Our intention is not to modify them; 
but, as it is important to finish the campaign with the re- 
duction of Mantua, in order to dictate with the greater 
assurance laws in southern Italy, and it is useful meanwhile 
not to break the armistice which you have concluded, we 
are instructing our commissioners to prolong the negocia- 


366 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


tion till such time as we shall be able imperatively to com- 
mand peace to Rome or to overthrow its power. id 

General Beurnonville has made a movement in advance 
of the Sieg; Prince Charles is before him. The campaign 
is recommencing in that part of the theatre of war with 
hope of success, and General Moreau, who yee es him- 
self upon Ulm and Bregentz, likewise gives us hopes that 
he will maintain his ground in Suabia, till a decided offen- 
sive is re-established on the left of our line of operations. 
Some corps from the Tyrol have attempted to annoy his 
right flank and been repulsed. 

We are hastening the marching of a reinforcement of 
about 10,000 men, which we destine for you. Every day 
the conquest of Italy appears likely to turn the balance of 

olitical interests more and more in our favour; its conso- 

idation is involved in the taking of Mantua, and we give 

you all the means in our power for finishing the campaign 
with that decided advantage. 
L. M. REVEILLERE-LEPAUX. 


The Executive Directory to the General-in-Chief Bonaparte. 


Paris, 10 Vendemiaire, year 5 [October 1, 1796]. . 

You will find annexed, citizen-general, a decree relative 
to Wurmser: that hostile general, whom you have beaten 
so often, and who is very near his last defeat, in the place 
which you are besieging, falls under the laws of the Re- 
public relative to emigrants. We leave you to judge 
whether it is advisable to communicate to him this decree, 
in order to induce him to surrender Mantua, by exciting in 
him a dread of being sent to Paris and there tried as an 
emigrant, if he holds out to the last extremity, and by 
offering him an honourable capitulation if he consents to 
deliver up that place to you. It appears to us that this 
alternative must startle him; and whatever confidence we 
may have in the important operation in which you are 
engaged, we ought not to neglect any of the legitimate 
means which can be useful against an obstinate army ; but 
if you think, from a particular knowledge of the state of 
things, that this communication would produce a contrary 
effect and urge Wurmser to make a desperate defence, 
instead of suffering himself to be overcome by personal 


. 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 367 


fear, you will not make any use of the decree, and we rely 
upon the force of our arms and the talent which distin- 
guishes them to accelerate the taking of Mantua, to which 
we attach the highest value. 

L. M. ReveILLERE-LEPAUX. 


To General Bonaparte. 


Roverbello, 4 Vendemiaire, year 5 [September 25, 1796]. 

I learn this moment, general, that the enemy yesterday 
attacked Porto-Legnago: what is the result of that attack, 
and what the force of the enemy, I know not; neither do 
Generals Massena and Kilmaine. I immediately despatched 
fifty chasseurs of the 10th for Porto Legnago, by way of 
Castellara, Nogara, and Sangninaten. The officer com- 
manding this reconnaissance has orders to push on till he 
falls in with the enemy, or can inform me of his force and 
his position. 

General Kilmaine sends word that General Bon has 
marched upon Castellara with his division, and that he has 
orders to break down all the bridges across the Tanaro, 

I shall send out continual patroles upon Isola until I 
have received some intelligence. 

I see with pain, general, that prisoners continue to be 
escorted with culpable indifference and almost without pre- 
cautions. Yesterday, from 7 to 800 prisoners were com- 
mitted to the charge of eight dragoons, from the Due Castelli 
to Roverbello, and without one foot soldier. They were 
conducted yesterday to Peschiera by thirty horse chasseurs 
only, and without infantry: it is nevertheless high time to 
take precautions. I know from good a that a corps 
is forming entirely of deserters in the Val Trompia, and 
that every day, three or four boat-loads of these deserters 
are sent across Lake Iseo to increase the nucleus collecting 
in the Val Trompia. 

The corps descending from Padua is estimated at 10,000 
men. Some volunteers complained bitterly yesterday under 
my windows that the prisoners of whom this new army was 

rtly composed were suffered to escape: they nevertheless 

atter themselves that they shall beat them and see them 
better guarded in future. 


368 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES: 


I learn too from a letter written at Venice that a body 
of Hungarians has already arrived at Trieste. 

The inhabitants of Bergamo, out of gratitude for not 
having had a French garrison, have given an entertainment 
to the governor of the town, who has ordered a young man 
of Brescia, named Lechi, to leave Bergamo immediately, 
for having published in a coffee-house the news of your 
triumphs far from agreeable to the country, and treated 
there as a falsehood. 

You are no doubt aware that the prisoners who desert 
are favoured in the whole of the Bergamasco by the consti- 
tuted authorities. You are already informed of this; but I 
am too much attached to your glory and your person not to 
communicate to you every particular that I can pick up 
respecting the proceedings and the intentions of our 
enemies. 

Morar. 


To the General-in- Chief. 


Florence, 4 Vendemiaire, year 5 [September 25, 1796]. 

Garrau must have informed you, general, of the pope’s 
answer. He has refused to accept the conditions which the 
Executive Directory offered him through us. 

The successes which you have lately obtained are so 
splendid, that to me it appears impossible for the emperor 
to think of opposing an army to you in Italy: but Jourdan’s 
reverses in Germany, if as disastrous as they are reported 
to be, must throw the Executive Directory into great em- 
barrassment. 

The tidings from Corsica are good. The interior of the 
island cannot be more discontented than it is with the Eng- 
lish: it appears to be only waiting for the fit moment to 
break forth. Canzo, with twelve men of his own choosing, 
has landed on the island towards Ajaccio; a score more, 
from this side of the mountains, have landed on the beach 
of Ravague. Rocca Serra, Subrini, and two deputies sent 
to us from Sartenne, with thirty-six or forty refugees, were 
to set sail yesterday evening, if the weather were favour- 
able. General Gentili and Casalta, with 300 men, are only 
waiting for a fair wind to be off; and as soon as the 
movement has assumed the character which I am striving 
to give it, I will repair thither myself, unless you think 


ae . foe 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 369 


that my presence can be of any utility for the operations 
which you are about to undertake in Italy. 

The Directory has just written to me to put in requisi- 
tion all the hemp I can in Ferrara and Bologna, and to 
transmit it forthwith to Toulon. To this end four clerks 
in the Navy Office have arrived with instructions to acce- 
lerate the transport of the hemp, which I shall place at 
their disposal. T shall set out for Bologna to-morrow, and 
avail myself of this opportunity to organize at Ferrara an 
administration composed of natives of the country, capable 
of managing affairs ad interim. If you have anything to 
say to me meanwhile, I beg you to write to me at Bologna 
or Ferrara. | nS 

While I am engaged in superintending the collection of 
the hemp and giving a more regular march to the adminis- 
tration of this country, the embarkation of the Corsicans 
will be actively continued at Leghorn. Every preparation 
is already made there for their speedy departure. Every- 
thing leads me to believe that the depédition will be sue- 
cessful, especially as the English have embarked part of 
their troops at St. Florent, to reinforce the garrison of 
Gibraltar. ; 

At Leghorn there have been some movements during the 
last days, on account of a miracle performed by a Christ in 
a church. - General Serrurier must have given you an 
account of this affair: all is now quiet again. 

SALICETTI. 


To General Bonaparte. 


Venice, 7 Vendemiaire, year 5 (September 28, 1796). 
The enemy have retired from Treviso: their last ad- 
vanced posts, since six p.m. onthe 5th instant, are at 
Corrigliano.and Oderto on the river Montigan, and at 
Molto, which is at the conflux of the Montigan and the 
Livenza. In each of these villages there is a corps of 150. 
men, part cavalry. ie 
' Towards Trent, the enemy is advanced upon the right 
of that city; and I am assured some detachments have 
appeared at Sabio in the valley of Sabio. iy 
or these three or four days past, the city of Verona 
has been erowded with French, who give out that they are 
in the service of the Republic; though many of them. do 
VOL. I. BB 


i 6 ei Sl le > | |] =, 


370 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


not wear the cockade. Their conversation is not republi- 
ean, so that there is reason to suspect them to be royalists 
come from the interior or emigrants. 

Pico, 


To General Bonaparte. 
Fachiani Farm, in the Sarraglio, R 
8 Vendemiaire, year 5 [September 29, 1796]. 

I inform you, general, that our investment has been 
made in the best order and without loss. Wurmser has 
profited by the succours given him at St. George and at 
Governolo. From the faint resistance he has made, we 
may conclude that he has not precisely the garrison which 
he needs for the place. According to my calculations, he 
cannot have men enough, for I think he has 1200 fewer 
than on his arrival. 

Having traversed the Sarraglio in more than one direc- 
tion, I have perceived that it cannot be so unwholesome as 
it is reputed; the soil is every where dry, and there is no 
water but on the banks of the lake towards Mantua; what 
proves that it is an agreeable spot to live in, is the great 
number of handsome country-houses. I enter into these 
particulars, merely to intimate to you that we might form 
some establishments there. Nay, more, general: if you do 
not get a bridge thrown over the Po, for the passage of 
shear from the other side, in a month the roads by the 

ikes and by Formigosa will frequently expose your troops to 
the want of subsistence. Another consideration might be 
added, namely, that this would relieve the country about 
Verona, which has been occupied by armies during the 
whole campaign. The causeway from Ceresa to Borgo- 
Forte is very good ; it would therefore be requisite that the 
bridge should be within reach of that causeway. 

T have this instant received your letter of the 7th Ven- 
demiaire, in which you order me to cut and break down the 
dikes of Governolo. Those who suggested these ideas 
meant, no doubt, to say—destroy the taibes of Governolo : 
but it is thirty years since they were destroyed, and since 
the Po, when swollen, ascends without impediment to 
Mantua. 

As there are persons who think of making a Venice of 
Mantua, they ought to have proposed to you a very consi- 


y 
; 
: 
7 
zx 
; 
: 


he 


dna ee ee ee 


| 
| |e 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 371 


derable undertaking, but great in its results, namely, to bar 
the whole Mincio with a dike, having in its upper part the 
form of a mill-dam, that the water may never rise above 
the dikes, but always keep at that height. I shall revert 
to this subject when I have seen Governolo again; on a 
day of battle I cannot say more to you ; only be easy about 
Mantua: they are labouring very hard, and I am ‘oing to 
fortify all our positions by redoubts, which will take from 
the enemy all inclination to come to seek us. 
CHASSELOUP-LAUBAT, 


To the General-in-Chief. 


Rodiza, 8 Vendemiaire, year 5 [September 28, 1796]. 

I shall now answer the different articles of your letter. 

The cavalry, according to the arrangement which you 
— at Verona, is to be divided into three brigades ; 
the first is that of General Beaumont, the second that of 
General Murat, the third that of General Leclere. You 
will find annexed the statement of subdivision. Not a 
single musket has yet arrived from Cremona; but Lan- 
drieux has found 300 new ones at Raggiolo in a forsaken 
mansion, and sent me them. Iam arming with them 300 
of the 69th brigade, whom I am bringing from Cremona. 

I shall establish at San Benedetto the depot for conva- 
lescents, the formation of which you order: I think with 
you that this will be an excellent site. 

As we have no brandy and Cremona cannot furnish 
any more, I avail myself of that which is at Modena, and, 
in consequence, am giving orders to the commissary of war 
charged with the two divisions to get a quantity. 

I have agreed upon everything with General Lespinasse ; 
but, as we are in want of artillerymen and cannot supply 
it, I am taking gunners’ assistants from the battalions. 
This measure is of the strictest necessity. 

The enemy made a sortie yesterday morning, but with- 
out success: I send you a copy of General Chabot’s report 
on the subject. 

Our flotilla makes no progress: at the rate this goes on, 
we shall not have an armed boat on the lake in less than a 
fortnight : the enemy is armed in force at Mantua. 

Moreau’s last victory is a brilliant one, no doubt ; but 

BB2 


872 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


the victory of an army which nevertheless does not decam 
is of no great service to us, and my opinion is that we sha 
be obliged to reckon upon ourselves alone. If it were , 
possible to fall upon the enemy before they have collected 
their troops, what think you of that, general? You can 
dispose of 20,000 infantry and 2000 cavalry: a little revo- 
lutionary march would astonish them. Whatever you do, 
general, accept my most sincere wishes for your success and 


your glory. KILMAINE. 


PS. This moment, general, I have received your letter 
by my aide-de-camp. I think that it would be possible to 
make ourselves masters of the works of Pradella, and also 
to make a lodgment there; but I imagine that it would 
cost us a great many men, and as for the blockade, the 
enemy is so closely cooped-up on this side that not a creature 
can either go in or out. If we had but wherewithal to 
commence the siege, we should be sure to take it; but 
then this would be much easier, because, by throwing a few 
bombs into the work, we should drive off those who are 
defending it, and can batter the flank with siege pieces. 

I think that it is possible to surprise it, but thatwe should 
have difficulty to maintain ourselves in it. For the rest, if 
a few days were of no consequence, I might hope that the 
fever would grant me some respite and allow me to preside 
on the occasion: I shall write to General Dallemagne and 
to the engineers ; this is all that I can do at the moment, 
for I am unable to ride and still less to walk. In two days, 
I will write to you on the subject. - 

I will send and get the proclamations printed at Modena 
and have them posted in all the environs of Mantua. 

The preparations and the great number of boats which 
the enemy is arming in Mantua indicate the intention of 
an external sortie, and probably on the side of St. George, 
where our forces are thinned in an alarming manner. That 
division has lost 1500 men in the last fortnight, and the 
posts can no longer be manned. 

The Ist regiment of hussars will march in two days for 
Legnago, as well as the remainder of the 20th dragoons, 
because by that time our moveable columns will have re- 
turned. The first regiment of cavalry must come to 
Roverbello, and, if the 5th cavalry has not arrived, I shall 
keep a detachment of the 20th dragoons till it does. 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 373 


To General Bonaparte. 


Rome, 8 Vendemiaire, year 5 [September 29, 1796]. 

I send you herewith two edicts of the pope’s: the first, 
to show that his Holiness does not consider himself as being 
at war, and orders only defensive measures; the second, 
to institute a civie guard for the safety of the city of 
Rome. 

I send you also a copy of the despatch of the King of 
Naples to. M. the Marquis del Vasto, authorizing him to 
come and treat on his behalf with the pope. That envoy 
had, the day before yesterday, a long audience of the pope, 
in the presence of the secretary of state. The league 
between those two courts is considered as concluded. His 
Sicilian Majesty will march forward 30,000 men: the 
English promise to give money ; the pope will furnish 8000 
men and fanaticism for the whole people. Between two 
extravagant courts, it is not easy to establish harmony : I 
am assured that the treaty is not yet signed. 

M. Acton ‘would be obliged to relinquish his place if he 
were to sign a treaty with France, proving how ill he has 
thus far guided his master. He knows full well that the 
Neapolitan troops will be worsted if they hazard .a battle : 
he wishes at least to gain time. 

If these troops remain on the frontier, the French will 
quickly force one of the points of their line, and make a 
rapid march to Naples, to settle the business. M. Acton 
intends that the peace should have two acts: he has, indeed, 
avery large company. That half which is to be pushed for- 
ward into the Keclesiastical State will somewhat retard our 
army. The beaten troops will retire to the frontier, where 
there will be another battle to fight. After this second and 
last defeat, the generalissimo Acton will embark in a fri- 
gate and sail to England, to enjoy his fortune and the 
favour of Mr. Pitt. His masters will become whatever 
they can: the Ecclesiastical State will be swallowed up. 

ML. Acton flatters himself that it will be time enough to 
sign a very hard peace when the French shall be in Rome, 
and that, after having utterly ruined the affairs of the pope, 
he may contrive to get so much larger a share of the Eccle- 
siastical State. 

This country is consigned to foreign influence ; the family 
of Albani, attached to Austria, has a great ascendency. 


374 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


The best posts at the court of Rome are occupied by Nea- 
politans ; the English have a great number of emissaries 
and hired clamourers. The pope is a narrow-minded man, 
but violent and proud, who hae been excited and in whom 
are taken to keep up the > apt of infatuation: nobody 

ere cares about the welfare of the country: the people 
feast themselves upon absurd fables. 

The agents of Austria, London, Naples, unite their in- 
fluence to make this country a victim: it is sufficient for 
them to throw an additional obstacle in our way, by exas- 
perating the rabble against us. There are pean who 
would be glad to instigate the populace to murder me, in 
order to animate it to defend ithelf against the French for 
the purpose of escaping their vengeance. You cannot form 
any idea of the misguided state of minds in Lower Italy. 
The presence of the armies can alone rectify opinions, by 
closing the mouths of furious declaimers, who are paid by 
the courts. 

I am of opinion that the proposed treaty will not be 
signed either in Rome or Miche without the presence of 
armies. If our forces are needed elsewhere, there is no 
hurry : leave those two States to ruin themselves still more ; 
but we must not give up one step of the ground that we 
have gained: this would diminish too much the idea of our 
strength. When the emperor is pulled down and compelled 
to sign a peace, provided that neither Rome nor Naples is 
comprehended in it, those two States will be at the mercy 
of the Directory. 

This league between the emperor, Rome, and Naples, 
would soon be strengthened by the adhesion of Venice, 
Turin, and Tuseany, if they could flatter themselves with 
the idea of driving us out of Italy. For this reason we 
must not proceed a step further than we have done without 
duly examining our strength, which we must not compro- 
mise by too much exposing so vast a fortune. 

I beg you, citizen-general-in-chief, to take notice in what 
tone M. the Cardinal Secretary of State has written to me 
in the accompanying note on the subject of a French de- 
tachment arrived at Farnese. I have endeavoured to reply 
in such a manner as to set him to rights, as you will see in 
the annexed copy of my answer. 

It seems to me that they have made a mistake at Leg- 
horn in sending a detachment to Farnese as if it were an 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 375 
7 


imperial fief: it is dependent on the pope alone. Prince 
Chigi, the proprietor, has just assured me in writing, upon 
his word of honour, that never did his family receive impe- 
rial investiture, or pay any contribution to the emperor. I 
shall write to citizen Miot to desire him to investigate this 
affair with the commandant of Leghorn. I should be sorry 
if, in a moment of doubt and fermentation, the suspension 
of arms with the pope were broken, before the Directory 
or the general-in-chief had given orders for it. 
I beg you, general, to accept, &c. 
CACAULT. 


To General Bonaparte. 


Rome, 9 Vendemiaire, year 5 [September 30, 1796] 

I find, upon investigation, that only three Frenchmen, 
without arms, have been peaceably at Farnese: so there is 
not the least fault to find with our troops. I send you 
herewith copies of two new notes. 

It is said that the Marquis del Vasto finds some diffi- 
culty in settling the treaty of alliance with the pope: it is 
said that the principal of them arises from the refusal of the 
pope to declare the war which you are waging in Lower 
Italy a war of religion. 

I have not the means of learning precisely what is 
secretly negociating between Rome and Naples. To me 
every ing seems tending to overturn and engulph at once 
the Ecclesiastical State, which is but the country of dreams : 
I shall repair to you, general, after my departure from 
Rome, if that does take place. I shall go to recover some 
ieeeages of mind in the society of a great man, after having 

een so long among children. 
CACAULT. 


To General Bonaparte. 


Head-quarters, Verona, 9 Vendemiaire, year 5 [September 30, 1796}. 

The 18th of the line is still at St. George and at La 
Favorita, agreeably to orders given by General Kilmaine, 
without my having heard anything from him: it had re- 
mained at Roverbello in consequence of an order from 
General Berthier. 

A superior officer, whom I had sent to make a cireuit, 


376 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 
* 


for the purpose of ordering in the detached troops of my 
division, could not return by Bassano. The enemy occu- 
pies Castel-Franco and Santa Lucia, and pushes reconnais- 
sances as far as Bassano. a 
I am writing to Murat for him to send me a regiment of 
cavalry, for the purpose of making reconnaissances as far as 
Vicenza. I have been obliged to give orders to: General 
Pigeon to rejoin his brigade, having none besides him: I 
had left him at Roverbello. Victor is absent, and 
Rampon very ill. Order the 18th demi-brigade to come 
and join me. MASSENA. 


To General Bonaparte. 


Head-quarters, Bassano, 10 Vendemiaire, year 5 [October 1, 1796]. 

I should wish you to send me immediately the 75th 
demi-brigade, which is to proceed to Montebello: with this 
reinforcement, I should certainly hold out for a week at 
Bassano, as you desire, and with still greater certainty, 
when I have once received all the troops that you promise me. 
I will do, as usual, all that lies in my power to second your 
intentions in everything ; I will keep the enemy continually 
in check by my frequent reconnaissances. 

Have the goodness, general, to let me be apprised of the 
departure of the two demi-brigades which Vaubois is to 
send me down the Brenta, so that I may be able to take 
advantage of that moment for placing the Tyrolese, who 
are about Borgo, between two fires, in sending on my part 
to meet them. : 

The Castle of Covolo would be destroyed by this time if 
I had had an officer of engineers and a few sappers addi- 
tional: I have but nine in all, and I have only a lieutenant 
of engineers, who is always ill and cannot be of any use 
to me. 

The number of the sick in the hospital of Bassano is de- 
ereasing ; I shall send to-morrow to inspect the hospitals of 
Vicenza and Montebello. MASSENA. 


To the Executive Directory. 


Head-quarters, Milan, 11 Vendemiaire, year 5 [October 2, 1796]. 
The people of Lombardy are speaking out more plainly 
every day ; but there is a very considerable class that would 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES: 377 
> 


wish, before throwing down the gauntlet to the emperor, to 
be invited to do so by a proclamation of the government, 
which would be a sort of guarantee of the interest that 
France will take in this country at the general peace. 

This resolution of the government and a decree establish- 
ing a regulating government, and acknowledging the inde- 
pendence of Lombardy from that day, with some modifica- 
tions for the time that the war continues, would be worth 
as much to the army as a corps of three or four thousand 
auxiliaries. 

The knaveries that are committed are innumerable: - 
amid the bustle of war, it was not possible to keep a strict eye 
upon them; but now that, during my stay at Milan, cir- 
cumstances allow me to do so, I promise vou to make fierce 
war upon them: I shall soon have to apprize you that the 
council has done justice upon a dozen of them. 

Henceforward, the ple of Lombardy, more fortunate, 
will feel less the weight of the army and be less liable to 
vexations. The same is not the case with the unfortunate 
Mantuan; Nature shudders in thinking of the host of 
rogues who are desolating that country. Ihave made some 
dispositions to diminish the evil. 

ologna and Ferrara, having no troops, are the luckiest 
of all: superintendents have just been established there ; 
if they behave like the former military agents of Lombardy, 
most of whom ran away with their chests, they will carry 
desolation into that fine country. I shall take care to have 
accounts of them sent tome. _ 

Reggio has made its revolution, and shaken off the 
eg of the Duke of Modena. There is not perhaps in 

taly a district more decided in favour of liberty. 

Modena tried to do the same; but the fifteen hundred 
a that the duke keeps in garrison there fire upon the 
people and disperse the mob. I believe the shortest way 
would be to declare the armistice broken, since five or six 
hundred thousand livres are still due, and to place that city 
on the same footing as Bologna and Reggio. We should 
have so many enemies the fewer, for the regency makes no 
secret of the fear with which we fill it, and the joy which it 
feels at the successes of the enemy. I request you to give 
me your orders on that point. 

y opinion is that this State ought not to be left in the 
commotion in which it is, but that it would be proper to 


a 


= 
> 


ST ae 


378 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


declare to the plenipotentiary whom you have in Paris that 
the negociations are broken off. Instead of having a new 
enemy, we should have, on the contrary, succours and 
allies, the united Le perrias! of Modena and Reggio. How- 
ever, as the face of affairs is changing every fortnight in 
this country, since that follows the military operations, and 
as there is no need that your rupture with Modena should 
occur at a moment when I could not spare fifteen hundred 
men for a few days, to establish a new order of things in 
that country, you could declare to the envoy of Modena 
that you have acquainted me with your intentions, and com- 
mit to me the conclusion of peace with his prince. He 
would then come to head-quarters, you taking care to inti- 
mate to him that he must be there before the expiration of 
twelve days. I would then declare to‘him that all the ne- 
gociations were broken off ; at the same moment, our troops 
shall enter Modena, make the garrison lay down its arms, 
take the most furious aristocrats for hostages, and put 
friends of the liberty of Modena into office in their stead. 

You will then have Modena, Reggio, Bologna, and Fer- 
rara, where the mass of the people is daily training itself 
for liberty, where the majority regard us as deliverers, and. 
our cause as theirs. 

The territories of Modena extend to the Mantuan: you 
must be aware how advantageous it would be to us to have 
there, instead of an inimical government, a government 
like that of Bologna, which would be entirely devoted to 
us. We could, at the general peace, give the Mantuan to 
the Duke of Parma, which would be politic in every re- 
spect; but it would be useful for you to cause this to be 
intimated to the ambassador of Spain, that it may get 
round to the Duke of Parma, tisk would induce him to 
render us many services. Since we are in alliance with 
Spain, it would not be amiss if the Duke of Parma were to 
join one of his regiments of seven or eight hundred men to 
our army ; this would render disposable a like number of 
our troops, and make all the inhabitants of the duchy 
of Parma consider our cause as theirs; and that is al- 


’ ways a great thing. I shall employ this corps before 


Mantua or in escorting convoys or prisoners, which our men 
do very negligently : out of 4000 prisoners, 1000 generall 
eseape, which arises from the small number of men that 
can spare for escorts. I have tried four hundred Milanese 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 379 


for escorts, and with complete success. The duke ought 
also to be obliged to furnish us with a battalion of pioneers 
of about eight hundred men, with the necessary imple- 
ments. 

Distant as we are from France, the alliance of this prince 
will be a valuable assistance to us, since his territories are 
upon the theatre of the war. 

The Barbets cut up our communications. They are no 
longer single-handed robbers ;_ they are organized bodies of 
four or five hundred men. General Garnier, at the head of 
a moveable column, which I have papEen occupies Tende 
at this moment: he has taken a dozen of them and had 
them shot. 

The administration of the department of the Var has 
refused to furnish two hundred men whom I put in requi- 
sition for the formation of this moveable column. General _ 
Willot has not only refused to obey an order that I gave 
him for the departure of the L0th battalion of the Ain, but 
he has likewise kept back the 11th demi-brigade, which 
General Chateauneuf-Randon was sending to the army, and 
a squadron of the 18th regiment of dragoons. That general 
has, nevertheless, eight thousand men in his division— 
troops sufficient to conquer the South of France, if it were 
in revolt. 

I keep in awe and attend to the police of an enemy’s 
country more extensive than his whole division, with eight 
or nine hundred men. That general has too exaggerated 
opinions, and too readily embraces the different opinions of 
the parties which are tearing France in pieces, to be able to 
maintain order in the South without a strong army. 

General Willot served at the beginning of the revolution 
in the army of Italy: he has the character of being a brave 
man and a good officer, but a furious royalist. As I do 
not know him, and have not had time to weigh his opera- 
tions, I am far from confirming this opinion ; but what ap- 
pears clear enough to me is that he acts in the South 
as in La Vendée, which is the very way to make it spring 
up there. 

When a man disregards all constituted authority, when 
he declares all the inhabitants in mass of several depart- 
ments unworthy of the name of citizen, he either wishes to 
form a considerable army or to give rise to civil war: I can 
see no middle course. Tf you leave General Willot at Mar- 


380 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


seilles, you must give him an army of twenty thousand 
men, or expect the most afilicting scenes. eo 
When a city is in a state of siege, a military man be- 
comes, to my thinking, a kind of magistrate, and ought to 
conduct himself with the moderation and decorum required 
by circumstances, and he ought not to be an instrument of 
factions, an advanced guard officer. I submit to you all 
these reflexions, specially on account of the need I have for 
troops. 24 
I beh you therefore to take the 8th division from under 


my command, because the principles and conduct of General — a 


Willot are not such as they ought to be in his situation ; 
and I should think myself dishonoured to see a leaven of 
disturbance forming in a place where I command, and to 
suffer a general under my orders to be but an instrument of 
faction. ~ cathe 

By his disobedience and by his insubordination, he is the 
cause of the horrors committing at this moment in the de- 
partment of the Maritime Alps. The convoy of picturés, 
the masterpieces of Italy, has been obliged to return to 
Coni; it would have been taken by the Barbets. If Ge- 
neral Willot does not immediately obey the order that I 
have given him to despatch the 83rd demi-brigade, my in- 
tention is to suspend him from his functions. Nice itself, 
at the present moment, is not safe. . 

The Barbets draw their forces from the provincial regi- 
ment of Nice, which the King of Sardinia has disbanded ; 
perhaps it might be useful to form a particular corps from 
all the inhabitants of the Maritime Alps who were serving 
in the provincial regiment and the free corps, at the begin- 
ning of the war. In this case, one might declare that they 
shall not resume their rights of citizens till they have served 
two years under the colours of the Republic. 

I have written very strong letters to the minister of forei 
affairs and to the King of Sardinia himself. I hope that the 
number of these banditti will daily become less formidable. 

I have sent citizen Poussielgue, secretary of legation at 
Genoa, to Turin, to sound the disposition of that cabinet 
for a treaty of alliance: we must have that prince or the 
republic of Genoa. I even expressed a wish for an inter- 
view with the minister for foreign affairs of the King of Sar- 
dinia, but that could not be arranged. BoNAPARTE. 


— . 


7 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 381 


To the Executive Directory. 


Head-quarters, Milan, 10 Vendemiaire, year 4 [October 1, 1796]. 

After the battle of St. George, we endeavoured to draw 
Wurmser into a second action, in order to weaken the gar- 
rison in an affair evtra muros: we took good care, therefore, 
to oceupy the Sarraglio; I hoped that he would proceed 
thither. We continued only to occupy the bridge of Gover- 
nolo, with a view to facilitate our passage of the Mincio. 

On the 4th complementary day, the see marched 1500 
cavalry to Castellucio; our grand gardes fell back as they 
had been ordered; the enemy came no further. On the 
3rd Vendemiaire, he marched upon Governolo, following 
the right bank of the Mincio. After a very brisk can- 
nonade and several charges of our infantry, he was put to 
the rout; a hundred of his men were taken and five 
caissons, with their teams. 

General Kilmaine, to whom I have given the command 
of the two divisions besieging Mantua, remained in his for- 
mer positions till the 8th, still hoping that the enemy, urged 
by the desire to bring in forage, would attempt to come out ; 
but the enemy had encamped at the Carthusian convent, 
before the Pradella gate, and the chapel before the Ceresa 
gate. General Kilmaine made his dispositions of attack, 
and marched by several points upon these two camps, which 
the enemy evacuated at his spercedls after a slight fire of 
musketry from the rear-guard. We oceupy the Pradella 
gate and that of Ceresa, and are blockading the citadel. 

It is impossible at this moment to think of the siege of 
Mantua on account of the rains: it will not be feasible be- 
fore January. By that time the emperor will have a power- 
ful army in the Tyrol and in the Friule; he has already 
collected a corps of 6000 men in the latter country, and sent 
8000 men to Dotnen: Nothing can equal the activity which 
prevails in the empire for recruiting the army of Italy. 

The force of our army is as follows :—I have 18,000 men 
in the army of observation, 9000 men in the besieging 
army. I leave you to conclude whether, if I receive no re- 
inforcements, it is possible for me to make head this winter 
against the emperor, who will have 50,000 men in six weeks. 

I have required the commissioner of the government to 
direct the-4oth demi-brigade, which is at Lyons, to be sent 
to me; I have ordered the 83rd, which is at Marseilles, 


oe 


as 


Ss 


f 
} 
i 
tp 


382 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


and the 10th battalion of the Ain, which is at Toulon, and 
is to be incorporated in our cadres, to be despatched to me. 
These two demi-brigades, if they arrive, form 4500 men. 

General Willot has unseasonably detained the 11th 
demi-brigade, 400 strong,’ which General Chateauneuf- 
Randon was sending hither. Add to this number the 10th 
battalion of the Ain, 500 strong, which is at Nice; this 
makes 900 men of the 6000 whom that general ought to 
send. 

Renew the orders to General Chateauneuf-Randon ; order 
the departure of the 40th, which is at Lyons, and of the 
87th, which is at Marseilles; let 15,000 men of those that 
are within reach be despatched to us; but calculate that, 
out of 4000 men whom you send, not more than half will 
arrive. 

Consider that, in order to maintain your ground in Italy 
during the winter, you must have 35,000 infantry in the 
army of observation and 18,000 infantry in the besieging 
army, to make head against the emperor. These two 
forces together make 53,000 men ; there are at this moment 
27,000. Suppose that, the season being better, 3000 sick 
come back to us, though the autumnal rains generally give 
us a great number, there would remain 23,000 men to 
send us. 

If by extraordinary couriers you confirm my orders and 
my requisitions, I hope to have in less than a month 
8000 men drawn from the garrisons of the South. We 
shall still want 15,000 men. If you despatch them from 
Paris or the environs, they will be able to get hither in the 
course of December ; but they must have their orders im- 
mediately. If you have depdts, send them as well, to be 
incorporated in our corps. 

We should still want 1500 light cavalry or dragoons : 
for example, the 14th regiment of chasseurs. We must 
have 800 artillerymen for the siege of Mantua, 10 officers 
of engineers, and some superior officers of artillery for this 
siege. 

We must further have 1500 drivers [charretiers] organized 
into brigades, having their officers —I have none but 
Italians, who rob us—two battalions of sappers, and seven 
companies of miners. 

If the preservation of Italy is dear to you, citizens 
directors, send me all these succours. I want also 20,000 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES, 383 


muskets: but these things must arrive, and not be like all 
that is promised to this army but never comes. We have 
a great quantity of muskets, but they are Austrian; they 
are too heavy, and our soldiers cannot use them. We have 
here powder manufactories which we employ, and which can 
supply us with thirty thousand [pounds] per month ; that 
wil probably be sufficient. 

I recommend to you to give orders that the 8000 men 
whom I expect at the end of October shall arrive: this 
alone may enable me yet to give some hard blows to the 
Imperialists. If 3000 men are to reach me from General 
Chateauneuf-Randon, 6 or 7000 must be sent off. 

1 am endeavouring to raise here a legion armed with 
Austrian muskets, and clothed in the uniform of the na- 
tional guard of the country: the complement of this 
legion is to be 3500 men; it is possible that the plan 
may succeed, 

he advanced posts of General Vaubois have fallen in 
with the Austrian division defending the Tyrol: it has 
taken 110 prisoners from the enemy. 

Whatever circumstances occur, 1 beg you not to doubt 
for a moment the zeal and determination of the army of 
Italy to support the honour of the arms of the Republic. 

BonapaRTE. 


To the Chief of the Staff. 


Head-quarters, Milan, 10 Vendemiaire, year 5 [October 1, 1796]. 

\You will give orders to General Kilmaine for the dis- 
arming of the Mantuan and for obtaining the restitution of 
all the horses which have been bought of the soldiers. You 
will direct that there be paid for each horse the sum that it 
cost, but it must not exceed 120 francs apiece. You will 
form three moveable columns commanded by intelligent and 
upright men, which shall scour, the first, that part of the 
el comprised between the Po, the Mincio, and the 
Oglio; the second, that part comprised between the Mincio, 
the Po, andthe Adige; the third, all that is situated beyond 
the Po. I should think that 150 infantry and half the 
number of cavalry will be sufficient for each of these columns. 
These columns will repair to the three chief towns, Cas- 
tiglione, Roverbello, and Gonzaga, to proceed to the dis- 
arming, to the search after every thing that belongs to the 


Maven eee Meet pean toe SHEETS OWT 
. ea mionscnarrereweveek bute 


= 


FT ee 


if 
ift 
i 
i) 
4. 
+ 
safe 
iH 
¢ 
au 
} 


ei SE 


< OUA ee eee ee 


384 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


Austrians, to the apprehension of such turbulent men as 
have excited the people to take arms against the army, and’ 
to the recovery of the horses sold by the soldiers. ie 

‘I recommend to you, in particular, to obtain information 
respecting the conduct of the monks of San Benedetto ; in 
that village horrors have been perpetrated: I had ordered 
an extraordinary imposition upon. it, which must be levied 
immediately. Apply to the commissaire ordonnateur for a 
eopy of my order. of 

I recommend to you also to put an end to those per- 
petual requisitions which desolate the conquered countries, 
with scarcely any profit to the Republic. ni 

Concert with the commissaire ordonnateur Aubernon, so 
that a parcel of knaves, upon pretext of supplying the army, 
may no longer despoil the villages for their own profit. 
You are the first agent of the Republic in the Mantuan ; 
you ought, therefore, to exercise your vigilance over every 
thing that can interest public order. There is at Castig- 
lione an:administrative commission charged with the levy 
of impositions ; lend it the aid of the armed force and any 
other assistance that is in your power. 

$ BONAPARTE. 


To the Executive Directory. 


Head-quarters, Milan, 11 Vendemiaire, year 5 [October 2, 1796]. ; 

The republic of Venice is afraid; it is plotting with the 
King of Naples and the pope ; it is fortifying and entrench- 
ing itself in Venice. Of all the populations of Italy, the 
Venetian is the one that hates us most cordially : they are 
all armed, and there are districts the inhabitants of which 
are brave. ‘Their minister in Paris writes to them to arm, 
or all will be lost...We shall.do nothing with all these 
people, if Mantua is not taken. 

The King of Naples has on foot 60,000 men; he cannot 
be attacked and dethroned by fewer than 18,000 infant 
and 3000 cavalry. It is possible that, in concert isl 
Austria and Rome, he might push a corps upon Rome, 
and afterwards upon Bologna and Leghorn: this corps 
might be of about 15,000 men, and would considerably 
annoy the French army. The grand-duke of Tuscany is 
an cbailate cipher in all respects. The Duke of Parma 
behaves well enough: he is a cipher, too, in every respect. 


3 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 385 


Rome is strong in its fanaticism ; if it shows itself against 
us, it may considerably increase the strength of the King 
of Naples, and oblige me to keep 3000 more men on my rear, 
by the irritation which it may excite in the minds of these 
people: singly, without Naples, it would require 10,000 
infantry and 1500 cavalry to subdue it. If it arms, fana- 
ticism will give it some strength ; there would be bloodshed : 
one cannot march to Rome united with Naples with fewer 
than 20,000 infantry and 2000 cavalry ; and if one were to 
go to Naples after having been at Rome, one would need an 
army of 24,000 infantry and 3500 cavalry. I think that 
6000 infantry and 500 cavalry would be sufficient to keep 
the States of the pope in awe, if, when once master of 
them, a man were to conduct himself with address and 
firmness. 

The King of Sardinia foments the rebellion of the Bar- 
bets. If Naples and Rome act against us, 3000 more men 
will be required in the fortresses of Piedmont. . 

Genoa—On the 16th of this month, the minister Fay- 
poult will present a note to the senate, and we shall make 
our operation, agreeably to your orders: if it succeeds, we 
may rely upon the government. 

If you persist in making war upon Rome and Naples, 
there will be required a reinforcement of 25,000 men, 
which, added to the 20,000 necessary for making head 
against the emperor, form a reinforcement of 45,000 men 
that will be needed. If you make peace with Naples, and 
Rome only is left, it would be possible, with the mere force 
destined to make head against the emperor, to take advan- 
tage of a favourable moment for crushing it: one must 
reckon, nevertheless, on an increase of 83000 men. 

In the present position of the Republic, I think that 
you cannot make war at once upon Naples and the emperor. 
Peace with Naples is of the utmost necessity: continue 
in a state of negociation or armistice with Rome till the 
moment for get “ss that proud city. Rome would 
become very strong by its union with Naples. If we are 
beaten on the Rhine, it will be advisable for us to make 
peace with Rome and with Naples. 

There is another negociation which becomes indispen- 
sable; that is, a treaty of alliance with Piedmont and 
Genoa. J should give Massa and Carrara and the im- 

VOL. I. ce 


' 
| 


386 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


perial fiefs to Genoa, and make it declare against the 
coalition. 

If you continue the war against Naples, it appears neces- 
sary to me to take Lucca and put a garrison into it: that 
place is strong and well armed ; it covers the territories of 
Genoa, and affords a retreat to the garrison of Leghorn. 

This and the accompanying letters will make you tho- 
roughly ee with our position. I never calculated 
that, after destroying two armies of the emperor’s in one 
campaign, there would be a more powerful one, and that 
the two armies of the Republic would winter far from the 
Danube: the project of Trieste and Naples was founded on 
pore ; “eUh 3% 

have written to Vienna, and this evening the courie 
will set out at the same time that the army marches for 
the Brenta. 

I am fortifying the Adda, but it is a weak barrier. 
Speedy succours, race to you; for the emperor is already 
setting his troops in motion. 

The negociation with Rome has been mismanaged : 
before it was commenced, Rome ought to have fulfilled the 
conditions of the armistice; one might at least have waited 
a few days, and one might easily have had the 5,000,000 of the 
second payment, part of which had already arrived at 
Rimini. The whole treaty was shown to the pope at once: 
he ought, on the contrary, to have been obliged to decide 
previously on the first article ; but, above all, one ought 
not to have chosen the moment when the army was in the 
Tyrol, and one ought to have had as a support a corps of 
troops at Bologna, which fame would have increased. 
This costs us 10,000,000, five in kind, and all the master- 
pieces of Italy, which a delay of a few days would have 
given us. a> crete 

All these countries are so populous, the situation of our 
forces is so well known, all this is so hackneyed by the 
emperor and by England, that the scene changes every 


fortnight. 


If we do not succeed in all we undertake, I beg you to 
believe that it will not be for want of zeal and assiduity. 
BONAPARTE. 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 887 


To the Executive Directory. 


Head-quarters, Milan, 17 Vendemiaire, year 5 [October 8, 1796]. 

Mantua cannot be taken before the month of February, 
as I must have already informed you: by this you perceive 
that our position in Italy is uncertain, and our political 
system very bad. 

We commenced negociations with Rome, when the armi- 
stice was not fulfilled, when 10,000,000 worth in pictures, 
and 5,000,000 in kind were on the point of being delivered 
tous. Rome is arming, is kindling the fanaticism of the 
people: they are coalescing on all sides against us ; wey 
are awaiting the moment for acting ; they will act wit 
success, if the emperor’s army is at all reinforced. 

Trieste is as near to Vienna as Lyons is to Paris: in 
fifteen days troops arrive there. The emperor has already 
an army in that quarter. 

You will find herewith all the papers necessary to enable 
you to judge of our position and of the state of people’s 
minds. 

I think peace with Naples most essential, and an alliance 
with Genoa or the court of Turin necessary. Make peace 
with Parma, and a declaration, taking under the protection of 
France the people of Lombardy, Modena, Reggio, Bologna, 
and Ferrara, and, above all things, send troops. It is abso- 
lutely necessary, at the conclusion of such a campaign as 
this, to send 15,000 recruits. The emperor has sent them 
thrice over in his campaign. 

In Italy all is spoiled: the spell of our force is broken ; 
they count our number. I think it time, and high time, 
that you should take into consideration the state of your 
army in Italy, that you adopt a system which can give you 
friends as well among princes as among the people. _Lessen 
the number of your enemies. The influence of Rome is 
incalculable. It was very impolitic to break with that 
power ; all this turns to its advantage. Had I been con- 
sulted upon all this, I should have delayed the negociation 
with Rome, like that with Genoa and Venice. henever 
your general in Italy is not the centre of the whole, you will 
run great risks. This language will not be attributed to 
ambition ; I have but too much honour, and my health is 
so impaired that I feel myself obliged to apply to you for a 

cc2 


388 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


successor. I am unable to ride; nothing but courage is left 
me, but that is not sufficient in a post like this. ) 

All was ready for the business of Genoa; but citizen 
Faypoult thought that it would be advisable to procrasti- 
nate. Surrounded by fermenting populations, prudence 
commands us to conciliate that of Genoa till the new order 
of things. I have sent citizen Poussielgue to sound the 
court of Turin. Iam continuing this negociation. Troops, 
troops, if you would preserve Italy. 

BONAPARTE. 


To the Executive Directory. 


_ Head-quarters, Milan, 17 Vendemiaire, year 5 [October 8, 1796). 

One hundred and fifty men of the garrison of Mantua, 
leaving the place on the 8th at ten in the morning, crossed 
the Po at Borgo-Forte in quest of forage. However, at five 
in the afternoon, we eoaaghered the blockade of Mantua by 
possessing ourselves of the Pradella gate and that of Ceresa, 
as I had the honour to inform you by my last courier. This 
detachment, finding itself thereby cut off from Mantua, 
attempted to retire to Florence. On reaching Reggio, the 
inhabitants, apprized of the circumstance, ran to arms, and 
prevented them from passing, which obliged them to retire 
to the castle of Monte Chiragolo, in the territories of the Duke 
of Parma. The brave inhabitants of Reggio pursued them, 
invested them, and made them prisoners by capitulation. 
In the firing which took place, the national guards of 
Reggio had two men killed. These are the first that have 
shed their blood for the liberty of their country. 

The brave inhabitants of Reggio have shaken off the 
yoke of tyranny, from their own impulse, and without so 
much as ascertaining whether they should be supported 
by us. 

BONAPARTE. 


To the Executive Directory. 


Head-quarters, Milan, 17 Vendemiaire, year 5 [October 8, 1796]. 
You will find annexed, citizens directors, a proclamation 
relative to Modena. These petty rulers take it into their 
heads to conspire; I have been beforehand with them. 


LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 389 


Why had I not a couple of brigades to do the same at 
Rome! But I have no disposable troops, and there is 
Naples, which would oblige us to fall back. The affair of 
Modena somewhat improves our position. 

I am surrounded by thieves here; I have already three 
commissaries of war, two administrators, and officers, before 
the council of war. 


BONAPARTE. 


To the Executive Directory. 


Head-quarters, Milan, 20 Vendemiaire, year 5 [October 11, 1796]. 

The Modena business, citizens directors, has been com- 
pletely successful: this country is content and happy to 
find itself delivered from the yoke that oppressed it. The 
patriots are numerous and in office. You will find here- 
with different printed papers which will enable you to 
judge of the turn that I am giving to the public mind, in 
order to oppose fanaticism by fanaticism, and to make friends 
of people who otherwise would become our implacable 
foes. You will there find the organization of the Lombard 
legion. The national colours which they have adopted are 
green, white, and red. 

Among the officers, there are many French; the others 
are Italian officers, who have for several years been fighting 
with us in the army of Italy. The chief of brigade, nam 
Lahoz, is a Milanese: he was aide-de-camp to General 
Laharpe. I had taken him with me; he is known to the 
representatives, who have been with the army of Italy, and 
particularly to citizen Ritter. 

You will find annexed, in manuscript, the organization 
which I intend to give to the first Italian legion. To this 
end, I have written to. the commissioners of the government, 
in order that the governing persons of Bologna, Modena, 
Reggio, and Ferrara may meet in congress: this will take 
place on the 23rd. I shall neglect nothing that is capable 
of imparting energy to this immense population and turning 
minds in our favour. The Lombard Paiva will be paid, 
clothed, and equipped by the Milanese. To defray this 
expense, they must be authorized to take the plate of the 
churches, which will produce nearly a million. 

You will find different letters and different notes from 
citizen Cacault. Every thing indicates that in less than a 


» $3890 LETTERS AND DESPATCHES. 


month great blows will be struck in Italy. Between this 
and then, we must have concluded an allianee with Genoa 
or with the King of Sardinia. Perhaps it would be highly 
advisable to make peace with the King of Naples also. 

I have sent back citizen Poussielgue to Torin, te con- 
tinue his negociation ; I have told him to inform you direct 
from Turin of the issue of this second interview. Let me 
| know, above all, our present position in regard to Naples, 
You are aware that I have 2400 Neapolitan cavalry, whom 
I keep closely watched, and whom it would be necessary to 

et the start of, if we had stronger reasons for mistrusting 
aples: if they were to act on their part at the same time 


f as the Austrians and the other powers, that could not fail 
: to increase our embarrassment. In the month of Thermi- 
| dor, when I was falling back upon Brescia, I thought of 
j having them secured, but durst not venture. 


General Serrurier writes to me from Leghorn that the 
: grand-duke is arming also. 

| Believe that, if my health will in any way permit, I will 
; spare no pains for the preservation of Italy. 

You will find annexed a letter from citizen Faypoult. It 
appears to me, according to this, that the Genoa business is 
[ negociating in Paris, and that we have done quite right not 
! to intermeddle in it. This conduct excites distrust in the 
f Genoese government. I revert to my spa exhorting 
f : you to treat before a month’s end with Genoa and Turin. 

t BoNAPARTE. 
i 


END OF YO 
BIBLIOTHECA 
REG 1A 


' 
: . 
\ MONACE NSIS. 


FREDERICK SHOBEKL, JUNIOR, 
PRINTER TO HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS PRINCE ALBERT, 
51, RUPERT STREET, HAYMARKET, LONDON. 


ie ateyrras 


Tei Ht peye@wrtokt mf a (hfe eal Bas 
eorae Gite apis. .t 0-6 HG tS rT . 
) elt wl ite (hifea*h Se NishoH Rocprd A nate aly 1G be ins 
wel colyndu FA yt ae Mie gy bl int re hihtes 7ANt ~ ae 

efter a3 ssn at a6 linen? tev © WY : : : 
‘Piruh bog ores OF ont filo! etna D iis,” 
Ce adr io .woidriiat Buogin ehelf toere) 6 


Pe aA a ae 


MS 


t 4s aOF “0.6 Seine Ob fl Th Tisly ck MNES 


’ 
’ 

* 
fi 


ae t ’ tr : rc 
orn q OVP iieiius oct BB Ose. Sa Rut Wa imi Sy 


OS en) ee ae od ti bingy Sis Sai" i5e pie valk ~ 


st lit doet fiftia Fail peso a tie siP hae Hunieen : TSS 
: Belg , fat, 
Le <rateiee ae Ae at f Dt i ts Saeee > yg 
a ~ +, Seay ihe . ‘ eh ORD sgl re ides ou 
) _ 4 > * 
4 Pa at aa es 4 
‘ 4 ‘ a 44 
. ny gs arto! tp! Taba eee se <% ees ie : ‘* 
i ; a ‘ t 
E > e ,* . i. 
thie E dere yee sos ar orgie ob cca dF sau mee 
patoth a naciay ror pity cla vaiben ining MA iega > y 
aires) rictS areely woe Pesos bs : 
yt 9 “rtd athe? siesty 
po ' be 
’ : 
& i 
a ¥ 
‘ 


Lear ne MDZ PiatisteunysZentrun 
taatsBibliothe! Digitale Bibliothek 


Napoleon 


‘The Napoleon leters and despatches, secret, confidential and official 
from the originals in his private cabinet 


Bd. 1 


London (1846) 


Gallrev. 104 61 
urn:nbn:de:bvb:12-bsb10421011-4 


