II 


iCZ14 
.N213 


■  V>         *i^  M//    >yK  \\V)  ^  *  r% 


5^^  />f^:^ 


4  O 


NAPOLEON'S    ADDRESSES 


NAPOLEON'S  ADDRESSES 


SELECTIONS 

FROM   THE    PROCLAMATIONS,    SPEECHES 
AND   CORRESPONDENCE 

NAPOLEON  BONAPARTE 


Edited  by  IDA  M.  TARBELL 


,^<  <n%.-v. 


boston' 
joseph  knight  company 

1897 


CoPyrigJtt,  i8qb 
By  Joseph  Knight  Company 


Colonial  Press: 

C.  H.  Simonds  &  Co.,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.  S.  A. 
Electrotyped  by  Geo.  C.  Scott  &  Sons 


INTRODUCTION. 

The  flash  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte's  sword 
so  blinded  men  in  his  lifetime,  and,  indeed, 
long  after,  that  they  were  unable  to  dis- 
tinguish  a   second    weapon    in    his    hand. 

.e  clearer  vision  which  time  and  study 
jring  have  shown  that  he  used  words 
almost  as  effectively  as  the  sword,  and  that 
throughout  his  career  the  address  ably 
supported  the  military  manoeuvre. 

The  first  complete  demonstration  of  the 
elaborate  use  made  by  Napoleon  of  the  ad- 
dress was  the  publication  of  the  gigantic 
work  known  as  the  "  Correspondance  de 
Napoleon y  Though  the  thirty-two  pon- 
derous volumes  which  form  this  magnus 
opus  appeared  nearly  forty  years  ago,  it  is 
little  known  to  general  readers,  its  size  and 
cost  confining  it  to  special  libraries,  and  its 
documentary  character  repelling  all  but 
special  students. 

Yet   it   is   only   in   these   volumes    that 

Napoleon's  official  life  can  be  traced  in  de- 
vil 


Vlll  INTRODUCTION. 


tail  from  Toulon  to  St.  Helena.  Every 
document  which  he  wrote  relating  to  pub- 
lic affairs  is  —  if  we  may  believe  the 
editors  —  printed  in  the  collection.  The 
number  is  enormous.  When  the  commis- 
sion appointed  to  collect  the  material  began 
its  labors,  it  found  itself  obliged  to  go 
through  ten  thousand  volumes  pertaining 
to  Napoleon's  life.  The  archives  of  Paris 
yielded  forty  thousand  different  documents 
of  which  he  was  the  author,  and  the  rulers 
of  Austria,  Bavaria,  Hesse,  Russia,  Sar- 
dinia, and  Wurtemberg  sent  contributions 
from  their  royal  records. 

Across  the  pages  of  the  great  tomes  file 
the  mighty  procession  of  soldiers  and  gen- 
erals, priests  and  cardinals,  kings  and 
peoples  who,  in  the  twenty  years  in  which 
Napoleon  was  the  preeminent  figure  of 
Europe,  fell  captive  to  his  charms  or  his 
power.  Here  are  the  words  by  which  he 
fired  starving  armies  to  battle,  bullied 
obstinate  powers  to  follow  his  plans,  put 
hope  into  despot-ridden  people,  told  kings 
their  duties. 

In  these  addresses  one  traces  Napoleon's 
daily  thought,  so  far  as  he  cared  to  reveal 


INTRODUCTION.  IX 

it  to  others,  watches  the  development  of 
his  plans  and  follows  the  gradual  enlarge- 
ment of  his  power.  Nowhere  else  is  there 
so  fine  an  opportunity  to  observe  the  steady 
unfolding  of  his  ambition  for  world- 
mastery,  to  see  how  he  aspired  to  rule 
France,  then  her  neighbors,  then  Europe, 
the  Orient,  America,  the  Isles  of  the  sea. 
An  especially  curious  study  in  connection 
with  that  of  the  evolution  of  his  ambition 
is  that  of  the  methods  he  followed  to 
enlist  men  in  his  stupendous  undertakings. 
Such  a  study  is  possible  only  in  the  ad- 
dresses. 

The  spell  he  exercised  over  the  army  is 
explained  here,  partially,  at  least.  It  was 
the  custom  to  post  the  addresses  through- 
out the  ranks  where  each  soldier  could  see 
and  read  them.  The  men  had  been  accus- 
tomed at  home  to  seeing  all  official  com- 
munications from  the  Government  to  the 
people  placed  on  the  bill-boards,  and  so 
read  them  from  habit.  But  Napoleon's 
bulletins,  if  they  were  posted  in  a  familiar 
way,  had  a  new  character.  He  addressed 
the  soldiers  as  if  they  were  comrades,  ex- 
plaining the  general  situation  of  the  army 


X  INTRODUCTION. 

to  them,  exhorting  them  to  new  efforts  and 
promising  them  rich  rewards. 

After  a  battle  he  stated  the  results  to 
them,  thus  giving  them  a  tacit  recogni- 
tion of  their  importance.  The  explanation 
was  one  that  all  understood  ;  it  was  clear 
and  explicit,  and  bristled  with  figures. 
Your  common  man  grasps  numbers.  They 
are  the  bullets  of  speech  and  sink  in  like 
lead.  When  Napoleon  rattled  a  volley  of 
numbers  at  them  —  "  Soldiers,  in  fifteen 
days  you  have  gained  six  victories,  taken 
twenty  -  one  stands  of  colors,  fifty  -  five 
pieces  of  cannon,  and  several  fortresses, 
and  conquered  the  richest  part  of  Pied- 
mont. You  have  made  fifteen  hundred 
prisoners,  and  killed  or  wounded  ten  thou- 
sand men  " — they  understood,  and  glowed 
with  pride. 

The  phrases  with  which  he  praised, 
condemned,  exhorted  them,  were  short, 
terse,  and  unforgetable.  "  You  will  return 
to  your  homes,  and  your  countrymen  will 
say  as  they  point  you  out,  '  He  belonged 
to  the  Army  of  Italy.'  "  Not  a  man  with 
a  spark  of  pride  but  remembered  those 
words   and   dreamed   that   he  walked    the 


INTRODUCTION.  XI 

village  street  and  heard  the  whisper  follow- 
ing him,  *'  He  belonged  to  the  Army  of 
Italy."  "  Soldiers,  from  the  summit  of 
these  pyramids  forty  centuries  look  down 
upon  you,"  he  cried  in  Egypt.  The  splen- 
did phrase  voiced  the  awe  of  the  army  in 
the  shadow  of  the  mysterious  monuments, 
and  they  charged  their  dark  -  faced  foes  as 
if  in  the  presence  of  all  the  heroes  of  the 
past. 

The  perfect  clearness  and  directness  of 
the  addresses  is  their  most  striking  liter- 
ary quality.  The  classic  pose  affected  by 
writers  in  Napoleon's  day  he  entirely 
ignored.  He  wished  those  whom  he  ad- 
dressed to  understand  his  meaning.  If  he 
spoke  to  the  soldier  it  was  to  convince  him 
that  certain  facts  were  true  and  to  persuade 
him  to  adopt  certain  theories.  To  do  this 
he  put  what  he  wished  believed  and  re- 
peated in  so  clear  a  fashion  that  it  could 
not  be  mistaken.  If  both  bombast  and 
bathos  sometimes  characterized  his  ad- 
dresses to  the  army,  it  was  never  at  the 
expense  of  his  meaning. 

The  same  lucidity  marked  all  his  instruc- 
tions to  the  Council  of  State  when  it  was 


Xll  INTRODUCTION. 

preparing  the  Code  of  Laws.  He  would  not 
discuss  the  laws  proposed,  in  technical  and 
equivocal  language,  but  insisted  on  trans- 
lating them  into  the  plainest,  most  evident 
terms.  When  it  came  to  wording  the  laws, 
he  still  declared  that  they  should  be  kept 
clear  of  all  obscurities  and  ambiguities  of 
meaning,  so  that  the  most  illiterate  of  the 
people  could  comprehend  them. 

While  all  of  Napoleon's  addresses  to  the 
army  and  to  the  people  are  imbued  with  a 
spirit  of  comradeship,  those  to  generals, 
ambassadors,  counselors  of  State,  even  to 
the  members  of  his  family,  are  imperious 
and  inflexible  in  tone.  The  first  impression 
they  produce  is  that  the  author  knows  his 
own  mind  and  is  convinced  of  his  ability  to 
carry  out  his  own  plans,  that  he  has  no 
superstitious  regard  for  titles,  formalities, 
even  for  ties  of  blood,  that  he  is  superior 
to  traditions,  and  will  recognize  the  author- 
ity of  no  man  who  does  not  prove  himself 
the  stronger.  From  the  beginning  of  his 
career,  the  audacity  of  this  presumption, 
this  confidence  in  himself,  checked  and 
often  stifled  opposition.  There  was,  in  the 
high  tone  of  his  communications,  something 


INTRODUCTION.  Xlll 

which  compelled  obedience,  just  as  there 
was  something  in  his  bearing  which  silenced 
those  who  met  him  face  to  face.  Augereau 
went  in  to  his  first  interview  with  Napoleon 
sneering  contemptuously  at  the  idea  of  an 
untried  commander  being  sent  to  the  Army 
of  Italy,  but  he  backed  out  from  his  pres- 
ence, pale  with  dismay.  "  His  first  glance 
crushed  me,"  he  cried.  In  a  similar  way 
a  first  address  from  Napoleon  bewildered 
and  silenced  critics  and  opponents.  They 
were  baffled  by  his  apparent  candor,  by 
the  serious  way  in  which  he  took  himself, 
and  by  the  complete  mastery  he  had  of  all 
the  elements  in  a  situation.  There  seemed 
to  be  no  fact  which  had  escaped  him,  no 
contingency  he  had  not  considered.  A 
reading  of  the  addresses  shows  that  much 
of  the  impression  of  strength  they  produce 
is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  writer  has  full 
knowledge  of  the  business  in  hand.  One 
sees  from  the  way  in  which  he  criticizes, 
asks  questions,  and  advises  that  he  under- 
stands his  subject.  Of  course,  it  is  in 
military  matters  that  it  is  particularly  con- 
spicuous. Here  he  knows  everything,  the 
quality  of  cloth  which  ought  to  be  used  in 


XIV  INTRODUCTION. 

a  soldier's  uniform,  the  way  to  make  a  can- 
non, the  kind  of  food  which  the  horses 
should  receive.  Not  only  did  he  know 
what  should  be  done,  but  he  knew  if  it  was 
done.  His  communications  to  officers  are 
bewildering  to  a  lay  reader,  because  of  the 
intimate  knowledge  they  show  of  each 
man's  actions,  and  the  attention  they  give 
to  what  seems  unimportant  details.  It 
is  not  difficult  to  understand  and  to  share, 
in  reading  them,  the  superstitious  feeling 
that  many  of  Napoleon's  associates  had 
that  he  was  "  not  as  other  men,"  that  he 
had  superhuman  insight  and  faculties,  else 
how  could  he  know  all,  foresee  all,  do  all. 

Napoleon's  attitude  towards  his  family 
was  as  imperious  as  that  towards  officers 
and  statesmen.  Unquestionably  he  had  a 
warm  affection  for  his  mother  and  brothers 
and  sisters,  and  even  when  a  mere  boy  he 
always  thought  of  them  ;  yet  when  money 
and  power  came  to  him  he  would  do  nothing 
for  them  save  on  condition  that  they  obey 
absolutely  his  will ;  when  he  became  Em- 
peror this  determination  was  firmer  than 
ever.  His  refusal  to  acknowledge  Jerome 
Bonaparte's  marriage  with   Miss  Paterson 


INTRODUCTION.  XV 

is  a  familiar  example  of  this.  His  letters 
to  Louis,  as  King  of  Holland,  to  Joseph,  as 
King  of  Spain,  to  Jerome,  as  King  of  West- 
phalia, are  marked  by  an  amazing  absolu- 
tism. "  All  feelings  of  State  yield  to  State 
reasons,"  he  sent  word  to  Joseph.  *'  I  recog- 
nize as  relatives  only  those  who  serve  me. 
My  fortune  is  not  attached  to  the  name  of 
Bonaparte,  but  to  that  of  Napoleon."  As 
a  rule,  however,  his  letters  to  his  family 
are  as  conspicuous  for  their  common  sense 
as  for  their  despotism. 

When  he  reached  the  point  in  his  career 
where  first  as  consul  and  then  as  Emperor 
he  must  direct  the  framing  of  a  new  code 
of  laws  for  France,  must  organize  schools, 
beautify  the  capitol,  revive  industries,  his 
addresses  to  the  councils  and  officials 
charged  with  the  duties,  show  the  same 
knowledge  of  the  principles  involved  and 
the  same  attention  to  details  which  distin- 
guish his  military  writings. 

All  of  the  extraordinary  stories  of 
Napoleon's  capacity  for  work,  of  his  teem- 
ing brain,  his  incessant  invention,  which 
one  finds  in  the  memoirs  of  his  secretaries 
and  associates,  are  fully  justified  by  his  ad- 


XVI  INTRODUCTION. 

dresses.  Take  one  of  the  days  when  he 
was  at  the  height  of  his  power  and  note 
the  marvellous  range  over  which  his 
thoughts  run.  He  gives  direction  for  the 
mobilization  of  troops  and  the  fortification 
of  a  town ;  inquires  of  Cambaceres  or 
Portalis  the  meaning  of  a  law  they  have 
under  consideration  for  the  new  Code,  asks 
them  why  such  a  law  is  necessary,  if  it  ex- 
isted under  Louis  XIV.,  why  it  should  not 
be  worded  in  this  way  instead  of  that ;  'he 
remembers  a  general  who  is  compromising 
himself  in  a  love  affair,  and  counsels  him 
at  least  to  be  discreet ;  he  scolds  Josephine 
for  extravagance  ;  orders  a  monument  to 
the  last  general  killed  on  the  field  of 
battle ;  selects  the  names  to  be  given  to 
certain  new  streets  and  bridges  of  Paris. 

To  the  end  of  his  career  his  addresses 
show  the  same  vigor  and  range.  Even 
those  sent  to  the  inhabitants  and  author- 
ities of  Elbe  are  as  fertile  in  schemes  for 
improving  the  island  as  those  addressed 
to  the  French  people  ;  they  show,  too,  the 
same  attention  to  detail.  At  Elbe  he  even 
dictated,  with  ceremonious  regard  for  the 
forms  which  become  the  ruler  of  a  king- 


INTRODUCTION.  XVll 

dom,  the  kind  of  bread  to  be  fed  his 
hunting-dogs. 

A  study  of  these  addresses  shows  that 
he  never  lost  his  exuberance  of  imagina- 
tion. However  tragic  his  losses,  he  re- 
bounded at  once,  and  on  the  very  day  that 
he  dictated  his  last  address  to  the  French 
army,  June  25,  181  5,  he  wrote  his  librarian 
to  send  him  all  the  books  on  the  United 
States  which  were  to  be  obtained.  He 
wanted  to  study  up  the  country  which  he 
had  already  chosen  for  his  future  home. 

Even  at  St.  Helena,  sick  and  irritated  as 
he  was,  his  rnind  was  never  quiet.  He 
dictated  in  the  five  and  a  half  years  he 
lived  on  the  island  most  of  the  matter  in 
the  journals  of  O'Meara,  Las  Cases,  and 
Montholon,  his  essays  on  Caesar,  Turenne, 
and  Frederick,  his  commentaries  and  sev- 
eral less  important  works, —  a  respectable 
literary  output,  certainly,  for  five  and  a 
half  years,  and  an  excellent  reply  to  the 
old  charge  that  the  fallen  Emperor  passed 
his  imprisonment  sulking. 

It  is  because  the  addresses  of  Napoleon 
are  so  characteristic  of  the  man,  because 
they  reveal    so  clearly  his  ambitions,  his 


XVlll  INTRODUCTION. 

methods,  his  genius  and  his  faults,  that  this 

selection  from  them  is  offered  to  the  public. 

It  is  a  sketch  of  Napoleon  by  himself ;  an 

incomplete  sketch,  to  be  sure,  but  one  in 

which  every  bold,  sharp  line  is  by  his  own 

hand. 

IDA   M.    TARBELL. 


CONTENTS. 

Introduction vii 

Biographical  Sketch        ....         xxiii 
Part  I.     The  Campaign  in  Italy  .        .        -27 

Address  to  the  Army  at  the  Beginning  of  the  Campaign, 

March,  1796. 
Proclamation  to  the  Army,  May,  1796. 
Letter  to  "  The  Directory,"  May  n,  1796. 
Letter  to  "  The  Directory,  May  14,  1796. 
Proclamation  to  the  Soldiers  on  Entering  Milan,  May 

15,  1796. 
Proclamation  to  the  Troops  on  Entering  Brescia,  May 

28,  1796. 
Address  to  Soldiers  During  the  Siege  of  Mantua,  Nov. 

6,  1796. 
Address  to  the  Troops  on  the  Conclusion  of  the  First 

Italian  Campaign,  March,  1797. 
Address  to  the  Genoese,  1797. 

Extract  from  a  Letter  to  the  Directory,  April,  1797. 
Address  to  Soldiers  after  the  Signing  of  the  Treaty  of 

Campo  Formio,  October,  1797. 
Proclamation  to  the  Cisalpine  Republic,  Nov.  17,  1797. 
Proclamation  on  Leaving  the  Troops  at  Rastadt,  No- 
vember, 1797. 
Address  to  the  Citizens  after  the  Signing  of  the  Treaty 

of  Campo  Formio,  Dec.  10,  1787. 

Part  II.     The  Egyptian  Expedition      .         .     49 

Proclamation  to  the  Troops  on  Entering  Toulon,  May 

9.  1798. 
Address  to  the  Military  Commissioners,  May  i6,  1798. 
Proclamation  to  the  Troops  on  Embarking  for  Egypt, 

June,  1798. 
Proclamation  to  the  Egyptians,  July,  1798. 


XX  CONTENTS. 

Letter  to  "The  Directory,"  July  24,  1798. 

Order  Respecting  the  Government  of  Egypt,  July  27, 

1798. 
Letter  to  Tippoo  Saib,  Jan.  25,  1799. 
Proclamation  to  the  Army  on  the  Abandoning  of  the 

Siege  of  Acre,  May,  1799. 
Proclamation  to  the  Army  on  His  Departure  for  France, 

August,  1799. 

Part  III.     Napoleon,  First  Consul       .        .     67 

Proclamation  to  the  French  People,  Nov.  lo,  1799. 
Proclamation  to  the  Army  of  the  East,  November,  1799. 
Proclamation  to  the  French  before  the  Second  Italian 

Campaign. 
Proclamation   to    the    Soldiers    before    the   Battle    of 

Marengo,  June,  1800. 
Letter  to   the    Emperor   of   Austria,  on   the    Field  of 

Marengo,  June,  1800. 
Order  to  Seize  all  English  in  France,  Announced  in 

the  Monitezir,  May,  1803. 

Part  IV.     Napoleon,  Emperor  of  France  .     77 

Letter  to  the  Pope,  1804. 

Address  to  the  Troops  on  Presenting  the  Colors,  Dec.  3, 

1804. 
Letter  to  the  King  of  England,  Jan.  2,  1805. 
Conversation  with  Decier  Regarding  the  Marriage  of 

Jerome  Bonaparte,  May  6,  1805. 
Letter  to  Jerome  Bonaparte,  May  6,  1805. 
Address  to  the  Senate,  1805. 
Proclamation  to  the  Troops  on  the  Commencement  of 

the  War  of  the  Third  Coalition,  September,  1805. 
Address  to  the  Austrians,  after  the  Fall  of  Ulm,  Oc- 
tober, 1805. 
Address   to   the   Troops   after   the  War  of   the  Third 

Coalition,  October,  1805. 
Proclamation    to    the   Soldiers    before    the    Battle   of 

Austerlitz,  Dec.  i,  1805. 
Proclamation  after  the  Battle  of  Austerlitz,  Dec.  3,  1805. 
Address  to  the  Soldiers  on  the  Signing  of  Peace  with 

Austria,  Dec.  26,  1S05. 
Proclamation  to  the  Soldiers,  February,  1806. 
Address  to  the  vSenate  on  Annexation  of  the  Cisalpine 

Republic,  1806. 


CONTENTS.  XXI 

To  the   Legislative    Body  before  the  Battle  of   Jena, 

October,  iSo6. 
Address  to  the  Captive  Officers  after  the  Battle  of  Jena, 

Oct.  15,  1806. 
Proclamation  to  the  Soldiers  before  Entering  Warsaw, 

Jan.  I,  1807. 
To  the  King  of   Prussia,  Entreating   Peace    after  the 

Battle  of  Eyiau,  February,  1807. 
Address  to  the  Army  on  Its  Return  to  Winter  Quarters 

on  the  Vistula,  1807. 
Proclamation  to  the  Soldiers  after  the  Battle  of  Fried- 
land,  June  24,  1S07. 
Letter  to  Champagny,  Nov.  15,  1807. 
Proclamation  to  the  Spaniards  on   the    Abdication   of 

Charles  IV.,  June  2,  1808. 
Address  to  the  Legislative  Body  before  Lea\ang  Paris 

for  the  Spanish  Campaign,  1808. 
Letter  to  the  Empei'or  of  Austria,  October,  1808. 
Proclamation   to   the    Soldiers    during   the    March  for 

Spain,  1S08. 
Summons  to  M.  de  Morla  to  Surrender  Madrid,  Dec.  3, 

1808. 
Proclamation  to  the  Spanish  People,  December,  1808. 
Letter  to  the  American  Minister,  Armstrong,  1809. 
Proclamation  to  the  Soldiers  before  the  Battle  of  Eck- 

muhl,  April,  1809. 
Proclamation  to  the  Troops  at  Ratisbon,  April,  1809. 
Address  to  the  Troops  on  Entering  Vienna,  May,  1809. 
Proclamation  to  the  Hungarians,  1S09. 

Part  V.     The  Fall  of  Napoleon  .        .119 

Address  to  the  Troops  on  the  Beginning  of  the  Russian 

Campaign,  May,  1812. 
Address  to  the  Troops  before  the  Battle  of  Borodino, 

Sept.  7,  1812. 
Letter  to  Alexander  I.,  Emperor  of  Russia,  Sept.  20, 

l8l2. 

Discourse  at  the  Opening  of  the  Legislative  Body,  Feb. 

14,  1813. 
Address  to  the  Legislative  Body,  December,  1813. 
Address  to  the  Guard,  April  2,  18 14. 
Speech  of  Abdication,  April  2,  1814. 
Farewell  to  the  Old  Guard,  April  20,  1814. 
Proclamation  to  the  French  People  on  His  Return  from 

Elba,  March  5,  18 15. 


XXU  CONTENTS. 

Napoleon's  Proclamation  to  the  Army  on  His  Return 

from  Elba,  March  5,  18 15. 
Proclamation   on   the    Anniversary   of   the    Battles  of 

Marengo  and  Friedland,  June  14,  1815. 
Proclamation  to  the  Belgians,  June  17,  1815. 
Napoleon's  Proclamation  to  the  French  People  on  His 

Second  Abdication,  June  22,  18 15. 
Bonaparte's  Protest,  Written  on  Board  the  Bellerophon, 

Aug.  4,  1815. 

Napoleon's  Will 145 


BIOGRAPHICAL    SKETCH. 

Napoleon  Bonaparte  was  born  at  Ajaccio, 
Corsica,  on  August  15,  1769,  the  fourth  child 
of  Charles  Bonaparte  and  Laetitia  Romolino. 
He  was  educated  in  France  at  the  Royal  Mili- 
tary Schools  of  Brienne  and  of  Paris,  and 
when  sixteen  years  old  was  appointed. second 
lieutenant  in  a  French  artillery  regiment. 
From  November,  1785,  to  May,  1792,  he  was 
alternately  with  his  regiment  and  on  leaves 
of  absence  in  Corsica.  Sympathizing  with 
the  French  Revolution,  he  attempted  to  aid 
the  Revolutionary  party  in  Corsica  against  the 
party  of  the  Corsican  patriot,  Paoli,  but  was 
defeated,  and  obliged  with  his  family  to  fly 
to  France.  In  October,  1793,  he  was  given 
command  of  the  artillery  at  the  siege  of 
Toulon,  and  distinguished  himself  in  the  cap- 
ture of  the  town.  After  a  year  and  a  half  of 
military  service  in  the  south,  he  returned  to 
Paris,  and  on  the  13  th  Vendemiaii-e  (October 
5),  1795,  he  commanded  the  troops  of  the 
Convention  against  the  sections.  This  led 
to  his  being  appointed,  in  1796,  commander-in- 
chief  of  the  Army  of  Italy.      He  went  to  his 


XXIV  NAPOLEON  S    ADDRESSES. 

post  in  March,  1796,  and  after  a  series  of 
successful  battles  drove  the  Austrians  into 
Mantua.  Four  attempts  to  relieve  the  city 
were  made  by  the  enemy,  but  failed,  and  in 
February,  1797,  Wurmser,  the  Austrian  gen- 
eral, surrendered.  Bonaparte  then  drove  the 
rest  of  the  Austrian  force  from  Italy,  and  in 
October,  1797,  signed  the  treaty  of  Campo 
Formio. 

In  May,  1798,  he  undertook  the  conquest 
of  Egypt.  He  succeeded  in  entering  the 
country  and  taking  possession  of  Cairo  and 
Alexandria,  but  on  August  i,  at  the  Battle  of 
the  Nile,  the  French  fleet  was  destroyed  by 
the  English  under  Nelson.  A  disastrous  ex- 
pedition into  Syria  occupied  the  spring  of 
1799.  On  returning  to  Egypt,  Bonaparte 
received  news  of  political  disturbances  in 
France,  and  leaving  the  army  under  Kle'ber 
he  went  to  Paris,  where,  by  the  coup  if  etaf  of 
the  1 8th  and  19th  Bnwiaire  (November  9  and 
10)  he  became  First  Consul.  During  Bona- 
parte's absence  in  Egypt,  war  had  again 
broken  out  between  France  and  Austria,  and 
the  First  Consul  hurried  against  the  enemy. 
The  Battle  of  Marengo  on  June  14,  1800, 
again  drove  the  Austrians  from  Italy,  and 
February,  1801,  peace  was  concluded.  A 
treaty  with  England  followed  in  March,  1802. 


BIOGRAPHICAL    SKETCH.  XXV 

Napoleon  now  took  hold  of  the  reorganization 
of  P^rance  with  great  energy,  but  in  May,  1803, 
war  again  broke  out  between  France  and  Eng- 
land, and  the  First  Consul  made  elaborate 
preparations  to  invade  England.  While  pre- 
paring for  invasion  he  was  crowned  Emperor 
of  the  French  on  December  2,  1804.  Before 
the  plan  against  England  could  be  carried  out, 
Russia  and  Austria  began  hostilities,  but  the 
alliance  was  broken  by  the  victory  won  by 
Napoleon  at  Austerlitz  on  December  2,  1805, 
and  peace  was  signed  at  Presburg.  The  next 
year,  1806,  there  was  war  with  Prussia  and 
Russia.  Napoleon  won  the  Battle  of  Jena, 
October  14,  entered  Berlin,  October  25,  and 
issued  the  Berlin  Decrees  declaring  a  conti- 
nental blockade  against  England  on  Novem- 
ber 21.  On  February  8,  1807,  he  fought  with 
the  Russians  the  doubtful  Battle  of  Eylau,  and 
on  June  14,  the  decisive  Battle  of  Friedland. 
The  Peace  of  Tilsit  followed,  on  July  7.  In 
1808  Napoleon  attempted  to  take  possession 
of  Spain,  but  before  the  conquest  was  com- 
plete Austria  declared  war.  The  campaign 
of  Wagram  in  the  spring  and  summer  of  1809 
subdued  the  Austrians.  In  December  of 
1809,  Napoleon  divorced  Josephine,  by  whom 
he  had  ceased  to  hope  to  have  an  heir  to  the 
throne,   and  in   April,    1810,   he  married  the 


xxvi  napoleon's  addresses. 

Austrian  Princess,  Marie  Louise.  The  next 
year  a  son,  the  King  of  Rome,  was  born  to 
them.  The  alliance  between  France  and 
Russia  was  broken  in  1812,  and  Napoleon 
invaded  Russia.  The  campaign  ended  in  a 
frightful  retreat,  the  army  being  practically 
destroyed.  Napoleon  hastened  to  Paris,  and 
by  the  spring  of  18 13  had  a  new  force  in  the 
field.  After  successful  battles  at  Liitzen, 
Bautzen,  and  Dresden,  he  was  routed  com- 
pletely at  Leipsic  in  October.  The  allies 
invaded  France  in  January,  18 14,  and  a  three 
months'  campaign  compelled  Paris  to  capitu- 
late, and  Napoleon  to  abdicate.  The  treaty 
with  the  allies  gave  the  Emperor  the  island  of 
Elbe  for  life,  and  hither  he  went  at  once,  but 
in  February,  18 15,  he  left  the  island  for 
France,  and  was  greeted  joyfully  by  the  French 
army  and  nation.  Louis  XVIII.  was  obliged 
to  fly  from  the  country,  and  Napoleon  was 
restored  to  the  throne.  The  allies  immedi- 
ately attacked  him,  and  at  Waterloo,  on  June 
18,  18 1 5,  he  was  defeated.  He  again  resigned 
the  throne,  and  on  July  15  surrendered  to  the 
English,  who  sent  him  a  captive  to  St.  Helena, 
where  he  died  on  May  5,  182 1.  Napoleon 
was  buried  on  the  island,  but  in  1840  his 
remains  were  removed  to  France,  and  placed 
in  the  Invalides. 


NAPOLEON'S    ADDRESSES. 


SELECTIONS    OF    THE    SPEECHES    AND    LETTERS    OF 
NAPOLEON    FROM    I796    UNTIL    HIS    DEATH. 


PART    I. 

THE    CAMPAIGN    IN    ITALY 

Address  to  the  Ai'my  at  the  Begm?iing  of  the 
Campaign^  March,  lygd. 

"  Soldiers,  you  are  naked  and  ill  -  fed ! 
Government  owes  you  much  and  can  give 
you  nothing.  The  patience  and  courage  you 
have  shown  in  the  midst  of  these  rocks  are 
admirable ;  but  they  gain  you  no  renown  ;  no 
glory  results  to  you  from  your  endurance.  It 
is  my  design  to  lead  you  into  the  most  fertile 
plains  of  the  world.  Rich  provinces  and  great 
cities  will  be  in  your  power  ;  there  you  will 
find  honor,  glory,  and  wealth.  Soldiers  of 
Italy  !  will  you  be  wanting  in  courage  or 
perseverance  ? " 


28  napoleon's  addresses. 


Proclamation  to  the  Army,  May,  I7g6. 

"  Soldiers  :  You  have  in  fifteen  days  gained 
six  victories,  taken  twenty-one  stand  of  colors, 
fifty -five  pieces  of  cannon,  and  several  for- 
tresses, and  overrun  the  richest  part  of  Pied- 
mont;  you  have  made  15,000  prisoners,  and 
killed  or  wounded  upwards  of  10,000  men. 
Hitherto  you  have  been  fighting  for  barren 
rocks,  made  memorable  by  your  valor,  though 
useless  to  your  country,  but  your  exploits 
now  equal  those  of  the  Armies  of  Holland 
and  the  Rhine.  You  were  utterly  destitute, 
and  you  have  supplied  all  your  wants.  You 
have  gained  battles  without  cannon,  passed 
rivers  without  bridges,  performed  forced 
marches  without  shoes,  and  bivouacked  with- 
out strong  liquors,  and  often  without  bread. 
None  but  Republican  phalanxes,  the  soldiers 
of  liberty,  could  have  endured  what  you  have 
done  ;  thanks  to  you,  soldiers,  for  your  per- 
severance !  Your  grateful  country  owes  its 
safety  to  you  ;  and  if  the  taking  of  Toulon 
was  an  earnest  of  the  immortal  campaign  of 
1794,  your  present  victories  foretell  one  more 
glorious.  The  two  armies  which  lately  at- 
tacked you  in  full  confidence,  now  fly  before 
you  in  consternation  ;  the  perverse  men-  who 


THE    CAMPAIGN    IN    ITALY.  29 

laughed  at  your  distress,  and  inwardly  rejoiced 
at  the  triumph  of  your  enemies,  are  now  con- 
founded and  trembling.  But,  soldiers,  you 
have  yet  done  nothing,  for  there  still  remains 
much  to  do.  Neither  Turin  nor  Milan  are 
yours  ;  the  ashes  of  the  conquerors  of  Tar- 
quin  are  still  trodden  underfoot  by  the  assas- 
sins of  Basseville.  It  is  said  that  there  are 
some  among  you  whose  courage  is  shaken, 
and  who  would  prefer  returning  to  the  sum- 
mits of  the  Alps  and  Apennines.  No,  I  can- 
not believe  it.  The  victors  of  Montenotte, 
Millesimo,  Dego,  and  Mondovi  are  eager  to 
extend  the  glory  of  the  French  name !  " 


30  NAPOLEONS    ADDRESSES. 


Letter  to  "  The  Directory." 

"  Headquarters,  Lodi,  ) 
"  May  II,  1796.  ) 

""  Citizen  Directors  :  —  I  thought  that  the 
passage  of  the  Po  would  be  the  most  auda- 
cious performance  of  the  campaign,  the  Battle 
of  Millesimo  the  liveliest  encounter,  but  I 
have  yet  to  give  you  an  account  of  the  Battle 
of  Lodi. 

"  At  three  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the 
2 1  St,  we  pitched  our  headquarters  at  Casal.  At 
nine  o'clock,  our  vanguard  encountered  the 
enemy  defending  the  approaches  to  Lodi.  I 
immediately  ordered  all  the  cavalry  to  mount 
with  four  pieces  of  light  artillery  which  had 
just  arrived,  drawn  by  the  carriage  horses  of 
the  lords  of  Plaisance. 

"  The  division  of  General  Augereau,  which 
had  camped  over  night  at  Borghetto,  and  that 
of  General  Massena,  which  slept  at  Casal, 
were  put  in  motion.  Meantime,  our  van- 
guard had  overturned  all  the  posts  of  the 
enemy,  and  seized  one  of  their  cannon.  We 
pursued  the  enemy  into  Lodi,  they  having 
already  crossed  the  Adda  by  the  bridge. 
Beaulieu  with  all  his  army  was  drawn  up  in 
battle  array.     Thirty  set  cannon  defended  the 


THE    CAMPAIGN    IN    ITALY.  3 1 

passage  of  the  bridge.  I  formed  all  my  artil- 
lery into  a  battery.  The  cannonading  was 
very  lively  for  several  hours. 

"  As  soon  as  the  army  arrived  it  formed  into 
a  close  colmnn  with  the  second  battalion  of 
rifles  at  its  head,  followed  by  all  the  battalions 
of  grenadiers.  On  the  run,  with  cries  of  Vive 
la  Republique^  they  appeared  on  the  bridge, 
which  is  over  six  hundred  feet  long.  The 
enemy  kept  up  a  terrible  fire.  The  head  of 
the  column  almost  seemed  to  waver.  A 
moment's  hesitation  and  all  would  have  been 
lost.  The  Generals  Berthier,  Massena,  Cer- 
voni,  Dallemagne,  the  Brigadier-General  Lan- 
nes,  and  Battalion  -  Commander  Dupas  felt 
this,  and,  rushing  to  the  front,  decided  the  fate 
of  the  day. 

"This  redoubtable  column  overrode  all  op- 
position, breaking  Beaulieu's  order  of  battle, 
capturing  all  his  artillery,  and  sowing  on  all 
sides  seeds  of  terror,  flight,  and  death.  In 
the  twinkling  of  an  eye  the  enemy's  army  was 
dispersed.  The  Generals  Rusca,  Augereau, 
and  Beyrand  crossed  as  soon  as  their  divi- 
sions arrived,  and  completed  the  victory. 
The  cavalry  crossed  the  Adda  at  a  ford  ;  but 
the  ford  proving  extremely  bad,  there  was 
much  delay,  which  prevented  an  engage- 
ment. 


32  NAPOLEON  S    ADDRESSES. 

"  The  enemy's  cavalry  tried  charging  our 
troops,  in  order  to  protect  the  retreat  of  their 
infantry,  but  our  men  were  hard  to  frighten. 

"  Nightfall  and  the  extreme  fatigue  of  the 
troops,  many  of  whom  had  made  more  than 
ten  leagues  during  the  day,  forced  us  to  forego 
the  pleasure  of  pursuit. 

"  The  enemy  lost  twenty  pieces  of  cannon, 
and  from  two  to  three  thousand  killed, 
wounded  or  prisoners.  We  lost  but  150  men, 
dead  and  wounded. 

"  Citizen  Latour,  General  Massena's  captain 
aide-de-camp,  received  several  sabre  cuts.  I 
want  the  place  of  battalion  commander  for 
this  brave  officer. 

"  Citizen  Marmont,  my  aide-de-camp  briga- 
dier-general, had  a  horse  shot  under  him. 

"Citizen  Lemarois,  my  captain  aide-de-camp, 
had  his  clothes  riddled  by  balls.  The  courage 
of  this  young  officer  is  equal  to  his  activity. 

"  If  called  upon  to  name  all  the  soldiers  who 
distinguished  themselves  on  that  extraordinary 
day,  I  should  be  obliged  to  name  all  the 
riflemen  and  grenadiers  of  the  vanguard,  and 
nearly  all  the  officers  of  the  staff.  But  I  must 
not  forget  the  intrepid  Berthier,  who  was,  in 
one  day,  gunner,  cavalier,  and  grenadier. 
Brigadier -General  Sugny,  commandnig  the 
artillery,  conducted  himself  creditably. 


THE    CAMPAIGN    IN    ITALY.  33 

"  Beaulieu  fled  with  the  remains  of  his  army. 
Already  Normandy  may  be  considered  as 
belonging  to  the  Republic.  At  this  moment 
Beaulieu  is  passing  through  the  Venetian 
States,  many  of  whose  cities  have  closed  their 
doors  upon  him. 

"  I  hope  soon  to  send  you  the  keys  of  Milan 
and  Pavia. 

"  Although,  since  the  beginning  of  the 
campaign,  we  have  had  some  pretty  hot  en- 
counters, which  tlie  army  of  the  French 
Republic  Jiave  met  witli  audacity,  not  one 
of  them  has  approached  the  terrible  passage 
of  the  bridge  at  Lodi. 

"  If  we  have  lost  but  few^  men  it  is  due  to 
promptness  of  execution,  and  to  the  sudden 
effect  produced  upon  the  opposing  army  by 
the  size  and  formidable  fire  of  our  intrepid 
column." 


34  NAPOLEON  S    ADDRESSES. 


Letter  to  "  The  Directory. ^^ 

"  Headquarters,  Lodi.  | 
"May  14,  1796.  \ 

"  Citizen  Directors :  —  I  think  it  most  impol- 
itic to  divide  the  ItaUan  army  into  two  sec- 
tions ;  it  is  equally  contrary  to  the  interests  of 
the  Republic  to  put  two  generals  in  command. 

"  The  expedition  against  Livourne,  Rome, 
and  Naples  is  a  small  affair ;  it  can  be  ac- 
complished by  arranging  the  divisions  in 
echelon  in  such  a  manner  as  to  enable  them, 
by  a  retrograde  march,  to  appear  in  force 
against  the  Austrians,  and  threaten  to  hem 
them  in  at  the  slightest  movement  on  their  part. 

"  For  this  it  is  not  only  necessary  to  have  one 
general,  but  he  should  have  nothing  to  hinder 
him  in  his  march  or  in  his  operations.  I  have 
conducted  the  campaign  without  consulting 
any  one.  I  should  have  accomplished  nothing 
worth  the  trouble  had  I  been  obliged  to 
reconcile  my  ideas  with  those  of  another.  I 
have  gained  some  advantages  over  very  supe- 
rior forces  while  in  an  almost  destitute  con- 
dition ;  because  I  was  persuaded  of  your 
entire  confidence  in  me,  mv  moves  were  as 
prompt  as  my  thoughts. 

"  If  you  fetter  me  on  all  sides ;  if  it  is  nee- 


THE    CAMPAIGN    IN    ITALY.  35 

essary  for  me  to  confer  with  the  commis- 
sioners of  the  Government  regarding  each 
step ;  if  they  have  the  right  to  change  my 
movements,  to  send  me  troops  or  withdraw 
them  at  their  will,  then  look  for  no  good. 

"  If  you  reduce  your  power  by  dividing  your 
forces,  if  you  break  the  unity  of  the  military 
outline  in  Italy,  with  grief  I  tell  you,  you  will 
have  lost  the  most  favorable  occasion  for 
bringing  Italy  to  terms. 

"  In  the  present  condition  of  the  affairs  of 
the  Republic  in  Italy,  it  is  indispensable  for 
you  to  have  a  general  in  whom  you  have 
entire  confidence.  If  it  is  not  I,  I  make  no 
complaint,  I  shall  only  strive  to  redouble  my 
zeal  in  order  to  merit  your  esteem  in  the  past 
that  you  may  confide  to  me.  Every  one  has 
his  own  manner  of  conducting  a  war.  Gen- 
eral Keelerman  has  had  more  experience  and 
will  do  better  than  I,  but  together  we  would 
make  a  dire  failure. 

"  I  cannot  render  our  country  any  essential 
service  unless  invested  with  your  absolute  and 
entire  confidence.  It  requires  much  courage 
on  my  part  to  write  you  in  this  w^ay,  I  could 
so  easily  be  accused  of  pride  and  ambition. 
But  I  owe  the  expression  of  all  my  opinions 
on  the  subject  to  one  whose  many  tokens  of 
esteem  I  shall  never  forget." 


36  napoleon's  addresses. 


Proclamation  to  the  Soldiers  on  Entering  Milan^ 
May  Z5,  1796. 

"  Soldiers :  You  have  rushed  Uke  a  torrent 
from  the  top  of  the  Apennmes ;  you  have 
overthrown  and  scattered  all  that  opposed  your 
march.  Piedmont,  delivered  from  Austrian 
tyranny,  indulges  her  natural  sentiments  of 
peace  and  friendship  towards  France.  Milan 
is  yours,  and  the  Republican  flag  waves 
throughout  Lombardy.  The  Dukes  of  Parma 
and  Modena  owe  their  political  existence  to 
your  generosity  alone.  The  army  which  so 
proudly  threatened  you  can  find  no  barrier  to 
protect  it  against  your  courage ;  neither  the 
Po,  the  Ticino,  nor  the  Adda  could  stop  you 
for  a  single  day.  These  vaunted  bulwarks  of 
Italy  opposed  you  in  vain  ;  you  passed  them 
as  rapidly  as  the  Apennines.  These  great 
successes  have  filled  the  heart  of  your  coun- 
try with  joy.  Your  representatives  have  or- 
dered a  festival  to  commemorate  your  victo- 
ries, which  has  been  held  in  every  district  of 
the  Republic.  There  your  fathers,  your  moth- 
ers, your  wives,  sisters,  and  mistresses  rejoiced 
in  your  good  fortune,  and  proudly  boasted  of 
belonging  to  you.  Yes,  soldiers,  you  have 
done  much,  —  but  remains  there  nothing  more 


THE    CAMPAIGN    IN    ITALY.  37 

to  do  ?  Shall  it  be  said  of  us  that  we  knew 
how  to  conquer,  but  not  how  to  make  use  of 
victory  ?  Shall  posterity  reproach  us  with 
having  found  Capau  in  Lombardy  ?  But  I 
see  you  already  hasten  to  arms.  An  effemi- 
nate repose  is  tedious  to  you  ;  the  days  which 
are  lost  to  glory  are  lost  to  your  happiness. 
Well,  then,  let  us  set  forth  !  We  have  still 
forced  marches  to  make,  enemies  to  subdue, 
laurels  to  gather,  injuries  to  revenge.  Let 
those  who  have  sharpened  the  daggers  of  civil 
war  in  France,  who  have  basely  murdered  our 
ministers,  and  burnt  our  ships  at  Toulon, 
tremble  !  The  hour  of  vengeance  has  struck ; 
but  let  the  people  of  all  countries  be  free 
from  apprehension  ;  we  are  the  friends  of  the 
people  everywhere,  and  those  great  men  whom 
we  have  taken  for  our  models.  To  restore 
the  capitol,  to  replace  the  statues  of  the  heroes 
who  rendered  it  illustrious,  to  rouse  the  Roman 
people,  stupefied  by  several  ages  of  slavery,  — 
such  will  be  the  fruit  of  our  victories ;  they 
will  form  an  era  for  posterity ;  you  will  have 
the  immortal  glory  of  changing  the  face  of 
the  finest  part  of  Europe.  The  French  people, 
free  and  respected  by  the  whole  world,  will 
give  to  Europe  a  glorious  peace,  which  will 
indemnify  them  for  the  sacrifices  of  every 
kind  which  for  the  last  six  years  they  have 


38  napoleon's  addresses. 

been  making.  You  will  then  return  to  your 
homes  and  your  country.  Men  will  say  as 
they  point  you  out,  '  He  belonged  to  the  army 
of  Italy  y 


THE    CAMPAIGN    IN    ITALY.  39 


Proclamation  to  the  T?-oops  07i  Entering  B?'escia, 
May  28,  I7g6. 

"  It  is  to  deliver  the  finest  country  in  Eu- 
rope from  the  iron  yoke  of  the  proud  House 
of  Austria,  that  the  French  army  lias  braved 
the  most  formidable  obstacles.  Victory,  siding 
with  justice,  has  crowned  its  eiforts  with  suc- 
cess, the  wreck  of  the  enemy's  army  has 
retreated  behind  the  Mincio.  In  order  to 
pursue  them,  the  French  army  enters  the  ter- 
ritory of  the  Republic  of  Venice ;  but  it  will 
not  forget  that  the  two  Republics  are  united 
by  ancient  friendship.  Religion,  government, 
and  customs  shall  be  respected.  Let  the  peo- 
ple be  free  from  apprehension,  the  severest 
discipline  will  be  kept  up ;  whatever  the  army 
is  supplied  with  shall  be  punctually  paid  for  in 
money.  The  general-in-chief  invites  the  offi- 
cers of  the  Republic  of  Venice,  the  magis- 
trates, and  priests  to  make  known  his  senti- 
ments to  the  people,  in  order  that  the  friend- 
ship which  has  so  long  subsisted  between  the 
two  nations  may  be  cemented  by  confidence. 
Faithful  in  the  path  of  honor  as  in  that  of 
victory,  the  French  soldier  is  terrible  only  to 
the  enemies  of  his  liberty  and  his  Govern- 
ment." 


40  NAPOLEON  S    ADDRESSES. 


Address  to  Soldiers  During  the  Siege  of 
Mantua^  Nov.  6,  lygd. 

"  Soldiers  :  I  am  not  satisfied  with  you  ;  you 
have  shown  neither  bravery,  discipline,  nor 
perseverance ;  no  position  could  rally  you ; 
you  abandoned  yourselves  to  a  panic-terror ; 
you  suffered  yourselves  to  be  driven  from 
situations  where  a  handful  of  brave  men 
might  have  stopped  an  army.  Soldiers  of 
the  39th  and  85  th,  you  are  not  French  sol- 
diers. Quartermaster -general,  let  it  be  in- 
scribed on  their  colors,  '  jyiey  no  lo7iger  form 
part  of  the  Army  of  Italy  I '  " 


THE    CAMPAIGN    IN    ITALY.  41 


Address  to  the  Troops  on  the   Conchismi  of 
the  First  Italian   Campaign.,  March,  i7Qy. 

"  Soldiers  :  The  campaign  just  ended  has 
given  you  imperishable  renown.  You  ha\'e 
been  victorious  in  fourteen  pitched  battles 
and  seventy  actions.  You  have  taken  more 
than  a  hundred  thousand  prisoners,  five  hun- 
dred field -pieces,  two  thousand  heavy  guns, 
and  four  pontoon  trains.  You  have  main- 
tained the  army  during  the  whole  campaign. 
In  addition  to  this,  you  have  sent  six  millions 
of  dollars  to  the  public  treasury,  and  have 
enriched  the  National  Museum  with  three 
hundred  masterpieces  of  the  arts  of  ancient 
and  modern  Italy,  which  it  has  required  thirty 
centuries  to  produce.  You  have  conquered 
the  finest  countries  in  Europe.  The  French 
flag  waves  for  the  first  time  upon  the  Adriatic 
opposite  to  Macedon,  the  native  country  of 
Alexander.  Still  higher  destinies  await  you. 
I  know  that  you  will  not  prove  unworthy  of 
them.  Of  all  the  foes  that  conspired  to  stifle 
the  Republic  in  its  birth,  the  Austrian  Em- 
peror alone  remains  before  you.  To  obtain 
peace  we  must  seek  it  in  the  heart  of  his 
hereditary  State.  You  will  there  find  a  brave 
people,  whose  religion  and  customs  you  will 


42  NAPOLEON  S    ADDRESSES. 

respect,  and  whose  prosperity  you  will  hold 
sacred.  Remember  that  it  is  liberty  you 
carry  to  the  brave  Hungarian  nation." 


THE    CAMPAIGN    IN    ITALY.  43 

Addj'ess  to  the  Genoese,  ^797- 

"  I  will  respond,  citizens,  to  the  confidence 
you  have  reposed  in  me.  It  is  not  enough 
that  you  refrain  from  hostility  to  religion. 
You  should  do  nothing  which  can  cause  in- 
quietude to  tender  consciences.  To  exclude 
the  nobles  from  any  public  office,  is  an  act  of 
extreme  injustice.  You  thus  repeat  the  wrong 
which  you  condemn  in  them.  Why  are  you 
people  of  Genoa  so  changed  ?  Their  first 
impulses  of  fraternal  kindness  have  been 
succeeded  by  terror  and  fear.  Remember 
that  the  priests  were  the  first  who  rallied 
around  the  tree  of  liberty.  They  first  told 
you  that  the  morality  of  the  gospel  is  demo- 
cratic. Men  have  taken  advantage  of  the 
faults,  perhaps  of  the  crimes  of  individual 
priests,  to  unite  against  Christianity.  You 
have  proscribed  without  discrimination. 
When  a  State  becomes  accustomed  to  con- 
demn without  hearing,  to  applaud  a  discourse 
because  it  is  impassioned ;  when  exaggeration 
and  madness  are  called  virtue,  moderation 
and  equity  designated  as  crimes,  that  State  is 
near  its  ruin.  Believe  me,  I  shall  consider 
that  one  of  the  happiest  moments  of  my  life 
in  which  I  hear  that  the  people  of  Genoa  are, 
united  among  themselves  and  live  happily. " 


44  '       NAPOLEON  S    ADDRESSES. 


Extract  from  a  Letter  to  the  Directory^ 
April,  lygy. 

"  From  these  different  posts  we  shall  com- 
mand the  Mediterranean,  we  shall  keep  an 
eye  on  the  Ottoman  Empire,  which  is  crum- 
bling to  pieces,  and  we  shall  have  it  in  our 
power  to  render  the  dominion  of  the  ocean 
almost  useless  to  the  English.  They  have 
possession  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  We 
can  do  without  it.  Let  us  occupy  Egypt.  We 
shall  be  in  the  direct  road  for  India.  It  will 
be  easy  for  us  to  found  there  one  of  the  finest 
colonies  in  the  world.  //  is  in  Egypt  that  7ve 
must  attack  Ejigland^ 


THE    CAMPAIGN    IN    ITALY.  45 


Address   to    Soldiers   after   the  Signing  of  the 
Treaty  of  Campo  Forinio^  October,  i797- 

"  Soldiers  :  I  set  out  to-morrow  for  Germany. 
Separated  from  the  army,  I  shall  sigh  for  the 
moment  of  my  rejoining  it,  and  brave  fresh 
dangers.  Whatever  post  Government  may 
assign  to  the  soldiers  of  the  Army  of  Italy, 
they  will  always  be  the  worthy  supporters  of 
liberty  and  of  the  glory  of  the  French  name. 
Soldiers,  when  you  talk  of  the  Princes  you 
have  conquered,  of  the  nations  you  have  set 
free,  and  the  battles  you  have  fought  in  two 
campaigns,  say :  /;/  the  next  two  ive  shall  do 
still  more  !  " 


46  napoleon's  addresses. 


Proclamation  to  the  Cisalpine  Republic,  Nov. 
17,  1797. 

"  We  have  given  you  liberty.  Take  care 
you  preserve  it.  To  be  worthy  of  your  destiny 
make  only  discreet  and  honorable  laws,  and 
cause  them  to  be  executed  with  energy. 
Favor  the  diffusion  of  knowledge,  and  respect 
religion.  Compose  your  battalions  not  of 
disreputable  men,  but  with  citizens  imbued 
with  the  principles  of  the  Republic,  and 
closely  linked  with  the  prosperity.  You  have 
need  to  impress  yourselves  with  the  feelings 
of  your  strength,  and  with  the  dignity  which 
befits  the  free  man.  Divided  and  bowed 
by  ages  of  tyranny,  you  could  not  alone 
have  achieved  your  independence.  In  a  few 
years,  if  true  to  yourselves,  no  nation  will  be 
strong  enough  to  wrest  liberty  from  you.  Till 
then  the  great  nation  will  protect  you." 


THE    CAMPAIGN    IN    ITALY.  47 


Proclamation  on  Leaving  the  Troops  at  Rastadt^ 
November^  lygy. 

"  Soldiers  :  I  leave  you  to  -  morrow.  In 
separating  myself  from  the  army  I  am  con- 
soled with  the  thought  that  I  shall  soon  meet 
you  again,  and  engage  with  you  in  new  enter- 
prises. Soldiers,  when  conversing  among 
yourselves  of  the  kings  you  have  vanquished, 
of  the  people  upon  whom  you  have  conferred 
liberty,  of  the  victories  you  have  won  in  two 
campaigns,  say,  '  In  the  next  two  we  will 
accomplish  still  more.' " 


48  napoleon's  addresses. 


Address  to  the  Citizens  after  the  Stgiiing  of  the 
Treaty  of  Campo  Formio^  Dec.  10,  17 8y. 

"  Citizens :  The  French  people,  in  order  to 
be  free,  had  kings  to  combat.  To  obtain  a 
constitution  founded  on  reason  it  had  the 
prejudices  of  eighteen  centuries  to  overcome. 
Priestcraft,  feudalism,  despotism,  have  suc- 
cessively, for  two  thousand  years,  governed 
Europe.  From  the  peace  you  have  just  con- 
cluded dates  the  era  of  representative  govern- 
ments. You  have  succeeded  in  organizing  the 
great  nation,  whose  vast  territory  is  circum- 
scribed only  because  nature  herself  has  fixed 
its  limits.  You  have  done  more.  The  two 
finest  countries  in  Europe,  formerly  as  re- 
nowned for  the  arts,  the  sciences,  and  the 
illustrious  men,  whose  cradle  they  were,  see 
with  the  greatest  hopes  genius  and  freedom 
issuing  from  the  tomb  of  their  ancestors.  I 
have  the  honor  to  deliver  to  you  the  treaty 
signed  at  Campo  Formio,  and  ratified  by  the 
Emperor.  Peace  secures  the  liberty,  the 
prosperity,  and  the  glory  of  the  Republic.  As 
soon  as  the  happiness  of  France  is  secured  by 
the  best  organic  laws,  the  whole  of  Europe 
will  be  free." 


PART    II. 

THE   EGYPTIAN    EXPEDITION. 

Proclamation  to  the  Troops  on  Entering  Toulon^ 
May  g,  lygS. 

"  Soldiers  :  You  are  one  of  the  wings  of  the 
Army  of  England.  You  have  made  war  in 
mountains,  plains,  and  cities.  It  remains  to 
make  it  on  the  ocean.  The  Roman  legions, 
whom  you  have  often  imitated,  but  never  yet 
equaled,  combated  Carthage,  by  turns,  on  the 
seas  and  on  the  plains  of  Zama.  Victory 
never  deserted  their  standards,  because  they 
never  ceased  to  be  brave,  patient,  and  united. 
Soldiers,  the  eyes  of  Europe  are  upon  you. 
You  have  great  destinies  to  accomplish, 
battles  to  fight,  dangers  and  fatigues  to  over- 
come. You  are  about  to  do  more  than  you 
have  yet  done,  for  the  prosperity  of  your 
country,  the  happiness  of  man,  and  for  your 
own  glory." 


50  napoleon's  addresses. 


Address    to    the  Military    Commissioners, 
May  i6,  1798. 

"  Bonaparte,  Member  of  the  National  Insti- 
tute, TO  THE  Military  Commissioners  of 
the   Ninth    Division,    established    by  the 

LAW    OF   THE    I9TH    FrUCTIDOR. 

"  I  have  learned,  citizens,  with  deep  regret, 
that  an  old  man,  between  seventy  and  eighty 
years  of  age,  and  some  unfortunate  women, 
in  a  state  of  pregnancy,  or  surrounded  by 
children  of  tender  age,  have  been  shot  on  the 
charge  of  emigration. 

"  Have  the  soldiers  of  liberty  become  exe- 
cutioners ?  Can  the  mercy  which  they  have 
exercised  even  in  the  fury  of  the  battle  be 
extinct  in  their  hearts  ? 

"The  law  of  the  19th  Fructidor  was  a 
measure  of  public  safety.  Its  object  was  to 
reach  conspirators,  not  women  and  aged  men. 

"  I  therefore  exhort  you,  citizens,  whenever 
the  law  brings  to  your  tribunals  women  or  old 
men,  to  declare  that  in  the  field  of  battle  you 
have  respected  the  women  and  old  men  of 
your  enemies. 

"  The  officer  who  signs  a  sentence  against 
a  person  incapable  of  bearing  arms  is  a 
coward." 


THE    EGYPTIAN    EXPEDITION.  5 1 


Proclamation  to  the  Troops  on  Embarking  for 
Egypt,  June,  lygS. 

"  Headquarters  on  board  the  Orient,  | 
"  the  4th  Messidor,  year  6.  J 

"  Bonaparte,    Member   of  the   National   Insti- 
tute, General-in-Chief. 

"  Soldiers  :  — You  are  about  to  undertake  a 
conquest  the  effects  of  which,  on  civilization 
and  commerce,  are  incalculable.  The  blow 
you  are  about  to  give  to  England  will  be  the 
best  aimed,  the  most  sensibly  felt,  she  can 
receive  until  the  time  arrives  when  you  can 
give  her  her  death-blow. 

"  We  must  make  some  fatiguing  marches  ;  we 
must  fight  several  battles  ;  we  shall  succeed  in 
all  we  undertake.  The  destinies  are  with  us. 
The  Mameluke  beys,  who  favor  exclusively 
English  commerce,  whose  extortions  oppress 
our  merchants,  and  who  tyrannize  over  the 
unfortunate  inhabitants  of  the  Nile,  a  few 
days  after  our  arrival  will  no  longer  exist. 

"  The  people  amongst  whom  we  are  going  to 
live  are  Mahometans.  The  first  article  of 
their  faith  is  this :  '  There  is  but  one  God 
and  Mahomet  is  His  prophet.'  Do  not  con- 
tradict them,     Behave    to    them    as   you    be- 


52  napoleon's  addresses. 

haved  to  the  Jews  —  to  the  Italians.  Pay 
respect  to  their  muftis  and  their  imaums,  as 
you  did  to  the  rabbis  and  the  bishops.  Ex- 
tend to  the  ceremonies  prescribed  by  the 
Koran  and  the  mosques  the  same  toleration 
which  you  showed  to  the  synagogues,  to  the 
religion  of  Moses  and  of  Jesus  Christ. 

"  The  Roman  legions  protect  all  religions. 
You  will  here  find  customs  different  from 
those  of  Europe.  You  must  accommodate 
yourselves  to  them.  The  people  amongst 
whom  we  are  about  to  mix  differ  from  us  in 
the  treatment  of  women ;  but  in  all  countries 
he  who  violates  is  a  monster.  Pillage  only 
enriches  a  small  number  of  men  ;  it  dishonors 
us  ;  it  destroys  our  resources  ;  it  converts 
into  enemies  the  people  whom  it  is  our  inter- 
est to  have  for  friends. 

"  The  first  town  we  shall  come  to  was  built 
by  Alexander.  At  every  step  we  shall  meet 
with  grand  recollections,  worthy  of  exciting 
the  emulation  of  Frenchmen." 


THE    EGYPTIAN    EXPEDITION.  53 


Proclamation  to  the  Egyptians^  J^^b'-,  ^79^- 

"  People  of  Egypt :  You  will  be  told  by  our 
enemies,  that  I  am  come  to  destroy  your 
religion.  Believe  them  not.  Tell  them  that 
I  am  come  to  restore  your  rights,  punish  your 
usurpers,  and  raise  the  true  worship  of  Ma- 
homet. Tell  them  that  I  venerate,  more 
than  I  do  the  Mamelukes,  God,  His  prophet, 
and  the  Koran.  Tell  them  that  all  men  are 
equal  in  the  sight  of  God  ;  that  wisdom, 
talents,  and  virtue  alone  constitute  the  differ- 
ence between  them.  And  what  are  the 
virtues  which  distinguish  the  Mamelukes, 
that  entitle  them  to  appropriate  all  the  enjoy- 
ments of  life  to  themselves  ?  If  Egypt  is 
their  farm,  let  them  show  their  lease,  from 
God,  by  wdiich  they  hold  it.  Is  there  a  fine 
estate  ?  It  belongs  to  the  Mamelukes.  Is 
there  a  beautiful  slave,  a  fine  horse,  a  good 
house  ?  All  belong  to  the  Mamelukes.  But 
God  is  just  and  merciful,  and  He  hath  or- 
dained that  the  Empire  of  the  Mamelukes 
shall  come  to  an  end.  Thrice  happy  those 
who  shall  side  with  us ;  they  shall  prosper  in 
their  fortune  and  their  rank.  Happy  they 
who  shall  be  neutral ;  they  will  have  time  to 
become    acquainted    with  us,  and   will  range 


54  NAPOLEON  S    ADDRESSES. 

themselves  upon  our  side.  But  woe,  threefold 
woe,  to  those  who  shall  arm  for  the  Mame- 
lukes and  fight  against  us !  For  them  there 
will  be  no  hope  ;  they  shall  perish." 


THE    EGYPTIAN    EXPEDITION.  55 


Letter  to  "  The  Directoiy.^'' 

"  Headquarters,  Cairo,  |^ 
"6  Tliermidor,  year  4.  (24  July,  1798.)  \ 

"  Citizen  Directors  :  —  On  the  morning  of 
the  2d  Thermidor  we  caught  sight  of  the 
Pyramids. 

"On  the  evening  of  the  2d,  we  were  within 
six  leagues  of  Cairo,  and  I  learned  that  the 
twenty-three  beys,  with  all  their  forces,  were 
intrenched  at  Embabeh,  and  that  their  in- 
trenchments  were  armed  by  more  than  sixty 
pieces  of  cannon. 

"  BATTLE    OF    THE    PYRAMIDS. 

"On  the  3d,  at  dawn,  we  encountered  their 
vanguard,  which  we  drove  from  village  to 
village.  At  2  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  we 
arrived  before  their  intrenchments  and  found 
ourselves  in  the  presence  of  the  enemy. 

"I  ordered  the  divisions  of  Generals  Desaix 
and  Reynier  to  take  up  their  position  on  the 
right,  between  Gyseh  and  Embabeh,  in  such 
a  manner  as  to  cut  off  the  enemy's  commu- 
nication with  upper  Egypt,  which  is  their 
natural  retreat.  The  position  of  the  army 
was  the  same  as  at  Battle  of  Chobiakhyt. 


56  napoleon's  addresses. 

"  No  sooner  had  Mourad-Bey  perceived  Gen- 
eral Desaix's  movements,  than  he  resolved 
to  charge  him.  He  despatched  one  of  his 
bravest  beys  with  a  corps  of  picked  men, 
who,  with  lightning  rapidity,  charged  the  two 
divisions.  They  were  allowed  to  get  within 
fifty  feet,  then  we  greeted  them  with  a  shower 
of  balls  and  grape-shot  which  left  many  of 
their  number  dead  on  the  battle-field.  They 
dashed  into  the  space  formed  by  the  two 
divisions,  where  they  were  received  by  a 
double  fire  which  completed  their  defeat. 

"  I  seized  the  opportunity  and  ordered  Gen- 
eral Bon's  division,  which  was  on  the  Nile,  to 
prepare  for  an  attack  on  the  enemy's  intrench- 
ments.  I  ordered  General  Menon's  division, 
which  was  commanded  by  General  Vial,  to 
bear  down  between  the  corps  that  had  just 
charged  us  and  the  intrenchments,  in  such  a 
manner  as  to  accomplish  the  triple  end  of,  — 

"  Preventing  this  corps  reentering  their 
intrenchments. 

"  Cutting  off  the  retreat  of  those  who  occu- 
pied them. 

"  And  finally,  if  necessary,  of  attacking  the 
intrenchments  on  the  left. 

"  Directly  the  generals.  Vial  and  Bon,  were 
in  position,  they  ordered  the  first  and  third 
divisions  of  each  battalion  to  draw  up  in  col- 


THE    EGYPTIAN    EXPEDITION.  57 

umns  of  attack,  while  the  second  and  fourth 
retained  their  former  position,  forming  a 
square  battalion,  now  only  three  deep,  while 
they  advanced  to  support  the  columns  of 
attack. 

"  General  Bon's  columns  of  attack,  com- 
manded by  the  brave  General  Rampon,  threw 
themselves  upon  the  intrenchments  with  their 
usual  impetuosity,  in  spite  of  the  fire  from  a 
large  quantity  of  artillery,  when  suddenly  the 
Mamelukes  made  a  charge.  They  emerged 
from  their  intrenchments  on  a  full  gallop,  but 
our  columns  had  time  to  come  to  a  halt,  to 
face  all  sides,  and  receive  them  on  the  points 
of  their  bayonets,  or  by  a  shower  of  balls. 
In  an  instant  the  field  was  strewn  with  the 
enemy. 

"  Our  troops  soon  razed  their  intrenchments. 
The  Mamelukes  fled,  precipitating  themselves 
en  masse  upon  their  left,  but  General  Vial  was 
ready  for  them.  They  were  obliged  to  pass 
within  five  feet  of  a  battalion  of  our  riflemen, 
and  the  butchery  was  awful.  A  large  number 
threw  themselves  into  the  Nile  and  were 
drowned. 

"  After  the  numerous  combats  and  battles 
that  my  troops  have  gained  over  superior 
forces,  I  should  not  think  of  praising  their 
conduct  and  their  sang-froid  on  this  occasion, 


58  napoleon's  addresses. 

v/ere  it  not  that  this  new  method  of  warfare 
has  required,  on  their  part,  a  patience  which 
contrasts  with  French  impetuosity.  Had  they 
given  way  to  their  ardor  they  could  not  have 
gained  the  victory,  which  was  obtainable  only 
by  great  coolness  and  patience. 

"  The  Mamelukes'  cavalry  displayed  great 
bravery ;  they  defended  their  fortunes,  and 
upon  every  one  of  them  our  soldiers  found 
from  three  to  five  hundred  louis. 

"  All  the  luxury  of  these  people  is  in  their 
horses  and  their  accoutrements ;  their  houses 
are  pitiable. 

"  It  would  be  difficult  to  find  a  land  more 
fertile,  and  a  people  more  miserable,  more 
ignorant,  more  abject.  They  prefer  one  of 
our  soldier's  buttons  to  a  six-franc  piece. 

"  In  the  villages  they  do  not  even  know  the 
sight  of  a  pair  of  scissors.  Their  houses  are 
made  of  a  little  mud.  Their  sole  furniture  is 
a  mat  of  straw  and  two  or  three  earthen  pots. 
They  eat  and  burn  very  little  as  a  general 
thing.  They  do  not  know  the  use  of  mills ; 
consequently,  we  frequently  bivouacked  on 
stalks  of  wheat  without  being  able  to  obtain 
any  flour.  We  live  on  vegetables  and  cattle. 
The  little  grain  they  do  use,  they  grind  into 
flour  with  stones,  and  in  some  of  the  large 
villages  they  have  mills  turned  by  oxen. 


THE    EGYPTIAN    EXPEDITION.  59 

"  We  are  constantly  annoyed  by  clouds  of 
Arabs ;  they  are  the  greatest  robbers  and 
the  greatest  rascals  on  the  face  of  the  earth, 
assassinating  alike  Turks  and  French,  or  any 
one  who  falls  in  their  way. 

"  Brigadier-General  Mireur  and  several  aides- 
de-camp  and  oiificers  of  the  staff  have  been 
assassinated  by  these  wretches.  They  lie  in 
ambush  behind  banks  and  ditches  on  their 
excellent  little  horses,  and  woe  to  him  who 
ventures  to  wander  a  hundred  feet  from  the 
columns. 

"  By  a  fatality  that  I  have  often  observed  to 
follow  men  whose  last  hour  approaches.  Gen- 
eral Mireur  went  alone,  in  spite  of  the  remon- 
strances of  the  main  -guard,  to  a  little  elevation 
about  two  hundred  feet  from  the  camp.  Be- 
hind it  were  stationed  three  Bedouins  who 
murdered  him. 

"  The  Republic  has  met  with  a  real  loss.  He 
was  one  of  the  bravest  generals  I  have  ever 
known. 

"  There  is  very  little  coin  in  this  country,  not 
enough  to  pay  the  army.  There  is  plenty  of 
wheat,  rice,  vegetables,  and  cattle.  The  Re- 
public could  not  have  a  colony  better  suited 
to  its  needs,  nor  of  a  richer  soil.  The  climate 
is  very  healthy,  owing  to  the  cool  nights. 

"  In  spite  of  fifteen  days'  march,  and  all  kinds 


6o  napoleon's  addresses. 

of  fatigue,  the  absolute  deprivation  of  wine,  in 
fact,  of  everything  that  could  alleviate  fatigue, 
we  have  no  one  on  the  sick  list.  The  soldiers 
have  found  a  great  resource  in  the  posteques^ 
a  kind  of  watermelon  that  is  very  abundant 
here." 


THE    EGYPTIAN    EXPEDITION.  6 1 


Order  Respecting    the    Govenimeiit    of  Egypt, 
July  27,  lygS. 

"  Headquarters,  Cairo,  ) 
"  9th  Thermidol,    year  6.  \ 

"Bonaparte,    Member   of   the   National   Insti- 
tute, General-in-Chief,  Orders: 

"  Article  I.  There  shall  be  in  each  province 
of  Egypt  a  divan,  composed  of  seven  individ- 
uals, whose  duty  it  will  be  to  superintend  the 
interests  of  the  province ;  to  communicate  to 
me  any  complaints  that  may  be  made  ;  to  pre- 
vent warfare  among  the  different  villages ;  to 
apprehend  and  punish  criminals  (for  which 
purpose  they  may  demand  assistance  from  the 
French  commandant) ;  and  to  take  every 
opportunity  of  enlightening  the  people. 

"  Art.  II.  There  shall  be  in  each  province 
an  aga  of  the  Janizaries,  maintaining  constant 
communication  with  the  French  commandant. 
He  shall  have  with  him  a  company  of  sixty 
armed  natives,  whom  he  may  take  wherever 
he  pleases,  for  the  maintenance  of  good  order, 
subordination,  and  tranquillity. 

"  Art.  III.  There  shall  be  in  each  province 
an  intendant,  whose  business  will  be  to  levy 
the    Miri,  the  feddan,   and   the   other  contri- 


62  napoleon's  addresses. 

butions  which  formerly  belonged  to  the 
Mamelukes,  but  which  now  belong  to  the 
French  Republic.  The  intendants  shall  have 
as  many  agents  as  may  be  necessary. 

"  Art.  IV.  The  said  intendant  shall  have  a 
French  agent  to  correspond  with  the  Finance 
Department,  and  to  execute  all  the  orders  he 
may  receive." 


THE    EGYPTIAN    EXPEDITION.  63 


Letter  to  Tippoo  Sail\  Jan.  25,  ijgg. 

"  You  are,  of  course,  already  informed  of  my 
arrival  on  the  banks  of  the  Red  Sea,  with  a 
numerous  and  invincible  army.  Eager  to 
deliver  you  from  the  iron  yoke  of  England, 
I  hasten  to  request  that  you  will  send  me,  by 
the  way  of  Muscate  or  Mocha,  an  account  of  the 
political  situation  in  which  you  are.  I  also 
wish  that  you  would  send  to  Suez,  or  Grand 
Cairo,  some  able  man,  in  your  confidence,  with 
whom  I  may  confer." 


64  napoleon's  addresses. 


Pj'oclamation  to  the  Army^  on  the  Abandoning  of 
the  Siege  of  Acre,  May,  17 gg. 

"  Soldiers  :  You  have  traversed  the  desert 
which  separates  Asia  from  Africa,  with  the 
rapidity  of  an  Arab  force.  The  army,  which 
was  on  its  march  to  invade  Egypt,  is  destroyed. 
You  have  taken  its  general,  its  field-artillery, 
camels,  and  baggage.  You  have  captured  all 
the  fortified  posts,  which  secure  the  wells  of 
the  desert.  You  have  dispersed,  at  Mount 
Tabor,  those  swarms  of  brigands,  collected 
from  all  parts  of  Asia,  hoping  to  share  the 
plunder  of  Egypt.  The  thirty  ships,  which 
twelve  days  since  you  saw  enter  the  port 
of  Acre,  were  destined  for  an  attack  upon 
Alexandria.  But  you  compelled  them  to 
hasten  to  the  relief  of  Acre.  Several  of  their 
standards  will  contribute  to  adorn  your  trium- 
phal entry  into  Egypt.  After  having  main- 
tained the  war  with  a  handful  of  men,  during 
three  months,  in  the  heart  of  Syria,  taken 
forty  pieces  of  cannon,  fifty  stands  of  colors, 
six  thousand  prisoners,  and  captured  or  de- 
stroyed the  fortifications  of  Gaza,  Jaffa,  and 
Acre,  we  prepare  to  return  to  Egypt,  where, 
by  a  threatened  invasion,  our  presence  is 
imperiously  demanded.     A    few    days    longer 


THE    EGYPTIAN    EXPEDITION.  65 

might  give  you  the  hope  of  taking  the  Pacha 
in  his  palace.  But  at  this  season  the  palace 
of  Acre  is  not  worth  the  loss  of  three  days, 
nor  the  loss  of  those  brave  soldiers  who 
would  consequently  fall,  and  who  are  necessary 
for  more  essential  services.  Soldiers,  we 
have  yet  a  toilsome  and  a  perilous  task  to 
perform.  After  having  by  this  campaign 
secured  ourselves  from  attacks  from  the  east- 
ward, it  will  perhaps  be  necessary  to  repel  the 
efforts  which  may  be  made  from  the  west." 


66  napoleon's  addresses. 


Proclamation  to  the  Ariny  on  his  Departure  for 
France^  August^  lygg. 

"  The  news  from  Europe  has  determined  me 
to  proceed  to  France.  I  leave  the  command 
of  the  army  to  General  Kleber.  The  army 
shall  hear  from  me  forthwith ;  at  present  I  can 
say  no  more.  It  costs  me  much  pain  to  quit 
troops  to  whom  I  am  so  strongly  attached. 
But  my  absence  will  be  but  temporary,  and 
the  general  I  leave  in  command  has  the 
confidence  of  the  Government  as  well  as 
mine." 


PART    III. 

NAPOLEON,    FIRST   CONSUL. 

Proclamation  to  the  French  People^  Nov.  lO,  17QQ. 

19th  Brumaire,  11  o'clock,  p.  m, 
"  Frenchmen :  On  my  return  to  France  I 
found  division  reigning  amongst  all  the  author- 
ities. They  agreed  only  on  this  single  point, 
that  the  Constitution  was  half  destroyed,  and 
was  unable  to  protect  liberty. 

"  Each  party  in  turn  came  to  me,  confided  to 
me  their  designs,  imparted  their  secrets,  and 
requested  my  support.  I  refused  to  be  the 
man  of  a  party. 

"  The  Council  of  the  Ancients  appealed  to 
me.  I  answered  their  appeal.  A  plan  of  general 
restoration  had  been  concerted  by  men  whom 
the  nation  has  been  accustomed  to  regard  as 
the  defenders  of  liberty,  equality,  and  prop- 
erty. This  plan  required  calm  and  free  delib- 
eration, exempt  from  all  influence  and  all  fear. 
The  Ancients  resolved,  therefore,  upon  the 
removal  of  the  legislative  bodies  to  St.  Cloud. 


6S  napoleon's  addresses. 

They  placed  at  my  disposal  the  force  neces- 
sary to  secure  their  independence.  I  was 
bound,  in  duty  to  my  fellow  citizens,  to  the 
soldiers  perishing  in  our  armies,  and  to  the 
national  glory,  acquired  at  the  cost  of  so  much 
blood,  to  accept  the  command. 

"The  councils  assembled  at  St.  Cloud.  Re- 
publican troops  guaranteed  their  safety  from 
without,  but  assassins  created  terror  within. 
Many  members  of  the  Council  of  the  Five 
Hundred,  armed  with  stilettos  and  pistols, 
spread  menaces  of  death  around  them. 

"  The  plans  which  ought  to  have  been  devel- 
oped were  withheld.  The  majority  of  the 
council  was  rendered  inefficient ;  the  boldest 
orators  were  disconcerted,  and  the  inutility  of 
submitting  any  salutary  proposition  was  quite 
evident. 

"  I  proceeded,  filled  with  indignation  and 
grief,  to  the  Council  of  the  Ancients.  1  be- 
sought them  to  carry  their  noble  designs  into 
execution.  I  directed  their  attention  to  the 
evils  of  the  nation,  which  were  their  motives 
for  conceiving  those  designs.  They  concurred 
in  giving  me  new  proofs  of  their  uniform  good- 
will. 

"  I  presented  myself  before  the  Council  of 
the  Five  Hundred,  alone,  unarmed,  my  head 
uncovered,  just  as  the  Ancients  had  received 


NAPOLEON,    FIRST    CONSUL.  69 

and  applauded  me.  My  object  was  to  restore 
to  the  majority  the  expression  of  its  will,  and 
to  secure  to  it  its  power. 

"  The  stilettos  which  had  menaced  the  depu- 
ties were  instantly  raised  against  their  deliv- 
erer. Twenty  assassins  rushed  upon  me,  and 
aimed  at  my  breast.  The  grenadiers  of  the 
legislative  body,  whom  I  had  left  at  the  door 
of  the  hall,  ran  forward,  and  placed  themselves 
between  me  and  the  assassins.  One  of  these 
brave  grenadiers  (Thome)  had  his  clothes 
pierced  by  a  stiletto.     They  bore  me  off. 

"  At  the  same  moment  cries  of  '  Outlaw  him  ' 
were  raised  against  the  defender  of  the  law. 
It  was  the  horrid  cry  of  assassins  against  the 
power  destined  to  repress  them. 

"  They  crowded  around  the  President,  utter- 
ing threats.  With  arms  in  their  hands  they 
commanded  him  to  declare  '  the  outlawry.'  I 
was  informed  of  this.  I  ordered  him  to  be 
rescued  from  their  fury,  and  six  grenadiers  of 
the  legislative  body  brought  him  out.  Imme- 
diately afterwards  some  grenadiers  of  the 
legislative  body  charged  into  the  hall  and 
cleared  it. 

"The  factions,  intimidated,  dispersed  and 
fled.  The  majority,  freed  from  their  assaults, 
returned  freely  and  peaceably  into  the  hall, 
listened  to  the  propositions  made  for  the  pub- 


70  NAPOLEON  S    ADDRESSES. 

lie  safety,  deliberated,  and  drew  up  the  salu- 
tary resolution  which  will  become  the  new  and 
provisional  law  of  the  Republic. 

"  Frenchmen,  you  doubtless  recognize  in  this 
conduct  the  zeal  of  a  soldier  of  liberty,  of  a 
citizen  devoted  to  the  Republic.  Conserva- 
tive, tutelary,  and  liberal  ideas  resumed  their 
authority  upon  the  dispersion  of  the  factions, 
who  domineered  in  the  councils,  and  who,  in 
rendering  themselves  the  most  odious  of  men, 
did  not  cease  to  be  the  most  contemptible." 


NAPOLEON,    FIRST    CONSUL.  71 


Proclamation  to  the  A?yny  of  the  East^ 
Novembe7-^  ijgg. 

"  Soldiers :  The  Consuls  of  the  French 
Republic  frequently  direct  their  attention  to 
the  Army  of  the  East. 

"  France  acknowledged  all  the  influence  of 
your  conquests  on  the  restoration  of  her  trade 
and  civilization  of  the  world. 

"The  eyes  of  all  Europe  are  upon  you,  and 
in  thought  I  am  often  with  you. 

"  In  whatsoever  situation  the  chances  of  war 
may  place  you,  prove  yourselves  still  the 
soldiers  of  Rivoli  and  Aboukir  —  you  will  be 
invincible. 

"  Place  in  Kleber  the  boundless  confidence 
you  placed  in  me.      He  deserves  it. 

"  Soldiers,  think  of  the  day  when  you  will 
return  victorious  to  the  sacred  territory  of 
France.  That  will  be  a  glorious  day  for  this 
whole  nation." 


72  napoleon's  addresses. 


Proclamation   to   the  Frejich   before  the  Second 
Italian  Campaign. 

"  Frenchmen  :  You  have  been  anxious  for 
peace.  Your  Government  has  desired  it  with 
still  greater  ardor.  Its  first  efforts,  its  con- 
stant wishes,  have  been  for  its  attainment. 
The  English  Ministry  has  exposed  the  secret 
of  its  iniquitous  policy.  It  wishes  to  dismem- 
ber France,  to  destroy  its  commerce,  and 
either  to  erase  it  from  the  map  of  Europe,  or 
to  degrade  it  to  a  secondary  power.  England 
is  willing  to  embroil  all  the  nations  of  the 
Continent  in  hostility  with  each  other,  that 
she  may  enrich  herself  with  the  spoils,  and 
gain  possession  of  the  trade  of  the  world. 
For  the  attainment  of  this  object  she  scatters 
her  gold,  becomes  prodigal  of  her  promises, 
and  multiplies  her  intrigues." 


NAPOLEON,    FIRST    CONSUL.  73 


Proclamatifln  to    the  Soldiers    before  the  Battle 
of  Marengo,  June,  1800. 

"  Soldiers  :  When  we  began  our  march,  one 
department  of  France  was  in  the  hands  of  the 
enemy.  Consternation  pervaded  the  south  of 
the  Repubhc.  You  advanced.  Joy  and  hope 
in  our  country  have  succeeded  to  consterna- 
tion and  fear.  The  enemy,  terror  -  struck, 
seeks  only  to  regain  his  frontiers.  You  have 
taken  his  hospitals,  his  magazines,  his  reserve 
parks.  The  first  act  of  the  campaign  is  fin- 
ished. Millions  of  men  address  you  in 
strains  of  praise.  But  shall  we  allow  our 
audacious  enemies  to  violate  with  impunity 
the  territory  of  the  Republic  ?  Will  you  per- 
mit the  army  to  escape  which  has  carried 
terror  into  your  families  ?  You  will  not. 
March,  then,  to  meet  him.  Tear  from  his 
brows  the  laurels  he  has  won.  Teach  the 
world  that  a  malediction  attends  those  that 
violate  the  territory  of  the  Great  People. 
The  result  of  our  efforts  will  be  unclouded 
glory,  and  a  durable  peace." 


74  NAPOLEONS    ADDRESSES. 


Letter  to  the  Emperor  of  Austria^  on  the  Field 
of  Marengo,  fune,   1800. 

"  Sire : —  It  is  on  the  field  of  battle,  amid  the 
sufferings  of  a  multitude  of  wounded,  and 
surrounded  by  fifteen  thousand  corpses,  that  I 
beseech  your  Majesty  to  listen  to  the  voice  of 
humanity,  and  not  to  suffer  two  brave  nations 
to  cut  each  other's  throats  for  interests  not 
their  own.  It  is  my  part  to  press  this  upon 
your  Majesty,  being  upon  the  very  theatre  of 
war.  Your  Majesty's  heart  can  not  feel  it  so 
keenly  as  does  mine.- 

"  For  what  are  you  fighting  ?  For  religion  ? 
Then  make  war  on  the  Russians  and  the 
English,  who  are  the  enemies  of  your  faith. 
Do  you  wish  to  guard  against  revolutionary 
principles  ?  It  is  this  very  war  which  has 
extended  them  over  half  the  continent,  by 
extending  the  conquests  of  France.  The 
continuance  of  the  war  can  not  fail  to  diffuse 
them  still  further.  Is  it  for  the  balance  of 
Europe  ?  The  English  threaten  that  balance 
far  more  than  does  France,  for  they  have 
become  the  masters  and  the  tyrants  of  com- 
merce, and  are  beyond  the  reach  of  resistance. 
Is  it  to  secure  the  interests  of  the  House  of 
Austria }     Let  us  then  execute  the  Treaty  of 


NAPOLEON,    FIRST    CONSUL.  75 

Campo  Formio,  which  secures  to  your  Majesty 
large  indemnities  in  compensation  for  the 
provinces  lost  in  the  Netherlands,  and  secures 
them  to  you  where  you  most  wish  to  obtain 
them,  that  is,  in  Italy.  Your  Majesty  may 
send  negotiators  whither  you  will,  and  we  will 
add  to  the  Treaty  of  Campo  Formio  stipula- 
tions calculated  to  assure  you  of  the  con- 
tinued existence  of  the  secondary  States,  all 
of  which  the  French  Republic  is  accused  of 
having  shapen.  Upon  these  conditions  peace 
is  made  if  you  will.  Let  us  make  the  armis- 
tice general  for  all  the  armies,  and  enter  into 
negotiations  instantly." 


76  napoleon's  addresses. 


Order  to  Seize  all  English  i?i  France,  Announced 
in  the  Moniteur,  May,  180J. 

"  The  Government  of  the  Republic,  having 
heard  read,  by  tlie  Minister  of  Marine  and 
Colonies,  a  despatch  from  the  maritime  prefect 
at  Brest,  announcing  that  two  English  frigates 
had  taken  two  merchant  vessels  in  the  Bay  of 
Andrieu,  without  any  previous  declaration  of 
war,  and  in  manifest  violation  of  the  law  of 
nations,  — 

"  All  the  English,  from  the  ages  of  eighteen 
to  sixty,  or  holding  any  commission  from  his 
Britannic  Majesty,  who  are  at  present  in 
France,  shall  immediately  be  constituted  pris- 
oners of  war,  to  answer  for  those  citizens  of 
the  Republic  who  may  have  been  arrested 
and  made  prisoners  by  the  vessels  or  subjects 
of  his  Britannic  Majesty  previous  to  any 
declaration  of  hostilities." 


PART  IV. 

NAPOLEON,  EMPEROR  OF  FRANCE. 

Letter  to  the  Pope,  1804. 

"  Most  Holy  Father :  —  The  happy  effect 
produced  upon  the  character  and  moraUty  of 
my  people  by  the  reestablishment  of  reUgion 
induces  me  to  beg  your  Holiness  to  give  me 
a  new  proof  of  your  interest  in  my  destiny, 
and  in  that  of  this  great  nation,  in  one  of  the 
most  important  conjunctures  presented  in  the 
annals  of  the  world.  I  beg  you  to  come  and 
give,  to  the  highest  degree,  a  religious  char- 
acter to  the  anointing  and  coronation  of  the 
first  Emperor  of  the  French.  That  ceremony 
will  acquire  a  new  lustre  by  being  performed 
by  your  Holiness  in  person.  It  will  bring 
down  upon  our  people,  and  yourself,  the 
blessing  of  God,  whose  decrees  rule  the 
destiny  of  Empires  and  families.  Your  Holi- 
ness is  aware  of  the  affectionate  sentiments 
I  have  long  borne  towards  you,  and  can 
thence  judge  of  the  pleasure  that  this  occur- 

77 


78  napoleon's  addresses. 

rence  will  afford  me  of  testifying  them  anew. 
We  pray  God    that    He    may    preserve    you, 
most    Holy    Father,  for    many  years,  to  rule 
and  govern  our  mother,  the  Holy  Church. 
"  Your  dutiful  son, 

"  Napoleon." 


NAPOLEON,  EMPEROR  OF  FRANCE.     79 


Address  to  the  Troops  011  Presenting  the  Colors^ 
Dec.  J,  1804. 

"  Soldiers  :  Behold  your  colors !  These 
eagles  will  always  be  your  rallying  point ! 
They  will  always  be  where  your  Emperor 
may  think  them  necessary  for  the  defence  of 
his  throne  and  of  his  people.  Swear  to  sacri- 
fice your  lives  to  defend  them,  and  by  your 
courage  to  keep  them  constantly  in  the  path 
of  victory.      Swear  !  " 


8o  napoleon's  addresses. 


Letter  to  the  King  of  Englaiid,  Jan.  2, 180^. 

"  Sir.,  my  b?'other :  —  Called  to  the  throne  by 
Providence,  by  the  suffrages  of  the  Senate,  of 
the  people,  and  of  the  army,  my  first  desire 
is  peace.  France  and  England,  abusing  their 
prosperity,  may  contend  for  ages.  But  do 
their  respective  governments  fulfil  their 
most  sacred  duties  in  causing  so  much  blood 
to  be  vainly  shed  without  the  hope  of  advan- 
tage or  the  hope  of  cessation  ?  I  do  not  con- 
ceive that  it  can  be  deemed  dishonorable  in 
me  to  make  the  first  advances.  I  believe  it 
has  been  sufiiciently  proved  to  the  world  that 
I  dread  none  of  the  chances  of  war,  which 
indeed  offer  nothing  that  I  can  fear.  Though 
peace  is  the  wish  of  my  heart,  yet  war  has 
never  been  adverse  to  my  glory.  I  conjure 
your  Majesty,  then,  not  to  refuse  the  happiness 
of  giving  peace  to  the  world.  Delay  not  that 
grateful  satisfaction,  that  it  may  be  a  legacy 
for  your  children ;  for  never  have  arisen 
more  favorable  circumstances,  nor  a  more 
propitious  moment  for  calming  every  passion 
and  displaying  the  best  feelings  of  humanity 
and  reason.  That  moment  once  lost,  what 
term  shall  we  set  to  a  struggle  which  all  my 
efforts  have  been  unable  to  terminate.     In  the 


NAPOLEON,    EMPEROR    OF    FRANCE.  8 1 

space  of  ten  years  your  Majesty  has  gained 
more  in  wealth  and  territory  than  the  extent 
of  Europe  comprehends.  Your  people  have 
attained  the  height  of  prosperity.  What  then 
has  your  Majesty  to  hope  from  war?  The 
world  is  sufficiently  extensive  for  our  two 
nations ;  and  reason  might  assist  us  to  dis- 
cover means  of  conciliating  all,  were  both 
parties  animated  by  a  spirit  of  reconcilement. 
At  all  events  I  have  discharged  a  sacred  duty, 
and  one  clear  to  my  heart.  Your  Majesty 
may  rely  upon  the  sincerity  of  the  sentiments 
now  expressed,  and  on  my  desire  to  afford 
your  Majesty  every  proof  of  that  sincerity." 


82  napoleon's  addresses. 


Conversation  ivith  Decier  Regardiiig  the  Marriage 
of  Jerome  Bonaparte^  May  6,  i8o^. 

"Jerome  is  wrong  to  think  that  he  will  be 
able  to  count  upon  any  weakness  on  my  par% 
for,  not  having  the  rights  of  a  father,  I  cannoc 
entertain  for  him  the  feeling  of  a  father ;  a 
father  allows  himself  to  be  blinded,  and  it 
pleases  him  to  be  blinded  because  he  identi- 
fies his  son  with  himself. 

"  But  what  am  I  to  Jerome  ?  Sole  instru- 
ment of  my  destiny,  I  owe  nothing  to  my 
brothers.  They  have  made  an  abundant 
harvest  out  of  what  I  have  accomplished  in 
the  way  of  glory ;  but,  for  all  that,  they  must 
not  abandon  the  field  and  deprive  me  of  the 
aid  I  have  a  right  to  expect  from  them.  They 
will  cease  to  be  anything  for  me,  directly  they 
take  a  road  opposed  to  mine.  If  I  expect  so 
much  from  my  brothers,  who  have  already 
rendered  many  services,  if  I  have  abandoned 
the  one  who,  in  mature  age  (Lucien),  re- 
fused to  follow  my  advice,  what  must  not 
Jerome,  who  is  still  young,  and  is  known  only 
for  his  neglect  of  duty,  expect  ?  If  he  does 
nothing  for  me,  I  shall  see  in  this  the  decree 
of  destiny,  which  has  decided  that  I  shall  do 
nothing  for  him," 


NAPOLEON,    EMPEROR    OF    FRANCE.  83 


Letter  to  Je7'ome  Bonaparte^  May  (5,  i8o^. 

Alexandria,  i6  Floreal,  year  \t^. 

"  My  brother,  your  letter  of  this  morning 
informs  me  of  your  arrival  in  Alexandria. 
There  are  no  faults  that  a  true  repentance  will 
not  efface  in  my  eyes. 

"  Your  union  with  Mademoiselle  Paterson  is 
null,  alike  in  the  eyes  of  religion  and  of  the 
law.  Write  Mademoiselle  Paterson  to  return 
to  America.  I  will  grant  her  a  pension  of 
60,000  francs  during  her  lifetime,  on  condition 
that  she  will  under  no  circumstances  bear  my 
name, —  she  has  no  right  to  do  so  owing  to 
the  non-existence  of  her  marriage.  You  must 
yourself  give  her  to  understand  that  you  are 
powerless  to  change  the  nature  of  things. 
Your  marriage  being  thus  annulled  by  your 
own  consent,  I  will  restore  to  you  my  friend- 
ship and  continue  to  feel  for  you  as  I  have 
done  since  your  infancy,  hoping  that  you  will 
prove  yourself  worthy  by  the  efforts  you 
make  to  acquire  my  gratitude  and  to  dis- 
tinguish yourself  in  my  armies," 


84  napoleon's  addresses. 


Address  to  the  Senate,  180^. 

"  Senators :  It  is  necessary,  in  the  present 
state  of  Europe,  that  I  should  explain  to  you 
my  sentiments.  I  am  about  to  quit  my  capi- 
tal, to  place  myself  at  the  head  of  my  army, 
to  bear  prompt  assistance  to  my  allies,  and  to 
defend  the  dearest  interests  of  my  people. 
The  wishes  of  the  eternal  enemies  of  the 
continent  are  accomplished.  Hostilities  have 
commenced  in  the  midst  of  Germany ;  Austria 
and  Russia  have  united  with  England,  and 
our  generation  is  involved  anew  in  the 
calamity  of  war.  A  few  days  ago  I  still 
cherished  the  hope  that  peace  would  not  be 
disturbed.  But  the  Austrian  army  has 
passed  the  Inn.  Munich  is  invaded ;  the 
Elector  of  Bavaria  has  been  driven  from  his 
capital.  All  my  hopes  of  peace  have 
vanished." 


NAPOLEON,  EMPEROR  OF  FRANCE.     85 


Proclamatio7i  to  the  Troops  on  the  Comfnencement 

of  the    War  of  the  Third  Coalition, 

September,  i8o^. 

"  Soldiers  :  The  war  of  the  third  coalition  is 
commenced.  The  Austrian  army  has  passed 
the  Inn,  violated  treaties,  attacked  and  driven 
our  ally  from  his  capital.  You  yourselves 
have  been  obliged  to  hasten,  by  forced 
marches,  to  the  defence  of  our  frontiers. 
But  you  have  now  passed  the  Rhine ;  and  we 
will  not  stop  now  till  we  have  secured  the 
independence  of  the  Germanic  body,  succored 
our  allies,  and  humbled  the  pride  of  our  un- 
just assailants.  We  will  not  again  make 
peace  without  a  sufficient  guarantee !  Our 
generosity  shall  not  again  wrong  our  policy. 
Soldiers,  your  Emperor  is  among  you  !  You 
are  but  the  advanced  guard  of  the  great 
people.  If  it  is  necessary  they  will  all  rise 
at  my  call  to  confound  and  dissolve  this  new 
league,  which  has  been  created  by  the  malice 
and  gold  of  England.  But,  soldiers,  we  shall 
have  forced  marches  to  make,  privations  of 
every  kind  to  endure.  Still,  whatever  obsta- 
cles may  be  opposed  to  us,  we  will  conquer 
them ;  and  we  will  never  rest  until  we  have 
planted  our  eagles  on  the  territory  of  our 
enemies  1" 


86  napoleon's  addresses. 


Address  to  the  Austrians,  after  the  Fall  of  Uhn, 
October,  iSo^. 

"  Gentlemen  :  War  has  its  chances.  Often 
victorious,  you  must  expect  sometimes  to  be 
vanquished.  Your  master  wages  against  me 
an  unjust  war.  I  say  it  candidly,  I  know  not 
for  what  I  am  fighting,  I  know  not  what  he 
requires  of  me.  He  has  wished  to  remind  me 
that  I  was  once  a  soldier.  I  trust  he  will  find 
that  I  have  not  forgotten  my  original  avoca- 
tion. I  want  nothing  on  the  continent,  I 
desire  ships,  colonies,  and  commerce.  Their 
acquisition  would  be  as  advantageous  to  you 
as  to  me." 


NAPOLEON,    EiMPEROR    OF    FRANCE.  87 


Address  to  the  Troops  after  the  War  of  the 
Thmi  Coalition,  October,  i8o^. 

"  Soldiers  of  the  Grand  Army  :  In  a  fort- 
night we  have  finished  the  entire  campaign. 
What  we  proposed  to  do  has  been  done.  We 
have  driven  the  Austrian  troops  from  Bavaria, 
and  restored  our  ally  to  the  sovereignty  of  his 
dominions. 

"  That  army,  which,  with  equal  presumption 
and  imprudence,  marched  upon  our  frontiers, 
is  annihilated. 

"  But  what  does  this  signify  to  England  ? 
She  has  gained  her  object.  We  are  no  longer 
at  Boulogne,  and  her  subsidy  will  be  neither 
more  nor  less. 

"  Of  a  hundred  thousand  men  who  composed 
that  army,  sixty  thousand  are  prisoners.  They 
will  replace  our  conscripts  in  the  labors  of 
agriculture. 

"  Two  hundred  pieces  of  cannon,  the  whole 
park  of  artillery,  ninety  flags,  and  all  their  gen- 
erals are  in  our  power.  Fifteen  thousand  men 
only  have  escaped. 

"  Soldiers  :  I  announced  to  you  the  result  of 
a  great  battle  ;  but,  thanks  to  the  ill-devised 
schemes  of  the  enemy,  I  was  enabled  to  secure 
the   wished -for   result  without  incurring  any 


88  NAPOLEON  S    ADDRESSES. 

danger,  and,  what  is  unexampled  in  tlie  history 
of  nations,  that  result  has  been  gained  at  the 
sacrifice  of  scarcely  fifteen  hundred  men  killed 
and  wounded. 

"  Soldiers  :  this  success  is  due  to  your  un- 
limited confidence  in  your  Emperor,  to  your 
patience  in  enduring  fatigues  and  privations  of 
every  kind,  and  to  your  singular  courage  and 
intrepidity. 

"  But  we  will  not  stop  here.  You  are  im- 
patient to  commence  another  campaign. 

"  The  Russian  army,  which  English  gold  has 
brought  from  the  extremities  of  the  universe, 
shall  experience  the  same  fate  as  that  which 
we  have  just  defeated. 

"  In  the  conflict  in  which  we  are  about  to 
engage,  the  honor  of  the  French  infantry  is 
especially  concerned.  We  shall  now  see 
another  decision  of  the  question  which  has 
already  been  determined  in  Switzerland  and 
Holland ;  namely,  whether  the  French  infan- 
try is  the  first  or  the  second  in  Europe. 

"  Among  the  Russians  there  are  no  generals 
in  contending  against  whom  I  can  acquire 
any  glory.  All  I  wish  is  to  obtain  the  vic- 
tory with  the  least  possible  bloodshed.  My 
soldiers  are  my  children." 


NAPOLEON,    EMPEROR    OF    FRANCE.  89 


ProcIamatio7i  to  the  Soldiers  hefo7'e  the  Battle  of 
A7iste?'litz,  Dee.  i,  iSo^. 

"  Soldiers  :  The  Russian  army  has  presented 
itself  before  you  to  revenge  the  disasters  of 
the  Austrians  at  Ulm.  They  are  the  same 
men  that  you  conquered  at  Hollabrunn,  and 
on  whose  flying  trails  you  have  followed. 
The  positions  which  we  occupy  are  formid- 
able. While  they  are  marching  to  turn  my 
right,  they  must  present  their  flank  to  your 
blows. 

"  Soldiers :  I  will  myself  direct  all  your  bat- 
talions. I  will  keep  myself  at  a  distance  from 
the  fire,  if,  with  your  accustomed  valor,  you 
carry  disorder  and  confusion  into  the  enemies' 
ranks.  But  should  victory  appear  for  a 
moment  uncertain,  you  will  see  your  Emperor 
expose  himself  to  the  first  strokes.  Victory 
must  not  be  doubtful  on  this  occasion." 


go  NAPOLEONS    ADDRESSES. 


Proclamation  after  the  Battle  of  Austerlitz, 
Dec.  J,  1805. 

"  Soldiers  :  I  am  satisfied  with  you.  In  the 
Battle  of  Austerlitz  you  have  justified  all  that 
I  expected  from  your  intrepidity.  You  have 
decorated  your  eagles  with  immortal  glory. 
An  army  of  one  hundred  thousand  men,  com- 
manded by  the  Emperors  of  Russia  and  Aus- 
tria, has  been,  in  less  than  four  hours,  either 
cut  in  pieces  or  dispersed.  Thus  in  two 
months  the  third  coalition  has  been  van- 
quished and  dissolved.  Peace  can  not  now 
be  far  distant.  But  I  will  make  only  such  a 
peace  as  gives  us  guarantee  for  the  future, 
and  secures  rewards  to  our  allies.  When 
everything  necessary  to  secure  the  happiness 
and  prosperity  of  our  country  is  obtained,  I 
will  lead  you  back  to  France.  My  people  will 
behold  you  again  with  joy.  It  will  be  enough 
for  one  of  you  to  say,  '  I  was  at  the  battle  of 
Austerlitz  ;'  for  all  your  fellow  citizens  to  ex- 
claim, '  There  is  a  brave  man.'  " 


NAPOLEON,    EMPEROR    OF    FRANCE.  9 1 


Address  to  the  Soldiers  on  the  Signing  of  Peace 
with  Aiisti'ia,  Dec.  26,  180^. 

"  Peace  has  just  been  signed  by  the  Emperor 
of  Austria.  You  have  in  the  last  autumn 
made  two  campaigns.  You  have  seen  your 
Emperor  share  your  dangers  and  your  fatigues. 
I  wish  also  that  you  should  see  him  sur- 
rounded by  the  grandeur  and  splendor  which 
belong  to  the  sovereign  of  the  first  people  in. 
the  world.  You  shall  all  be  there.  We  will 
celebrate  the  names  of  those  who  have  died  in 
these  two  campaigns  in  the  field  of  honor. 
The  world  shall  ever  see  us  ready  to  follow 
their  example.  We  will  even  do  more  than 
we  have  yet  done,  if  necessary  to  vindicate 
our  national  honor,  or  to  resist  the  efforts  of 
those  who  are  the  eternal  enemies  of  peace 
upon  the  continent.  During  the  three  months 
which  are  necessary  to  effect  your  return  to 
France,  prove  the  example  for  all  armies. 
You  have  now  to  give  testimonies,  not  of 
courage  and  intrepidity,  but  of  strict  discipline. 
Conduct  yourselves  like  children  in  the  bosom 
of  their  family." 


92  NAPOLEON  S    ADDRESSES. 


Proclamation  to  the  Soldiers^  FeTyriiary^  1806. 

"  Soldiers  :  For  the  last  ten  years  I  have 
done  everything  in  my  power  to  save  the 
King  of  Naples.  He  has  done  everything  to 
destroy  himself.  After  the  battles  of  Dego, 
Mondovi,  and  Lodi  he  could  oppose  to  me 
but  a  feeble  resistance.  I  relied  upon  the 
word  of  this  Prince,  and  was  gracious  toward 
him.  When  the  second  coalition  was  dis- 
solved at  Marengo,  the  King  of  Naples,  who 
had  been  the  first  to  commence  this  unjust 
war,  abandoned  by  his  allies,  remained  single- 
handed  and  defenceless.  He  implored  me. 
I  pardoned  him  a  second  time.  It  is  but  a 
few  months  since  you  were  at  the  gates  of 
Naples.  I  had  sufficiently  poAverful  reasons 
for  suspecting  the  treason  in  contemplation. 
I  was  still  generous,  —  I  acknowledged  the 
neutrality  of  Naples.  I  ordered  you  to  evac- 
uate the  Kingdom.  For  the  third  time  the 
House  of  Naples  was  reestablished  and  saved. 
Shall  we  forgive  a  fourth  time  ?  Shall  we 
rely  a  fourth  time  on  a  court  without  faith, 
honor,  or  reason  ?  No,  no  !  The  dynasty  of 
Naples  has  ceased  to  I'ci^^n.  Its  existence  is 
incompatible  with  tlie  honor  of  Europe,  and 
the  repose  of  my  crown." 


NAPOLEON,     EMPEROR    OF    FRANCE.  93 

Address    to    the    Senate  on  Annexatio7i    of  the 
Cisalpine  Republic^  1806. 

"  Powerful  and  great  is  the  French  Empire. 
Greater  still  is  our  moderation.  We  have  in 
a  manner  conquered  Holland,  Switzerland, 
Italy,  Germany.  But,  in  the  midst  of  such 
unparalleled  success,  we  have  listened  only  to 
the  counsels  of  moderation.  Of  so  many  con- 
quered provinces,  we  have  retained  only  the 
one  which  was  necessary  to  maintain  France 
in  the  rank  among  the  nations  which  she  has 
always  enjoyed.  The  partition  of  Poland, 
the  provinces  torn  from  Turkey,  the  conquest 
of  India,  and  of  almost  all  the  European  col- 
onies, have  turned  the  balance  against  us. 
To  form  a  counterpoise  to  such  acquisitions, 
we  must  retain  something.  But  we  must 
keep  only  what  is  useful  and  necessary. 
Great  would  have  been  the  addition  to  the 
wealth  and  the  resources  of  our  territory,  if 
we  had  united  to  them  the  Italian  Republic. 
But  we  gave  it  independence  at  Lyons.  And 
we  now  proceed  a  step  further,  and  recognize 
its  ultimate  separation  •  from  the  crown  of 
France,  deferring  only  the  execution  of  that 
project  till  it  can  be  done  without  danger  to 
Italian  independence." 


94 


NAPOLEON  S    ADDRESSES. 


To  the  Legislative    Body    before   the  Battle  of 
fena^  October^  1806. 

"  Princes,  magistrates,  soldiers,  citizens,  we 
have  all  but  one  object  in  our  several  depart- 
ments, —  the  interests  of  our  country.  Weak- 
ness in  the  executive  is  the  greatest  of  all 
misfortunes  to  the  people.  Soldier,  or  First 
Consul,  I  have  but  one  thought ;  Emperor,  I 
have  no  other  object,  —  the  prosperity  of 
France.  I  do  not  wish  to  increase  its  terri- 
tory, but  I  am  resolved  to  maintain  its  integ- 
rity. I  have  no  desire  to  augment  the 
influence  which  we  possess  in  Europe,  but 
I  will  not  permit  that  we  enjoy  to  decline. 
No  State  shall  be  incorporated  with  our 
empire  ;  but  I  will  not  sacrifice  my  rights, 
or  the  ties  which  unite  us  to  other  States." 


NAPOLEON,  EMPEROR  OF  FRANCE.     95 


Address  to  the  Captive  Officers  after  the  Battle 
of/e/ia,  Oct.  75,  1806. 

"  I  know  not  why  I  am  at  war  with  your 
sovereign.  He  is  a  wise,  pacific  prince, 
deserving  of  respect.  I  wisli  to  see  your 
country  rescued  from  its  humiliating  depend- 
ence upon  Prussia.  Why  should  the  Saxons 
and  the  French,  with  no  motive  for  hostility, 
fight  against  each  other,  I  am  ready,  for  my 
part,  to  give  a  pledge  of  my  amicable  dis- 
position by  setting  you  all  at  liberty,  and  by 
sparing  Saxony.  All  I  require  of  you  is  your 
promise  no  more  to  bear  arms  against  France." 


96  napoleon's  addresses. 


Proclamation    to    the    Soldiers    before    Entering 
Warsaw,  Jan.  z,  1801. 

"  Soldiers :  It  is  a  year  this  very  hour  since 
you  were  on  the  field  of  Austerlitz,  where  the 
Russian  battalions  fled  in  disorder,  or  surren- 
dered up  their  arms  to  their  conquerors. 
Next  day  proposals  of  peace  were  talked  of, 
but  they  were  deceptive.  No  sooner  had 
the  Russians  escaped  by,  perhaps,  blamable 
generosity,  from  the  disasters  of  the  third 
coalition  than  they  contrived  a  fourth.  But 
the  ally  on  whose  tactics  they  founded  their 
principal  hope  was  no  more.  His  capitals, 
his  fortresses,  his  magazines,  his  arsenals,  two 
hundred  and  eighty  flags,  and  two  hundred 
field-pieces  have  fallen  into  our  power.  The 
Oder,  the  Wartha,  the  deserts  of  Poland,  and 
the  inclemency  of  the  season,  have  not  for  a 
moment  retarded  your  progress.  You  have 
braved  all ;  surmounted  all :  every  obstacle 
has  fled  at  your  approach.  The  Russians 
have  in  vain  endeavored  to  defend  the  cap- 
ital of  ancient  and  illustrious  Poland.  The 
French  eagle  hovers  over  the  Vistula.  The 
brave  and  unfortunate  Poles,  on  beholding 
you,  fancied  they  saw  the  legions  of  Sobiesky 
returning  from  their  memorable  expedition. 


NAPOLEON,  EMPEROR  OF  FRANCE.     97 

"  Soldiers  :  We  will  not  lay  clown  our  arms 
until  a  general  peace  has  secured  the  power 
of  our  allies,  and  restored  to  us  our  colonies 
and  our  freedom  of  trade.  We  have  gained  on 
the  Elbe  and  Oder,  Pondicherry,  our  Indian 
establishments,  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  and 
the  Spanish  colonies.  Why  should  the  Rus- 
sians have  the  right  of  opposing  destiny  and 
thwarting  our  just  designs  ?  They  and  we 
are  still  the  soldiers  who  fought  at  Austerlitz." 


98  napoleon's  addresses. 


To  the  King  of  Prussia^  Entreating  Peace  after 
the  Battle  of  Eylau^  Febj'uary^  i8oy. 

"  I  desire  to  put  a  period  to  the  misfortunes 
of  your  family,  and  to  organize,  as  speedily  as 
possible,  the  Prussian  monarchy.  Its  inter- 
mediate power  is  necessary  for  the  tranquillity 
of  Europe.  I  desire  peace  with  Russia;  and, 
provided  the  Cabinet  of  St  Petersburg  has  no 
designs  upon  the  Turkish  Empire,  I  see  no 
difficulty  in  obtaining  it.  Peace  with  England 
is  not  less  essential  to  all  nations.  I  shall 
have  no  hesitation  in  sending  a  minister  to 
Memil  to  take  part  in  a  congress  of  France, 
Sweden,  England,  Russia,  Prussia,  and  Turkey, 
But,  as  such  a  congress  may  last  many  years, 
which  would  not  suit  the  present  condition  of 
Prussia,  your  Majesty  therefore  will,  I  am 
persuaded,  be  of  opinion  that  I  have  taken 
the  simplest  method,  and  one  which  is  most 
likely  to  secure  the  prosperity  of  your  sub- 
jects. At  all  events,  I  entreat  your  Majesty 
to  believe  in  my  sincere  desire  to  reestablish 
amicable  relations  with  so  friendly  a  power  as 
Prussia,  and  that  I  wish  to  do  the  same  with 
Russia  and  England." 


NAPOLEON,    EMPEROR    OF    FRANCE.  99 


Address  to  the  Army  on  its  Return  to  Winter 
Quarters  on  the  Vistula,  iSoy. 

"  Soldiers  :  We  were  beginning  to  taste  the 
sweets  of  repose  in  our  winter  quarters  when 
the  enemy  attacked  the  first  corps  on  the 
lower  A'^istula.  We  flew  to  meet  him.  We 
pursued  him,  sword  in  hand,  eighty  leagues. 
He  was  driven  for  shelter  beneath  the  cannons 
of  his  fortresses,  and  beyond  the  Pregel.  We 
have  captured  sixty  pieces  of  cannon,  sixteen 
standards,  and  killed,  wounded,  or  taken  more 
than  forty  thousand  Russians.  The  brave, 
who  have  fallen  on  our  side,  have  fallen 
nobly  —  like  soldiers.  Their  families  shall 
receive  our  protection.  Having  thus  defeated 
the  whole  projects  of  the  enemy,  we  will  re- 
turn to  the  Vistula  and  reenter  our  winter 
quarters.  Whosoever  ventures  to  disturb  our 
repose  will  repent  of  it.  Beyond  the  Vistula, 
as  beyond  the  Danube,  we  shall  always  be  the 
Soldiers  of  the  Grand  Army." 


lOO  NAPOLEONS    ADDRESSES. 


Proclamatmi  to  the  Soldier's  after  the  Battle  of 
Friedland^  fune  24,  i8oy. 

"  Soldiers :  On  the  5th  of  June  we  were 
attacked  in  our  cantonments  by  the  Russian 
army.  The  enemy  had  mistaken  the  cause  of 
our  inactivity.  He  perceived  too  late  that  our 
repose  was  that  of  a  lion.  He  repents  of 
having  disturbed  it.  In  a  campaign  of  ten 
days  we  have  taken  one  hundred  and  twenty 
pieces  of  cannon,  seven  colors,  and  have 
killed,  wounded,  or  taken  sixty  thousand 
Russians.  We  have  taken  from  the  enemy's 
army  all  its  magazines,  its  hospitals,  its  am- 
bulances, the  fortress  of  Konisberg,  the  three 
hundred  vessels  which  were  in  that  port  laded 
with  all  kinds  of  military  stores,  and  one  hun- 
dred and  sixty  thousand  muskets,  which  Eng- 
land was  sending  to  arm  our  enemies.  From 
the  banks  of  the  Vistula  we  have  come  with 
the  speed  of  the  eagle  to  those  of  Niemen. 
At  Austerlitz  you  celebrated  the  anniversary 
of  the  coronation.  At  Friedland  you  have 
worthily  celebrated  the  Battle  of  Marengo, 
where  we  put  an  end  to  the  war  of  the  second 
coalition. 

"  Frenchmen :  You  have  been  worthy  of 
yourselves    and   of   me.     You   will  return  to 


NAPOLEON,  EMPEROR  OF  FRANCE.    lOI 

France  covered  with  laurels,  having  obtained 
a  glorious  peace,  which  carries  with  it  a 
guarantee  of  its  duration.  It  is  time  for  our 
country  to  live  in  repose,  sheltered  from  the 
malignant  influences  of  England.  My  bounties 
shall  prove  to  you  my  gratitude,  and  the  full 
extent  of  the  love  which  I  feel  for  you.'' 


I02  NAPOLEON  S    ADDRESSES. 


Letter  to  Champagny,  Nov.  zy,  iSoy. 

"  Since  America  suffers  her  vessels  to  be 
searcliecl,  she  adopts  the  principle  that  the 
flag  does  not  cover  the  goods. 

"  Since  she  recognizes  the  absurd  block- 
ades laid  by  England,  consents  to  having  her 
vessels  incessantly  stopped,  sent  to  England, 
and  so  turned  aside  from  their  course,  why 
should  not  the  Americans  suffer  the  blockade 
laid  by  France  ?  Certainly  France  is  no 
more  blockaded  by  England  than  England  by 
France.  Why  should  not  Americans  also 
suffer  their  vessels  to  be  searched  by  French 
ships  ?  Certainly  France  recognizes  that 
these  measures  are  unjust,  illegal,  and  sub- 
versive of  national  sovereignty ;  but  it  is  the 
duty  of  nations  to  resort  to  force,  and  to  de- 
clare themselves  against  things  which  dis- 
honor them  and  disgrace  their  independence." 


NAPOLEON,    EMPEROR    OF    FRANCE.         1 03 


Proclamation    to  the  Spaniards  on   the  Abdica- 
tion of  Charles  IV. ^  June  2,  1808. 

"  Spaniards  :  After  a  long  agony  your  nation 
was  on  the  point  of  perishing.  I  saw  your 
miseries  and  hastened  to  apply  a  remedy. 
Your  grandeur,  your  power,  form  an  integral 
part  of  my  own.  Your  princes  have  ceded  to 
me  the  rights  to  the  crown  of  Spain.  I  have 
no  wish  to  reign  over  your  provinces,  but  I  am 
desirous  of  acquiring  eternal  titles  to  the  love 
and  gratitude  of  your  posterity.  Your  mon- 
archy is  old.  My  mission  is  to  pour  into  its 
veins  the  blood  of  youth.  I  will  ameliorate 
all  your  institutions  and  make  you  enjoy,  if 
you  second  my  efforts,  the  blessings  of  reform, 
without  its  collisions,  its  disorders,  its  convul- 
sions. I  have  convoked  a  general  assembly 
of  the  deputations  of  your  provinces  and 
cities.  I  am  desirous  of  ascertaining  your 
wants  by  personal  intercourse.  I  will  then 
lay  aside  all  the  titles  I  have  acquired,  and 
place  your  glorious  crown  on  the  head  of  my 
second  self,  after  having  secured  for  you  a 
constitution  which  may  establish  the  sacred 
and  salutary  authority  of  the  sovereign,  with 
the  liberties  and  privileges  of  the  people. 
Spaniards  :  Reflect  on  what  your  fathers  were  ; 


I04  NAPOLEONS    ADDRESSES. 

on  what  you  are  now.  The  fault  does  not  lie 
in  you  ;  but  in  the  constitution  by  which  you 
have  been  governed.  Conceive  the  most  ar- 
dent hopes  and  confidence  in  the  results  of 
your  present  situation  ;  for  I  wish  that  your 
latest  posterity  should  preserve  the  recollec- 
tion of  me,  and  say  :  '  He  was  the  regenerator  of 
our  country.^  " 


NAPOLEON,  EMPEROR  OF  FRANCE.    105 


Address  to  the  Legislative  Body,  before  Leaving 
Paris  for  the  Spanish  Ca??ipaign,  1808. 

"  I  have  travelled  this  year  more  than  three 
thousand  miles  in  the  interior  of  my  empire. 
The  spectacle  of  this  great  French  family  — 
recently  distracted  by  intestine  divisions,  now 
united  and  happy  —  has  profoundly  moved 
me.  I  have  learned  that  I  cannot  be  happy 
myself  unless  I  first  see  that  France  is  happy. 
A  part  of  my  army  is  marching  to  meet  the 
troops  which  England  has  landed  in  Spain. 
It  is  an  especial  blessing  of  that  Providence 
which  has  constantly  protected  our  army,  that 
passion  has  so  blinded  the  English  counsels 
as  to  induce  them  to  renounce  the  possession 
of  the  seas,  and  to  exhibit  their  army  on  the 
continent.  I  depart  in  a  few  days  to  place 
myself  at  the  head  of  my  troops,  and,  with  the 
aid  of  God,  to  crown  in  Madrid  the  King  of 
Spain,  and  to  place  our  eagles  on  the  fort  of 
Lisbon.  The  Emperor  of  Russia  and  I  have 
met  at  Erfurt.  Our  most  earnest  endeavor 
has  been  for  peace.  We  have  resolved  to 
make  many  sacrifices ;  to  confer,  if  possible, 
the  blessings  of  maritime  commerce  upon  the 
hundred  millions  of  men  whom  we  represent. 
We  are  of  one  mind,  and  we  are  indissolubly 
united  for  peace  as  for  war. " 


io6  napoleon's  addresses. 


Letter  to  the  Emperoi'  of  Austria^  October^  1808. 

^"^  Sire,  my  Brother:  —  I  thank  your  Royal 
and  Imperial  Majesty  for  the  letter  you  have 
been  so  good  as  to  write  me,  and  which 
Baron  Vincent  delivered.  I  never  doubted 
your  Majesty,  but  I  nevertheless  feared  for  a 
moment  that  hostilities  would  be  renewed 
between  us.  There  is,  at  Vienna,  a  faction 
which  affects  alarm  in  order  to  drive  your 
Cabinet  to  violent  measures,  which  would 
entail  misfortunes  greater  than  those  which 
are  passed.  I  had  it  in  my  power  to  dismem- 
ber your  Majesty's  monarchy,  or  at  least  to 
diminish  its  power.  I  did  not  do  so.  It 
exists  as  it  is  by  my  consent.  This  is  a  plain 
proof  that  our  accounts  are  settled  ;  that  I  have 
no  desire  to  injure  you.  I  am  always  ready 
to  guarantee  the  integrity  of  your  monarchy. 
I  will  never  do  anything  adverse  to  the  im- 
portant interests  of  States.  But  your  Majesty 
ought  not  to  bring  again  under  discus- 
sion what  has  been  settled  by  a  fifteen  years' 
war.  You  ought  to  avoid  every  proclamation 
or  act  calculated  to  excite  dissension.  The 
last  levy  in  mass  might  have  provoked  war  if 
I  had  apprehended  that  the  levy  and  prepara- 
tions were  made  in  conjunction  with  Russia. 


NAPOLEON,    EMPEROR    OF    FRANCE,         107 

"I  have  just  disbanded  the  camp  of  the 
Confederation.  I  have  sent  a  hundred  thou- 
sand men  to  Boulogne  to  renew  my  projects 
against  England.  I  had  reason  to  believe 
when  I  had  the  happiness  of  seeing  your 
Majesty,  and  had  concluded  the  treaty  of 
Presburg,  that  our  disputes  were  terminated 
forever,  and  that  I  might  undertake  the  mari- 
time war  without  interruption.  I  beseech 
your  Majesty  to  distrust  those,  who,  by  speak- 
ing of  the  dangers  of  the  monarchy,  disturb 
your  happiness  and  that  of  your  family  and 
people.  Those  persons  alone  are  dangerous ; 
they  create  the  dangers  they  pretend  to  fear. 
By  a  straightforward,  plain,  and  ingenious  line 
of  conduct,  your  Majesty  will  render  your 
people  happy,  will  secure  to  yourself  that 
tranquillity  of  which  you  must  stand  in  need 
after  so  many  troubles,  and  will  be  sure  of 
finding  me  determined  to  do  nothing  hostile 
to  your  important  interests.  Let  your  con- 
duct bespeak  confidence,  and  you  will  inspire 
it.  The  best  policy  at  the  present  time  is 
simplicity  and  truth.  Confide  your  troubles 
to  me  when  you  have  any,  and  I  will  instantly 
banish  them.  Allow  me  to  make  one  obser- 
vation more  —  listen  to  your  own  judgment  — 
your  own  feelings  —  they  are  much  more  cor- 
rect than  those  of  your  advisers.     I  beseech 


io8  napoleon's  addresses. 

your  Majesty  to  read  my  letter  in  the  spirit  in 
which  it  is  written,  and  to  see  nothing  in  it 
inconsistent  with  the  welfare  and  tranquillity 
of  Europe  and  your  Majesty." 


NAPOLEON,  EMPEROR  OF  FRANCE.    1 09 


Proclamation  to  the  Soldiers,  during  the  March 
for  Spain,  1808. 

"  Soldiers :  After  triumphing  on  the  banks 
of  the  Vistula  and  the  Danube,  with  rapid 
steps  you  have  passed  through  Germany, 
This  day,  without  a  moment  of  repose,  I  com- 
mand you  to  traverse  France.  Soldiers :  I 
have  need  of  you.  The  hideous  presence  of 
the  leopard  contaminates  the  peninsula  of 
Spain  and  Portugal.  In  terror  he  must  fly 
before  you.  Let  us  bear  our  triumphal  eagles 
to  the  pillars  of  Hercules.  There,  also,  we 
have  injuries  to  avenge.  Soldiers  :  You  have 
passed  the  renown  of  our  modern  armies,  but 
you  have  not  yet  equalled  the  glories  of  those 
Romans,  who,  in  one  and  the  same  campaign, 
were  victorious  upon  the  Rhine  and  the 
Euphrates,  in  lUyria  and  upon  the  Tagus. 
A  long  peace,  a  lasting  prosperity,  shall  be 
the  reward  of  your  labors.  But  a  real  French- 
man ought  not,  could  not,  rest  until  the  seas 
are  open  to  all.  Soldiers :  All  that  you  have 
done,  all  that  you  will  do  for  the  happiness  of 
the  French  people,  and  for  my  glory,  shall  be 
eternal  in  my  heart." 


no  NAPOLEON  S    ADDRESSES. 


Summons  to  M.  de  Morla  to  Su?'?'e7ider  Madrid, 
Dec.  J,  1808. 

"  In  vain  you  employ  the  name  of  the  peo- 
ple. If  you  cannot  find  means  to  pacify  them, 
it  is  because  you  yourselves  excited  them 
and  misled  them  by  falsehood.  Assemble  the 
clergy,  the  heads  of  the  convents,  the  alcades, 
and  if  between  this  and  six  in  the  morning  the 
city  has  not  surrendered,  it  shall  cease  to 
exist.  I  neither  will,  nor  ought  to  withdraw 
my  troops.  You  have  slaughtered  the  unfortu- 
nate French  who  have  fallen  into  your  hands. 
Only  two  days  ago  you  suffered  two  servants 
of  the  Russian  ambassador  to  be  dragged 
away  and  put  to  death  in  the  streets  because 
they  were  Frenchmen.  The  incapacity  and 
weakness  of  a  general  had  put  into  your 
hands  troops  which  had  capitulated  on  the 
field  of  battle  of  Baylen,  and  the  capitulation 
was  violated.  You,  M.  de  Morla,  what  sort  of 
a  letter  did  you  write  to  that  general  .-*  Well 
did  it  become  you  to  talk  of  pillage — ^you, 
who  having  entered  Rousillon  in  1795,  carried 
off  all  the  women,  and  divided  them  as  booty 
among  your  soldiers.  What  right  had  you, 
moreover,  to  hold  such  language.  The  capit- 
ulation of  Baylen  forbade  it.     Look  what  was 


NAPOLEON,    EMPEROR    OF    FRANCE.         Ill 

the  conduct  of  the  EngHsh,  who  are  far  from 
priding  themselves  on  being  strict  observers 
of  the  law  of  nations.  They  complained  of 
the  Convention  of  Cintra,  but  they  fulfilled  it. 
To  violate  military  treaties  is  to  renounce  all 
civilization  —  to  put  ourselves  on  a  level  with 
the  Bedouins  of  the  desert.  How  then  dare 
you  demand  a  capitulation  —  you  who  violated 
that  of  Baylen  ?  See  how  injustice  and  bad 
faith  ever  recoil  upon  those  who  are  guilty  of 
them.  I  had  a  fleet  at  Cadiz.  It  had  come 
there  as  to  a  harbor  of  an  ally.  You  directed 
against  it  the  mortars  of  the  city  which  you 
commanded.  I  had  a  Spanish  army  in  my 
ranks.  I  preferred  to  see  it  escape  in  English 
ships,  and  to  fling  itself  upon  the  rocks  of 
Espinosa,  than  to  disarm  it.  I  preferred  hav- 
ing nine  thousand  more  enemies  to  fight,  to 
violating  good  faith  and  honor.  Return  to 
Madrid.  I  give  you  till  six  o'clock  to-morrow 
evening.  You  have  nothing  to  say  to  me 
about  the  people,  but  to  tell  me  that  they  have 
submitted.  If  not,  you  and  your  troops  shall 
be  put  to  the  sword." 


112  NAPOLEONS    ADDRESSES. 


Proclamation  to  the  Spanish  People^ 
December^  1808. 

"  I  have  declared,  in  a  proclamation  of  the 
2d  of  June,  that  I  wished  to  be  the  regen- 
erator of  Spain,  To  the  rights  which  the 
princes  of  the  ancient  dynasty  have  ceded  to 
me,  you  have  wished  that  I  should  add  the 
rights  of  conquest.  That,  however,  shall 
not  change  my  inclination  to  serve  you.  I 
wish  to  encourage  everything  that  is  noble  in 
your  own  exertions.  All  that  is  opposed  to 
your  prosperity  and  your  grandeur  I  wish  to 
destroy.  The  shackles  which  have  enslaved 
the  people  I  have  broken.  I  have  given  you 
a  liberal  constitution,  and,  in  the  place  of  an 
absolute  monarchy,  a  monarchy  mild  and 
limited.  It  depends  upon  yourselves  whether 
that  constitution  shall  still  be  your  law." 


NAPOLEON,  EMPEROR  OF  FRANCE.    II3 


Letter   to  the    American    Minister^    Arm- 
strong,  i8og. 

"  The  seas  belong  to  all  nations.  Any 
vessel,  sailing  under  whatsoever  flag,  recog- 
nized and  avowed  by  her,  should  be  as  much 
at  home  in  the  midst  of  the  seas  as  if  she  were 
in  her  own  ports.  The  flag  floating  from  the 
mast  of  a  merchant  vessel  should  be  respected 
as  much  as  if  it  floated  from  the  top  of  a 
village  spire. 

"  In  case  of  war  between  two  maritime 
powers,  neutrals  should  follow  the  legislation 
of  neither  one.  Every  vessel  should  be  pro- 
tected by  its  flag.  Every  power  which  vio- 
lates a  flag  declares  war  against  the  power  to 
which  it  belongs.  To  insult  a  merchant  vessel 
which  carries  the  flag  of  a  power,  is  the  same 
thing  as  invading  a  town  or  colony  belonging 
to  that  power.  His  Majesty  declares  that  he 
considers  the  fleets  of  nations  as  floating 
colonies  belonging  to  those  nations.  In  con- 
sequence of  this  principle,  the  sovereignty  and 
independence  of  a  nation  is  a  property  of  its 
neighbors.  If  a  French  citizen  was  insulted 
in  an  American  port  or  colony,  the  Govern- 
ment of  the  United  States  would  not  deny 
that  it  was  responsible  for  it.     In  the  same 


114  NAPOLEONS    ADDRESSES. 

way  the  Government  of  the  United  States 
must  be  responsible  for  the  violation  of  French 
property  on  board  of  a  ship  or  floating  Ameri- 
can colony  ;  otherwise,  this  Government,  not 
being  able  to  guarantee  the  integrity  of  its 
rights  and  the  independence  of  its  flag,  his 
Majesty  considers  the  American  vessels  which 
have  been  violated  by  visits,  by  taxes,  and 
other  arbitrary  acts,  as  no  longer  belonging  to 
the  United  States,  and  as  denationalized. 

"  But  whenever  the  Government  of  the 
United  States  shall  order  its  vessels  armed  to 
repulse  the  unjust  aggressions  of  England,  to 
sustain  its  rights,  against  the  refusal  of  this 
power  to  recognize  the  great  principle  that 
the  flag  covers  the  ship,  and  against  its  unjust 
pretension  of  searching  neutral  vessels,  his 
Majesty  is  willing  to  recognize  them  and  treat 
them  as  neutrals." 


NAPOLEON,    EMPEROR    OF    FRANCE.       II5 


Proclamation  to  the  Soldiers  before  the  Battle  of 
Eck77iuhl^  April,  i8og. 

"  Soldiers  :  The  territory  of  the  confedera- 
tion of  the  Rhine  has  been  violated.  The 
Austrian  general  supposes  that  we  are  to  fly 
at  the  sight  of  his  eagles,  and  abandon  our 
allies  to  his  mercy.  I  arrive  with  the  rapidity 
of  lightning  in  the  midst  of  you.  Soldiers :  I 
was  surrounded  by  your  bayonets,  when  the 
Emperor  of  Austria  arrived  at  my  bivouac  in 
Moravia.  You  heard  him  employ  my  clemency, 
and  swear  an  eternal  friendship.  Conquerors 
in  three  wars,  Austria  has  owed  everything  to 
our  generosity.  Three  times  she  has  per- 
jured herself  !  Our  former  successes  are  our 
guarantee  for  our  future  triumphs.  Let  us 
march,  then,  and  at  our  aspect,  let  the  enemy 
recognize  his  conquerors," 


ii6  napoleon's  addresses. 


Proclamation  to  the  Troops  at  RatisboUy 
Ap7'il,  i8og. 

"  Soldiers :  You  have  justified  my  anticipa- 
tions. You  have  suppUed  by  bravery  the 
want  of  numbers,  and  have  shown  the  differ- 
ence which  exists  between  the  soldiers  of 
Csesar  and  the  armed  rabble  of  Xerxes. 
Within  the  space  of  a  few  days  we  have 
triumphed  in  the  battles  of  Thaun,  Abersberg, 
and  Eckmuhl,  and  in  the  combats  of  Peissing, 
Landshut,  and  Ratisbon.  One  hundred  pieces 
of  cannon,  forty  standards,  fifty  thousand 
prisoners,  three  bridge  equipages,  three  thou- 
sand baggage-wagons  with  their  horses,  and  all 
the  money  chests  of  the  regiments,  are  the 
fruits  of  the  rapidity  of  your  marches,  and  of 
your  courage.  The  enemy,  seduced  by  a  per- 
jured Cabinet,  appeared  to  have  lost  all 
recollection  of  you.  His  awakening  has  been 
speedy ;  you  have  appeared  more  terrible  than 
ever.  Lately,  he  crossed  the  Inn,  and  invaded 
the  territory  of  our  allies.  Lately,  he  talked 
of  nothing  less  than  carrying  the  war  into  the 
bosom  of  our  country.  Now,  defeated,  dis- 
persed, he  flies,  in  consternation.  Already  my 
advance-guard  has  passed  the  Inn.  In  one 
month  we  will  be  in  Vienna." 


NAPOLEON,    EMPEROR    OF    FRANCE.        II7 


Address  to  the  Troops  on  Entering  Vienna^ 
May,  i8og. 

"  In  a  month  after  the  enemy  passed  the 
Inn,  on  the  same  day,  at  the  same  hour,  we 
entered  Vienna.  Their  miUtia,  their  levies  en 
viasse,  their  ramparts,  created  by  the  impotent 
rage  of  the  princes  of  the  House  of  Lorraine, 
have  fallen  at  the  first  sight  of  you.  The 
princes  of  that  house  have  abandoned  their 
capital,  not  like  the  soldiers  of  honor,  who 
yield  to  circumstance  and  the  reverses  of  war, 
but  as  perjurers  haunted  by  the  sense  of  their 
crime.  In  flying  from  Vienna,  their  adieus  to 
its  inhabitants  have  been  murder  and  confla- 
gration. Like  Medea,  they  have  with  their 
own  hands  massacred  their  own  offspring. 
Soldiers :  The  people  of  Vienna,  according  to 
the  expression  of  a  deputation  of  the  suburbs, 
abandoned,  widoived,  shall  be  the  object  of 
your  regards.  I  take  its  good  citizens  under 
my  special  protection.  As  to  the  wicked  and 
turbulent,  they  shall  meet  with  exemplary  jus- 
tice. Soldiers  :  Be  kind  to  the  poor  peasants  ; 
to  those  worthy  people  who  have  so  many 
claims  upon  your  esteem.  Let  us  not  mani- 
fest any  pride  at  our  success.  Let  us  see  in 
it  but  a  proof  of  that  divine  justice  which  pun- 
ishes the  ungrateful  and  the  perjured." 


ii8  napoleon's  addresses. 


Prodaination  to  the  Hungarians,  i8og. 

"  Hungarians :  The  moment  is  come  to 
revive  your  independence.  I  offer  you  peace, 
the  integrity  of.  your  territory,  the  inviolabiUty 
of  your  constitutions,  —  whether  of  such  as 
are  in  actual  existence,  or  of  those  which  the 
spirit  of  the  time  may  require.  I  ask  nothing 
of  you.  I  desire  only  to  see  your  nation  free 
and  independent.  Your  union  with  Austria 
has  made  your  misfortunes.  Your  blood  has 
flowed  for  her  in  distant  regions.  Your  dear- 
est interests  have  always  been  sacrificed  to 
those  of  the  Austrian  hereditary  estates.  You 
form  the  finest  part  of  the  Empire  of  Austria, 
yet  you  are  treated  as  a  province.  You  have 
national  manners,  a  national  language ;  you 
boast  an  ancient  and  illustrious  origin.  Re- 
sume, then,  your  existence  as  a  nation.  Have 
a  king  of  your  own  choice,  who  will  reside 
among  you,  and  reign  for  you  alone." 


PART    V. 

THE    FALL   OF   NAPOLEON. 

Address  to  the   Troops  on  the  Beg'mn'uig  of  the 
Ricssiaii  Campaig7i,  May,  1812. 

"  Soldiers  :  The  second  war  of  Poland  has 
commenced.  The  first  war  terminated  at 
Friedland  and  Tilsit.  At  Tilsit,  Russia  swore  "^ 
eternal  alliance  with  France,  and  war  with 
England.  She  has  openly  violated  her  oath, 
and  refuses  to  offer  any  explanation  of  her 
strange  conduct  till  the  French  Eagle  shall 
have  passed  the  Rhine,  and,  consequently, 
shall  have  left  her  allies  at  her  discretion. 
Russia  is  impelled  onward  by  fatality.  Her 
destiny,  is  about  to  be  accomplished.  Does 
she  believe  that  we  have  degenerated  ?  that 
we  are  no  longer  the  soldiers  of  Austerlitz  ? 
She  has  placed  us  between  dishonor  and 
war.  The  choice  cannot  for  an  instant  be 
doubtful.  Let  us  march  forward,  then,  and 
crossing  the  Niemen,  carry  the  war  into  her 
territories.  The  second  war  of  Poland  will  be 
to  the  French  army  as  glorious  as  the  first. 


I20  NAPOLEONS    ADDRESSES. 

But  our  next  peace  must  carry  with  it  its  own 
guarantee,  and  put  an  end  to  that  arrogant 
influence  which,  for  the  last  fifty  years,  Russia 
has  exercised  over  the  affairs  of  Europe." 


THE    FALL    OF    NAPOLEON.  121 


Address  to  the  Troops  before  the  Battle  of 
Borodino^  Sept.  7,  181 2. 

"  Soldiers :  This  is  the  battle  you  have  so 
much  desired.  The  victory  depends  upon 
you  !  It  is  now  necessary  to  us.  It  will  give 
us  abundance  of  good  winter  quarters,  and  a 
prompt  return  to  our  country.  Behave  as  at 
Austerlitz,  at  Friedland,  at  Witepsk,  at  Smo- 
lensk, and  let  the  latest  posterity  recount  with 
pride  your  conduct  on  this  day ;  let  them  say 
of  you,  '  He  was  at  the  battle  under  the  walls 
of  Moscow.' " 


122  NAPOLEONS    ADDRESSES. 


Letter  to  Alexander  I.,  Emperor  of  Russia. 

Moscow,  Sept.  20,  181 2. 

"  Monsieur,  my  brother :  —  Having  been  in- 
formed that  the  brother  of  your  Imperial 
Majesty's  Minister  at  Cassel  was  in  Moscow, 
I  sent  for  him,  and  we  have  had  a  conversa- 
tion of  some  length.  I  have  advised  his  mak- 
ing   my  sentiments  known  to  your   Majesty. 

"  The  superb  and  beautiful  city  of  Moscow 
no  longer  exists.  Rostoptchine  gave  orders 
to  burn  it.  Four  hundred  incendiaries  were 
arrested  on  the  spot,  all  of  whom  declared 
that  they  had  received  their  orders  from  the 
governor  and  the  director  of  the  police ;  they 
were  shot. 

"  The  fire  at  last  appears  to  have  ceased. 
Three-quarters  of  the  buildings  have  been 
burned,  the  other  quarter  remains. 

"  Such  conduct  is  atrocious  and  useless. 
Was  its  object  to  make  way  with  some  treas- 
ure ?  But  the  treasure  was  in  caves  which 
could  not  be  reached  by  the  fire. 

"  Moreover,  why  destroy  one  of  the  most 
beautiful  cities  in  the  world,  the  work  of  cen- 
turies, for  so  paltry  an  end  ?  It  is  the  same 
line  of  conduct  that  has  been  followed  from 
Smolensk,  and  has  left  600,000  families  home- 


THE    FALL    OF    NAPOLEON.  1 23 

less.  The  fire-engines  in  Moscow  were  either 
broken  or  made  way  with,  and  a  portion  of 
the  arms  in  the  arsenal  given  to  malefactors, 
which  obliged  us  to  lire  a  few  shots  at  the 
Kremlin  in  order  to  disperse  them. 

"  Humanity,  the  interests  of  your  Majesty 
and  of  this  great  city,  required  that  the  city 
should  be  confided  to  me  as  a  trust,  since  it 
was  exposed  by  the  Russian  army.  It  should 
not  have  been  left  without  administration, 
magistrates,  and  civil  guards.  Such  a  plan 
was  adopted  at  Vienna,  Madrid,  and  twice  at 
Berlin.  We  ourselves  followed  out  this  plan 
-at  the  time  of  the  entrance  of  Sonvarof. 

"  Incendiaries  authorize  pillage,  to  which 
the  soldiers  surrender  themselves  in  order  to 
dispute  the  debris  with  the  flames. 

"  If  I  imagined  for  an  instant  that  such  a 
state  of  affairs  was  authorized  by  3^our  Maj- 
esty, I  should  not  write  this  letter;  but  I  hold 
it  as  impossible  that,  with  your  Majesty's 
principles,  and  heart,  with  the  justice  of  your 
Majesty's  ideas,  you  could  authorize  excesses 
that  are  unworthy  of  a  great  sovereign  and 
of  a  great  nation.  While  the  engines  were 
carried  from  Moscow,  one  hundred  and 
fifty  pieces  of  field  cannon,  60,000  new  mus- 
kets, 1,600,000  infantry  cartridges,  400,000 
weights    of  powder,   300,000    weights  of  salt- 


124  NAPOLEON  S    ADDRESSES. 

petre,    as    much    sulphur,   etc.,  were   left   be- 
hind. 

^'  I  wage  war  against  your  Majesty  without 
animosity  ;  a  note  from  you  before  or  after  the 
last  battle  would  have  stopped  my  march, 
and  I  should  even  have  liked  to  have  sacri- 
ficed the  advantage  of  entering  Moscow.  If 
your  Majesty  retains  some  remains  of  your 
former  sentiments,  you  will  take  this  letter  in 
good  part.  At  all  events,  you  will  thank  me 
for  giving  you  an  account  of  what  is  passing 
at  Moscow." 


THE    FALL    OF    NAPOLEON.  1 25 


Discou7'se  at  the  Openiiig  of  the  Legislative  Body. 

Palais  des  Tuileries,  Feb.  14,  18 13. 

"  I  entered  Russia.  The  French  armies 
were  constantly  victorious  on  the  fields  of 
Ostrono,  Polotsk,  Mohilef,  Smolensk,  Mos- 
kova,  Malo-Yaroslavetz.  Nowhere  could  the 
Russian  armies  stand  before  our  eagles.  Mos- 
cow fell  into  our  power. 

''  When  the  Russian  borders  were  forced 
and  the  powerlessness  of  their  arms  was  rec- 
ognized, a  swarm  of  Tartars  turned  their 
parricidal  hands  against  the  most  beautiful 
provinces  of  the  empire  they  had  been  called 
upon  to  defend.  Inside  a  few  weeks,  in  spite 
of  the  grief  and  despair  of  the  unfortunate 
Muscovites,  they  set  fire  to  over  four  thousand 
of  their  most  prosperous  villages,  and  more 
than  fifty  of  their  most  beautiful  cities  ;  thus 
gratifying  their  ancient  hatred,  and,  on  the 
pretext  of  retarding  our  progress,  surround- 
ing us  by  a  desert  waste. 

"  But  we  triumphed  over  all  these  obstacles ; 
even  the  conflagration  of  Moscow,  where,  in 
four  days,  they  destroyed  the  fruits  of  the  toil 
and  thrift  of  forty  generations,  in  no  way 
changed  the  prosperous  condition  of  my  affairs. 
But    the  rigor  of  an  extreme  and   premature 


126  napoleon's  addresses. 

winter  laid  the  weight  of  a  terrible  calamity 
upon  my  army.  In  a  few  nights  every  thing 
changed.  I  met  with  great  losses.  My  solI 
would  have  been  crushed  beneath  their  weight 
had  I  been  accessible  to  any  other  feelings 
than  the  interest,  the  glory,  and  the  future  of 
my  people. 

"  At  sight  of  the  evils  that  beset  us,  Eng- 
land's joy  was  great.  Her  hopes  knew  no 
bounds.  She  offered  our  finest  provinces  as  a 
reward  for  treachery.  As  a  condition  of  peace 
she  proposed  the  extinction  of  this  beautiful 
empire ;  which  was  in  other  terms  a  proclama- 
tion of  perpetual  war. 

"  The  energy  shown  by  my  people  under 
such  grave  circumstances,  their  devotion  to 
the  integrity  of  the  empire,  the  love  they  have 
shown  me,  have  dissipated  all  these  chimeras 
and  have  brought  our  enemies  to  a  more  just 
appreciation  of  affairs. 

"  The  misfortunes  occasioned  by  the  severity 
of  the  frosts  demonstrated  to  their  full  extent 
the  grandeur  and  solidity  of  this  empire, 
founded  upon  the  exertions  and  love  of  fifty 
million  citizens,  and  upon  the  territorial  re- 
sources of  the  most  beautiful  countries  in  the 
world," 


THE    FALL    OF    NAPOLEON.  127 


Address  to    the  Legislative  Body, 
Decembe?',  i8ij. 

"  I  have  suppressed  your  address,  it  was 
incendiary.  I  called  you  round  me  to  do 
good  —  you  have  done  ill.  Eleven-twelfths  of 
you  are  well  intentioned,  the  others,  and  above 
all,  M.  Laine,  are  factious  intriguers,  devoted 
to  England,  to  all  my  enemies,  and  correspond- 
ing, through  the  channel  of  the  advocate 
Desege,  with  the  Prince  Regent,  Return  to 
your  departments  and  feel  that  my  eye  will 
follow  you  ;  you  have  endeavored  to  humble 
me,  you  may  kill  me,  but  you  shall  not  dis- 
honor me.  You  make  remonstrances  ;  is  this 
a  time,  when  the  stranger  invades  our  prov- 
inces, and  two  hundred  thousand  Cossacks  are 
ready  to  overflow  our  country  ?  There  may 
have  been  petty  abuses ;  I  never  connived  at 
them.  You,  M.  Renouard,  you  said  that 
Prince  Massena  robbed  a  man  at  Marseilles 
of  his  house.  You  lie  !  The  general  took 
possession  of  a  vacant  house,  and  my  minister 
shall  indemnify  the  proprietor.  Is  it  thus 
that  you  dare  affront  a  marshal  of  France 
who  has  bled  for  his  country,  and  grown  gray 
in  victory  ?  Why  did  you  not  make  your 
complaints    in  secret  to  me  ?     I  would  have 


^28  napoleon's  addresses. 

done  you  justice.  We  should  wash  our  dirty 
linen  in  private,  and  not  drag  it  out  before  the 
world.  You  call  yourselves  representatives  of 
the  nation.  It  is  not  true ;  you  are  only 
deputies  of  the  departments ;  a  small  portion 
of  the  State,  inferior  to  the  Senate,  inferior 
even  to  the  Council  of  State.  The  repre- 
sentatives of  the  people !  I  am  alone  the 
representative  of  the  people.  Twice  have 
twenty-four  millions  of  French  called  me  to 
the  throne  —  which  of  you  durst  undertake 
such  a  burden  ?  It  had  already  overwhelmed 
(ecrase)  your  Assemblies,  and  your  Conven- 
tions, your  Vergniands  and  your  Guadets, 
your  Jacobins  and  your  Girondins.  They 
are  all  dead  !  What,  who  are  you  ?  nothing  — 
all  authority  is  in  the  throne  ;  and  what  is  the 
throne  ?  This  wooden  frame  covered  with 
velvet .''  No,  I  am  the  throne.  You  have 
added  wrong  to  reproaches.  You  have  talked 
of  concessions  - —  concessions  that  even  my 
enemies  dared  not  ask.  I  suppose  if  they 
asked  Champagne,  you  would  have  given 
them  La  Brie  besides ;  but  in  four  months  I 
will  conquer  peace,  or  I  shall  be  dead.  You 
advise  !  how  dare  you  debate  on  such  high 
matters  (de  si  graves  interets)  !  You  have  put 
me  in  the  front  of  the  battle  as  the  cause  of 
war.     It  is  infamous  {c'est  une  atrocite).    In  all 


THE    FALL    OF    NAPOLEON.  1 29 

your  committees  you  have  excluded  the  friends 
of  the  Government,  extraordinary  commission, 
committee  of  finance,  committee  of  the  ad- 
dress, all,  all  my  enemies.  M.  Laine,  I  repeat 
it,  is  a  traitor ;  he  is  a  wicked  man,  the  others 
are  mere  intriguers.  I  do  justice  to  the 
eleven-twelfths  ;  but  the  factious  I  know  and 
will  pursue.  Is  it,  I  ask  again,  is  it  while  the 
enemy  is  in  France  that  you  should  have 
done  this  ?  But  nature  has  gifted  me  \\  ith  a 
determined  courage  —  nothing  can  overcome 
me.  It  cost  my  pride  much,  too,  —  I  made 
that  sacrifice  ;  I  — but  I  am  above  your  miser- 
able declamations.  I  was  in  need  of  consola- 
tion, and  you  would  mortify  me,  —  but,  no, 
my  victories  shall  crush  your  clamors  ;  in 
three  months  we  shall  have  peace,  and  you 
shall  repent  your  folly.  /  am  one  of  those  who 
triumph  or  die. 

"  Go  back  to  your  departments.  If  any  one 
of  you  dare  to  print  your  address,  I  shall  pub- 
Hsh  it  in  the  Mojiiteur  with  notes  of  my  own. 
Go,  France  stands  more  in  need  of  me  than  I 
do  of  France.  I  bear  the  eleven-twelfths  of 
vou  in  my  heart.  I  shall  nominate  the  depu- 
ties of  the  two  series  which  are  vacant,  and  I 
shall  reduce  the  legislative  body  to  the  dis- 
charge of  its  proper  duties.  The  inhabitants 
of  Alsace  and  Franche-Comte  have  a  better 


130  napoleon's  addresses. 

spirit  than  you ;  they  ask  me  for  arms.  I 
send  them,  and  one  of  my  aides-de-camp  will 
lead  them  against  the  enemy." 


THE    FALL    OF    NAPOLEON.  131 


Address  to  the  Guard,  April  2,  18 14. 

"  Soldiers :  The  enemy  has  stolen  three 
marches  on  us,  and  has  made  himself  master 
of  Paris.  We  must  drive  him  thence.  French- 
men, unworthy  of  the  name,  emigrants  whom 
we  have  pardoned,  have  mounted  the  white 
cockade  and  joined  the  enemy.  The  wretches 
shall  receive  the  reward  due  to  this  new 
crime.  Let  us  swear  to  conquer  or  die, 
and  to  enforce  respect  to  the  tri-colored  cock- 
ade, which  has  for  twenty  years  accompanied 
us  on  the  path  of  glory  and  honor." 


132  NAPOLEON  S    ADDRESSES. 


Speech  of  Abdication^  April  2,  18 14.. 

"  The  allied  powers  having  decided  that  the 
Emperor  Napoleon  is  the  only  obstacle  to 
the  reestablishment  of  peace  in  Europe,  the 
Emperor  Napoleon,  faithful  to  his  oath, 
declares  that  he  is  ready  to  descend  from  the 
throne,  to  leave  Europe,  and  even  to  lay  down 
his  life  for  the  welfare  of  his  country,  which 
is  inseparable  from  the  rights  of  his  son,  those 
of  the  regency  of  the  Empress,  and  the  main- 
tenance of  the  laws  of  the  empire." 


THE    FALL    OF    NAPOLEON.  133 


Farewell  to  the  Old  Guards  April  20,  18 14. 

"  Soldiers  of  my  old  guard,  I  bid  you  fare- 
well. For  twenty  years  I  have  constantly 
accompanied  you  on  the  road  to  honor  and 
glory.  In  these  latter  times,  as  in  the  days  of 
our  prosperity,  you  have  invariably  been 
models  of  courage  and  fidelity.  With  men 
such  as  you  our  cause  could  not  be  lost ;  but 
the  war  would  have  been  interminable ;  it 
would  have  been  civil  war,  and  that  would  have 
entailed  deeper  misfortunes  on  France.  I  have 
sacrificed  all  my  interests  to  those  of  the 
country.  I  go,  but  you,  my  friends,  wAW  con- 
tinue to  serve  France.  Her  happiness  was 
my  only  thought.  It  will  still  be  the  object  of 
my  wishes.  Do  not  regret  my  fate  ;  if  I  have 
consented  to  survive,  it  is  to  serve  your  glory. 
I  intend  to  write  the  history  of  the  great 
achievements  we  have  performed  together. 
Adieu,  my  friends.  Would  I  could  press  you 
all  to  my  heart."  Napoleon  then  ordered 
the  eagles  to  be  brought,  and,  having  em- 
braced them,  he  added  :  "  I  embrace  you  all 
in  the  person  of  your  general.  Adieu,  sol- 
diers !     Be  always  gallant  and  good." 


134  NAPOLEON  S    ADDRESSES. 


Proclamation    to    the   French    People    on    His 
Return  from  Elba^  March  ^^  i8i^. 

"  Frenchmen  :  The  defection  of  the  Duke  of 
CastigHone  (Augereau)  delivered  up  Lyons 
without  defense  to  our  enemies.  The  army, 
the  command  of  which  I  had  entrusted  to  him, 
was,  by  the  number  of  its  battalions,  the  cour- 
age and  patriotism  of  the  troops  that  com- 
posed it,  in  a  condition  to  beat  the  Austrian 
troops  opposed  to  it,  and  to  arrive  in  time  on 
the  rear  of  the  left  flank  of  the  army  which 
threatened  Paris.  The  victories  of  Champ- 
Aubert,  of  Montmirail,  of  Chateau  -  Thierry, 
of  Van  Champs,  of  Mormons,  of  Montereau,  of 
Craonne,  of  Rheims,  of  Arcis-sur-Aube,  and  of 
St.  Dizier,  the  rising  of  the  brave  peasants 
of  Lorraine  and  Champagne,  of  Alsace, 
Franche  -  Comte  and  Burgundy,  and  the  po- 
sition which  I  had  taken  in  the  rear  of  the 
hostile  army,  by  cutting  it  off  from  its  maga- 
zines, its  parks  of  reserve,  its  convoys,  and  all 
the  equipages,  had  placed  it  in  a  desperate 
situation.  The  French  were  never  on  the 
point  of  being  more  powerful,  and  the  elite  of 
the  enemy's  army  was  lost  without  resource ; 
it  would  have  found  a  tomb  in  those  vast 
plains  which  it  had  so  mercilessly  laid  waste, 


THE    FALL    OF    NAPOLEON.  I35 

when  the  treason  of  the  Duke  of  Ragusa 
delivered  up  the  capital  and  disorganized  the 
army.  The  unexpected  misconduct  of  these 
two  generals,  who  betrayed  at  once  their 
country,  their  prince,  and  their  benefactor, 
changed  the  fate  of  the  war  ;  the  situation  of 
the  enemy  was  such  that,  at  the  close  of  the 
action  which  took  place  before  Paris,  he  was 
without  ammunition,  in  consequence  of  his 
separation  from  his  parks  of  reserve.  In 
these  new  and  distressing  circumstances,  my 
heart  was  torn,  but  my  mind  remained  im- 
movable ;  I  consulted  only  the  interests  of 
the  country ;  I  banished  myself  to  a  rock  in 
the  middle  of  the  sea ;  my  life  was  yours,  and 
might  still  be  useful  to  you.  Frenchmen  :  In 
my  exile  I  heard  your  complaints  and  your 
wishes ;  you  accused  my  long  slumber ;  you 
reproached  me  with  sacrificing  the  welfare  of 
the  country  to  my  repose.  I  have  traversed 
the  seas  through  perils  of  every  kind ;  I  return 
among  you  to  reclaim  my  rights,  which  are 
yours." 


136  napoleon's  addresses. 


Napoleon^ s  Proclamation  to  the  Army  on  His 
Return  from  Elba^  March  5,  181^. 

"  Soldiers  :  We  have  not  been  conquered ; 
two  men,  sprung  from  our  ranks,  have  betrayed 
our  laurels,  their  country,  their  benefactor,  and 
their  prince.  Those  whom  we  have  beheld 
for  twenty-five  years  traversing  all  Europe  to 
raise  up  enemies  against  us,  who  have  spent 
their  lives  in  fighting  against  us  in  the  ranks 
of  foreign  armies,  and  in  cursing  our  beautiful 
France,  shall  they  pretend  to  command  or 
enchain  our  eagles  ?  —  they  who  have  never 
been  able  to  look  them  in  the  face.  Shall 
we  suffer  them  to  inherit  the  fruit  of  our  glori- 
ous toils,  to  take  possession  of  our  honors,  of 
our  fortunes ;  to  calumniate  and  revile  our 
glory }  If  their  reign  were  to  continue  all 
would  be  lost,  even  the  recollection  of  those 
memorable  days.  With  what  fury  they  mis- 
represent them  !  They  seek  to  tarnish  what 
the  world  admires ;  and  if  there  still  remain 
defenders  of  our  glory,  they  are  to  be  found 
among  those  very  enemies  whom  we  have 
confronted  in  the  field  of  battle.  Soldiers : 
in  my  exile  I  have  heard  your  voice  ;  I  have 
come  back  in  spite  of  all  obstacles  and  all 
dangers.     Your  general,  called  to  the  throne 


THE    FALL    OF    NAPOLEON.  137 

by  the  choice  of  the  people,  and  raised  on 
your  shields,  is  restored  to  you ;  come  and 
join  him.  Mount  the  tri-colored  cockade ; 
you  wore  it  in  the  days  of  our  greatness.  We 
must  forget  that  we  have  been  the  masters  of 
nations ;  but  we  must  not  suffer  any  to  inter- 
meddle in  our  affairs.  Who  would  pretend  to 
be  master  over  us  ?  Who  would  have  the 
power }  Resume  those  eagles  which  you  had 
at  Ulm,  at  Austerlitz,  at  Jena,  at  Eylau,  at 
Wagram,  at  Friedland,  at  Tudela,  at  Eck- 
miihl,  at  Essling,  at  Smolensk,  at  the  Mos- 
kowa,  at  Lutzen,  at  Wurtchen,  at  Montmirail. 
The  veterans  of  the  armies  of  the  Sambre 
and  Meuse,  of  the  Rhine,  of  Italy,  of  Egypt, 
of  the  West,  of  the  Grand  Army,  are  illumi- 
nated ;  their  honorable  scars  are  stained ; 
their  successes  would  be  crimes ;  the  brave 
would  be  rebels,  if,  as  the  enemies  of  the  peo- 
ple pretend,  the  legitimate  sovereigns  were  in 
the  midst  of  foreign  armies.  Honors,  recom- 
penses, favors,  are  reserved  for  those  who 
have  served  with  them  against  the  country 
and  against  us.  Soldiers :  Come  and  range 
yourselves  under  the  banners  of  your  chief ; 
his  existence  is  only  made  up  of  yours ;  his 
rights  are  only  those  of  the  people  and  yours ; 
his  interest,  his  honor,  his  glory,  are  no  other 
than  your  interest,  your  honor,  and  your  glory. 


138  napoleon's  addresses. 

Victory  shall  march  at  a  charging  step ;  the 
eagle,  with  the  national  colors,  shall  fly  from 
steeple  to  steeple,  till  it  reaches  the  towers  of 
Notre  Dame.,  Then  you  will  be  able  to  show 
your  scars  with  honor ;  then  you  will  be  able 
to  boast  of  what  you  have  done  ;  you  will  be 
the  liberators  of  the  country !  In  your  old 
age,  surrounded  and  looked  up  to  by  your 
fellow  citizens,  they  will  listen  to  you  with 
respect  as  you  recount  your  high  deeds ,  you 
will  each  of  you  be  able  to  say  with  pride, 
'  And  I  also  made  part  of  that  grand  army 
which  entered  twice  within  the  walls  of  Vi- 
enna, within  those  of  Rome,  of  Berlin,  of 
Madrid,  of  Moscow,  and  which  delivered  Paris 
from  the  stain  which  treason  and  the  presence 
of  the  enemy  had  imprinted  on  it'  Honor 
to  those  brave  soldiers,  the  glory  of  their 
country  ! " 


THE    FALL    OF    NAPOLEON.  1 39 


Proclamation  on  the  Annivcrsajy  of  the  Battles 
of  Marengo  and  Friedland^  fime  14,  181  j. 

"  Soldiers :  This  day  is  the  anniversary  of 
Marengo  and  Friedland,  which  twice  decided 
the  destiny  of  Europe.  Then,  as  after  the 
battles  of  Austerlitz  and  Wagram,  we  were  too 
generous.  We  believed  in  the  protestations 
and  oaths  of  princes  to  whom  we  left  their 
thrones.  Now,  however,  leagued  together, 
they  strike  at  the  independence  and  sacred 
rights  of  France.  They  have  committed  un- 
just aggressions.  Let  us  march  forward  and 
meet  them ;  are  we  not  still  the  same  men  ? 
Soldiers  :  At  Jena,  these  Prussians,  now  so 
arrogant,  were  three  to  one ;  at  Montmi- 
rail  six  to  one.  Let  those  who  have  been 
captive  to  the  English  describe  the  nature 
of  their  prison  ships,  and  the  sufferings 
they  endured.  The  Saxons,  the  Belgians,  the 
Hanoverians,  the  soldiers  of  the  Confederation 
of  the  Rhine,  lament  that  they  are  obliged  to 
use  their  arms  in  the  cause  of  princes  who  are 
the  enemies  of  justice,  and  the  destroyers  of 
the  rights  of  nations.  They  well  know  the 
coalition  to  be  insatiable.  After  having  swal- 
lowed up  twelve  millions  of  Poles,  twelve 
millions  of  Italians,  one  million  of  Saxons,  and 


140  NAPOLEONS    ADDRESSES. 

six  millions  of  Belgians,  they  now  wish  to 
devour  the  States  of  the  second  order  among 
the  Germans.  Madmen  !  one  moment  of  pros- 
perity has  bewildered  them.  To  oppress  and 
humble  the  people  of  France  is  out  of  their 
power ;  once  entering  our  territory,  there  they 
will  find  their  doom.  Soldiers  :  We  have  forced 
marches  before  us,  battles  to  fight,  and  dan- 
gers to  encounter ;  but  firm  in  resolution, 
victory  must  be  ours.  The  honor  and  happi- 
ness of  our  country  are  at  stake  !  and,  in  short. 
Frenchmen,  the  moment  is  arrived  when  we 
must  conquer  or  die  !  " 


THE    FALL    OF    NAPOLEON.  141 


Pi'oclamation  to  the  Belgians^  June  z/,    181^- 

"  To  the  Belgians  and  the  inhabitants  on 
the  left  bank  of  the  Rhine  :  The  ephemeral 
success  of  my  enemies  detached  you  for  a 
moment  from  my  empire.  In  my  exile,  upon 
a  rock  in  the  sea,  I  heard  your  complaint ; 
the  God  of  Battles  has  decided  the  fate  of 
your  beautiful  provinces  ;  Napoleon  is  among 
you  ;  you  are  worthy  to  be  Frenchmen.  Rise 
in  a  body ;  join  my  invincible  phalanxes  to 
exterminate  the  remainder  of  these  barbarians, 
who  are  your  enemies  and  mine  ;  they  fly,  with 
rage  and  despair  in  their  hearts." 


142  NAPOLEONS    ADDRESSES. 


Napoleon^ s  Proclamation  to  the  French  People  07i 
His  Secojid  Abdication^  June  22^  181^. 

"  Frenchmen  :  In  commencing  war  for  the 
national  independence,  I  reUed  on  the  miion 
of  all  efforts,  of  all  wills,  and  the  concurrence 
of  all  the  national  authorities.  I  had  reason 
to  hope  for  success,  and  I  braved  all  the 
declarations  of  the  powers  against  me.  Circum- 
stances appear  to  me  changed.  I  offer  myself 
a  sacrifice  to  the  hatred  of  the  enemies  of 
France.  May  they  prove  sincere  in  their 
declarations,  and  really  have  directed  them 
only  against  my  power.  My  political  life  is 
terminated,  and  I  proclaim  my  son,  under  the 
title  of  Napoleon  II.,  Emperor  of  the  French. 
The  present  ministers  will  provisionally  form 
the  council  of  the  Government.  The  interest 
which  I  take  in  my  son  induces  me  to  invite 
the  chambers  to  form,  without  delay,  the 
regency  by  a  law.  Unite  all  for  the  public 
safety  that  you  may  continue  an  independent 
nation." 


THE    FALL    OF    NAPOLEON. 


143 


Boiiaparte' s  Protest^   Written  on  Bom-d  the 
Belter  op  hon^  August  ^,  181^. 

"  I  hereby  solemniy  protest,  before  God  and 
man,  against  the  injustice  offered  me,  and  the 
violation  of  my  most  sacred  rights,  in  forcibly 
disposing  of  my  person  and  my  liberty.  I 
came  freely  on  board  of  the  Bellerophon ;  I  am 
not  a  prisoner  ;  I  am  the  guest  of  England.  I 
was,  indeed,  instigated  to  come  on  board  by 
the  captain,  who  told  me  that  he  had  been 
directed  by  his  Government  to  receive  me  and 
my  suite,  and  conduct  me  to  England,  if 
agreeable  to  my  wishes.  I  presented  myself 
in  good  faith,  with  the  view  of  claiming  the 
protection  of  the  English  laws.  As  soon  as  I 
had  reached  the  deck  of  the  Bellerophon^  I 
considered  myself  in  the  home  and  on  the 
hearth  of  the  British  people. 

"  If  it  was  the  intention  of  Government,  in 
giving  orders  to  the  captain  of  the  Bellerophon 
to  receive  me  and  my  suite,  merely  to  entrap 
me,  it  has  forfeited  its  honor  and  sullied  its 
flag. 

"  If  this  act  be  consummated,  it  will  be 
useless  for  the  English  to  talk  to  Europe  of 
their  integrity,  their  laws,  and  their  liberty. 
British  good  faith  will  have  been  lost  in  the 
hospitality  of  the  Bellerophon. 


144  NAPOLEON  S    ADDRESSES. 

"  I  appeal  to  history,  —  it  will  say  that  an 
enemy,  who  made  war  for  twenty  years  upon 
the  English  people,  came  voluntarily,  in  his 
misfortunes,  to  seek  an  asylum  under  their 
laws.  What  more  striking  proof  could  he 
give  of  his  esteem  and  his  confidence  ?  But 
what  return  did  England  make  for  so  mag- 
nanimous an  act?  They  pretended  to  hold 
out  a  friendly  hand  to  this  enemy ;  and  when 
he  delivered  himself  up  in  good  faith,  they 
sacrificed  him." 


NAPOLEON'S    WILL. 

"  Napoleon. 

"This  15th  April,  182 1,  at  Longwood, 
Island  of  St.  Helena.  This  is  my  Testament 
or  act  of  my  last  will. 

"  I.  I  die  in  the  Apostolical  Roman  religion, 
in  the  bosom  of  which  I  was  born,  more  than 
fifty  years  since. 

"2.  It  is  my  wish  that  my  ashes  may  repose 
on  the  banks  of  the  Seine,  in  the  midst  of  the 
French  people,  whom  I  have  loved  so  well. 

"3.  I  have  always  had  reason  to  be  pleased 
with  my  dearest  wife,  Maria-Louisa.  I  retain 
for  her,  to  my  last  moment,  the  most  tender 
sentiments.  I  beseech  her  to  watch,  in  order 
to  preserve  my  son  from  the  snares  which  yet 
environ  his  infancy. 

"  4.  I  recommend  to  my  son,  never  to  forget 
that  he  was  born  a  French  prince,  and  never 
to  allow  himself  to  become  an  instrument  in 
the  hands  of  the  triumvirs  who  oppress  the 
nations  of  Europe;    he  ought  never  to    fight 


146  napoleon's  addresses. 

against  France,  or  injure  lier  in  any  manner; 
he  ought  to  adopt  my  motto  :  '  Everything  for 
the  French  people.^ 

"5.  I  die  prematurely,  assassinated  by  the 
English  oligarchy  and  its  .   .   . 

"  The  English  nation  will  not  be  slow  in 
avenging  me. 

"6.  The  two  unfortunate  results  of  the  in- 
vasions of  France,  when  she  had  still  so  many 
resources,  are  to  be  attributed  to  the  treason 
of  Marmont,  Augereau,  Talleyrand,  and  La 
Fayette. 

"  I  forgive  them  —  may  the  posterity  of 
France  forgive  them  as  I  do. 

"7.  I  thank  my  good  and  most  excellent 
mother,  the  Cardinal,  my  brothers,  Joseph, 
Lucien,  and  Jerome,  Pauline,  Caroline,  Julie, 
Hortense,  Catherine,  Eugene,  for  the  interest 
they  have  continued  to  feel  for  me.  I  pardon 
Louis  for  the  libel  he  published  in  1820  ;  it  is 
replete  with  false  assertions  and  falsified 
documents. 

"8.  I  disavow  the  Mamtscript  of  St.  Helena, 
and  other  works,  under  the  title  of  Maxims, 
Sayings,  etc.,  which  persons  have  been  pleased 
to  publish  for  the  last  six  years.  Such  are 
not  the  rules  which  have  guided  my  life.     I 


napoleon's  will.  147 

caused  the  Due  d'  Enghien  to  be  arrested  and 
tried,  because  that  step  was  essential  to  the 
safety,  interest,  and  honor  of  the  French 
people,  when  the  Comte  d  'Artois  was  main- 
taining, by  his  own  confession,  sixty  assassins 
at  Paris,  Under  similar  circumstances  I 
should  act  in  the  same  way." 


THE    END. 


RD-  3.7 


0        -a^Pi^ 


'^^K^ 
'<^'\ 


0^    .--/^      '^o 


^^ 


-^^^ 


A 


^ 


'^ 


^ 


"      DOBBS  BROS.   ^R "       ^^J^  d^  ^^^M^7^-<  ^  iC^  <^  ^ 

LIBRARY  aiNOINO     ^^  ^  <^Ml^^^:i^  ^     "^  •      ^ift 

DEC      7  8f^*    </      c^o  ^^^y  cP        "^  *^^ 

ST.  AUGUSTINE  V^  X^  «- °  A^  <^ 

_J^^    FLA  ^      .*i*!ioL'*        ^  aO  ►**"'  > 


13^;?    - 


->  ^ 


vP  C,' 


